Unions Identify Problems Hidden in Mayor's Budget
Last year Mayor David N. Dinkins threatened municipal workers with huge layoffs and drastic service cuts if they did not agree to wage and work-rule concessions, and the city's unions walked away from the bargaining table, leaving Mr.
Dinkins empty-handed.
This year the Mayor is trying a more conciliatory approach.
In his four-year financial plan released this week, Mr.
Dinkins proposed no layoffs, saying a reduction of 20,044 jobs would be achieved through attrition.
He offered the unions wage increases, but only if they agreed to productivity gains.


Facing Murder Charges
Milwaukee Brewers pitcher JULIO MACHADO will face murder charges in the shooting death of a woman, a judge in Caracas, Venezuela, ruled yesterday.
If convicted, Machado faces up to 30 years in prison.
A date has yet to be set for the trial, but Machado will appear in court Monday to hear the charges.
It could take up to a year before the case is heard.


A Copier Stays Broken For the Sake of Security
The world's leaders settled down to chart a new world order yesterday, but they had to do it with one copy machine on the blink because Tony Servin went home.
Like thousands of New Yorkers inconvenienced by the councils of power, the electronics technician from Brooklyn looked askance at the phalanx of security that barred his way to the United Nations, where he was sent to fix a copier.


An Uproar Over Nudes (Bush Is One)
Josef Schutzenhofer may not be a name to rival those of Robert Mapplethorpe and Andres Serrano, the provocateurs who brought down the wrath of conservatives in Congress on the National Endowment for the Arts two years ago, but Mr.
Schutzenhofer has stirred up a rumpus that the residents of Frederick, Md., are not likely to forget very soon.
His satirical, prize-winning mural depicting President Bush and Dolly Parton nude, with Senator Jesse Helms and Gen.
Norman H. Schwarzkopf in Roman armor and President Saddam Hussein of Iraq kneeling on a prayer rug, has been featured in the two local newspapers virtually every day since the work went on exhibit at the Delaplaine Visual Arts Center on Jan. 18.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Corrections
A caption with a sports picture by The Associated Press yesterday about a Duke University-Florida State basketball game misidentified a Duke player.
He was Thomas Hill, not Erik Meek.


Sampras and Agassi Put U.S. Ahead
Pete Sampras, with some difficulty, and Andre Agassi, with a little help from an antic wind, dominated in singles play this afternoon at the Mauna Lani Racquet Club to provide the United States Davis Cup Team with a commanding 2-0 lead over Argentina in the first round of 1992 competition.
When his Davis Cup jitters set in this time, Sampras, who confessed that this competition is the only competition that causes him high anxiety, survived them.


At Top, It's the Alone Rangers
For the Rangers, it must have seemed like the end of a long climb.
Late Thursday night, with four road games behind them and one to go, they had reached a kind of summit to their season, and so they paused to acknowledge it.
Their 4-1 victory over the Los Angeles Kings gave the Rangers their 33d victory and 67th and 68th points of the season, nudging them ahead of the Montreal Canadiens for first place over all in the National Hockey League.
It was a moment that they wore well.


Review/Dance; A Premiere Palpable With Desire
When she is good, she is very, very good.
"Sextet," Twyla Tharp's latest premiere, is an inspired piece of work, a laid-back tropical equivalent of the love dances she created in her big hit, "Nine Sinatra Songs."
Sex is not what this shimmering, successful "Sextet" for six dancers is about.
But desire is very much present in the new piece, performed Thursday night by Twyla Tharp and Dancers at the City Center (131 West 55th Street).
One could imagine invisible fans whirling overhead as the women dipped and arched in their partners' embraces to an equally inspired original score by Bob Telson.


Woman to Coach Regis
AMY MACHIN-WARD, a former all-American at North Carolina, is the new men's coach at Regis University in Denver.
Machin-Ward, 28, is believed to be the first woman to coach a men's soccer program at the college level.
Machin-Ward was a starter on the United States women's national team from 1983 to 1985 and has been coaching boys' teams since. (AP)


Observer; . . . And Go to Sleep
The tipoff came when the Bush people said the speech would be a "defining moment." That was what they had called the gulf war this time last year -- a "defining moment" -- and now they were recycling it to ballyhoo a speech.
They didn't even have any new phrases, for Pete's sake.
How could they possibly have a new idea?
Applying "defining moment" to that perennial brain-glazer, the State of the Union speech, should have told us how things stood: to wit, that this outfit is so sure it's home safe for another four years that it doesn't even feel the need for fresh bluster, much less a fresh thought.


Tyson's Accuser Remains Unshaken on Stand
Mike Tyson's defense attorney sought repeatedly today to challenge the testimony of an 18-year-old woman who has accused Tyson of rape, but after three and a half hours of cross-examination the woman and her account emerged largely unshaken.
The woman, who says the former heavyweight champion raped her in his hotel room early last July 19, was calm and direct as she answered pointed questions by Vincent J. Fuller about her intentions in meeting Tyson and her decision to go to his room.


State Department Cites China and Other Nations for Human-Rights Abuses
Barely an hour before President Bush met with Prime Minister Li Peng of China, the State Department issued its annual worldwide human rights report today.
In it, China was called a repressive regime "falling far short of of internationally accepted norms."
The report said that since the failed hard-line Soviet coup in August, a fearful Beijing had actually regressed, tightening ideological control and further stifling dissent.


Officials Say Runner Had a Heart Attack
An autopsy by the New York City Medical Examiner's office has found that a 9-year-old Long Island girl who collapsed while racing at a Brooklyn track meet last Sunday and died soon afterward had a previously unknown heart condition and suffered a fatal heart attack.
The police said the girl, Jessica Varady, of the Suffolk County village of Selden, collapsed while running a 55-meter dash at the Colgate Games, a series of women's track meets at the Pratt Institute gymnasium in Clinton Hill, while her mother, Janet, looked on helplessly.


Your Hands Need Help in Winter, Too
The dry-skin season is in full swing, and hands are a particularly vulnerable target of cold weather.
The best defense against redness and irritation is to wear gloves when outdoors or doing housework, and apply a hand cream regularly.
But with a sea of lotions and creams available, which one?
Some of the newest hand and body products offer a bonus: besides containing rich emollients, they also contain sunscreen ingredients.
Among them are Lancome's Progressive Hand Treatment ($12.50 for a 1.9-ounce tube, or $25 for a 5.3-ounce jar ) and, going the economy route, Vaseline Intensive Care UV Daily Defense Lotion for Body and Hands, SPF 4 ($3.99 for a 9-ounce bottle).
In mid-February, the Vaseline Intensive Care line will introduce UV Extra Defense Lotion, SPF 15 ($3.99 for a 6.6-ounce bottle).


Donors Give Again and Again to The Times' Neediest Cases
"This is the first time I am making a second contribution to the Fund," began an anonymous letter attached to a $100 donation to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"Although I expect to lose my white-collar professional job, and I also expect to have a difficult time finding work, I realize that I have many more resources to fall back on than many and that no matter how bad things get there are many others that are far worse off than I."
As the 80th annual Neediest appeal enters its final month, many people who gave earlier in the campaign have sent additional contributions.
Rather than holding off because this year's campaign has already raised a record amount of money, they have responded because of their concern that the recession and government cutbacks have left New York's poor, sick and disabled more dependent on private charity.


Oscar De Mejo, Artist, 80
Oscar De Mejo, a painter and children's-book illustrator, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and also had a home in Pawling, N.Y.
He died of colon cancer, said his wife, Dorothy.


O'Connor Seeks Aid For I.R.A. Fugitive
John Cardinal O'Connor has asked the Bush Administration to grant a hearing for political asylum to Joseph Doherty, the Irish Republican Army member convicted in absentia in Britain for killing a British solider in Northern Ireland.
Cardinal O'Connor, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, took up the Doherty case this week, in an article in the weekly "Catholic New York." Two weeks ago the United States Supreme Court ruled that the Government had the right to deny a hearing to Mr.
Doherty, who has been in Federal custody for more than eight years, thereby opening the way for his deportation.


A Little Night Pampering for Hotel Pamperers
It was a swell party, high above New York City in Rockefeller Center's Rainbow Room, that razzle-dazzle aerie where fresh bouquets loom like small trees and you can see forever, or at least much of Connecticut.
Men wore black tie, women glittering gowns.
Trays of champagne drifted past.
The guests were hotel concierges, those professional cosmopolites specializing in advice on how to have a splendiferous time.
Monday's wingding amounted to the ultimate cook's night out.


Jets Draw Sketch for Plan B Success
Jets General Manager Dick Steinberg will not be looking for warm bodies when he scours the list of unprotected players that the 27 other National Football League teams submit today under the Plan B free-agency system.
The Plan B signing period begins today and lasts through April 1.
Teams have until 3 P.M. today to give their lists to the N.F.L.


Gun Control, Privatized
Last fall, Washington D.C.'s voters approved an innovative measure that employs product liability law to limit private possession of assault weapons where more direct efforts to ban them have failed.
A similar measure before New York's State Legislature could give this new gun control tactic a welcome boost.
The bill would subject manufacturers and sellers of assault weapons and unlicensed handguns used in New York to "strict liability." They would be responsible for damages caused by the guns they produce or distribute, even if they have no knowledge of the crime.
There would be no strict liability for injuries caused by licensed guns, or for people who sustain gun wounds in the course of committing crimes.


Bush and Chinese Prime Minister Meet Briefly at U.N. Amid Protests
President Bush met with Prime Minister Li Peng of China today for the first time since Mr.
Li presided over Beijing's crackdown on democracy campaigners in 1989.
Mr.
Bush went ahead with the chilly, 20-minute encounter despite critics' charges that even a brief meeting would buttress the international standing of the Chinese Government and Mr.
Li.
The President contends that such contacts are worthwhile as a means of tempering Beijing's behavior through dialogue.
Hundreds of people protested against the meeting outside.


Devils Start Quickly and Look Much Better
Coach Tom McVie's hoarse voice and quiet approach apparently penetrated more than enough.
Tonight, the Devils, losers by 7-0 to the Red Wings in New Jersey six nights ago, responded and redeemed themselves handsomely with a 6-3 triumph at Joe Louis Arena.
"Tommy told us to just play our game, not try to win 7-0," said Chris Terreri, who played an inspired game in goal with 29 saves to help the Devils to their 10th victory on the road this season, which is one more than all of last season.


Review/Opera; Smash Hit of the 1800's, Now Nearly Forgotten
After listening to the Opera Orchestra of New York present "La Dame Blanche" in Carnegie Hall on Thursday night, it was clear enough why Berlioz detested its composer, Francois Adrien Boieldieu.
This 1825 opera, which has almost completely disappeared from the world's stages, sounded like everything Berlioz hated in music.
He scornfully described Boieldieu's typical style: "Music that was not too dramatic, but lucid, rather colorless, safely predictable, blameless of any alarming new harmonic, rhythmic or formal devices." From Berlioz, this was not praise.
What was harder to understand from Eve Queler's concert performance of this work is what made it, as the Grove Dictionary puts it, "one of the most notable successes in the history of opera." For over 50 years it was a regular part of European musical life.
It was playing to full houses even in 1869.
Delibes even wrote a one-act opera that year about a Frenchman who has seen the work 666 times and designs his home as if it were the set for the first act.


Knicks Stall On Road But Win in Overtime
The Knicks played tonight's second half on cruise control.
And they almost fell asleep at the wheel.
After being pushed into overtime by an undermanned Washington Bullets team that refused to concede defeat, New York dominated the extra period and escaped with a 125-114 victory at the Capital Centre.
The victory extended New York's winning streak to five games, but it was the least impressive of those victories.
The Knicks led by 20 points in the second quarter.
They led by 17 points after the third quarter.
And they led by 10 points with 3 minutes 31 seconds to play in the fourth quarter.


Officer's Trial In Teaneck Is Disrupted
The manslaughter trial of a Teaneck police officer was thrown into an uproar today for the second time in two weeks when a former New York City officer who was paralyzed by a 15-year-old gunman's bullet was wheeled into the courtroom while the defendant was being cross-examined.
"It's a terrible thing that's been done, a terrible thing," the presiding judge, Charles R. DiGisi, said angrily after he was informed of the presence of the paralyzed man, Steven McDonald.


Check Ends Suspension
University of Texas forward DEXTER CAMBRIDGE mailed a $4,600 check to a booster of his junior college yesterday, ending his two-month suspension.
Cambridge will rejoin his teammates today, when the Longhorns face Rhode Island at Providence.
It will be his first appearance since Nov. 29, the last game before the National Collegiate Athletic Association forced him off the court following the preseason National Invitation Tournament.


U.S. Ties 6 More Killings to Gotti
Federal prosecutors plan to bolster their racketeering case against John Gotti by presenting evidence that he authorized six murders, besides the five murders charged in his trial, court documents disclosed yesterday.
In the documents, the prosecutors said they would use the additional six murders as evidence to support the racketeering charge against Mr.
Gotti, who is charged with being the boss of the Gambino crime family.


A Litigator Tilts at Windmills and Wins Lawsuits
Lawyers in the State Attorney General's office are used to people who sue the state over everything and nothing: disgruntled prison inmates, self-taught legal experts and conspiracy theorists who feel persecuted by random public officials from State Comptroller Edward V. Regan to President Bush.
In the last few years, some of the lawyers have come to know one frequent litigator quite well.
But they say that there are two differences between Robert L. Schulz and your average lawsuit-happy zealot.
Mr.
Schulz doesn't seem to be a nut.
And he occasionally wins his cases.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the effects of an international economic embargo on Haiti misidentified an aid group whose local director is Virginia H. Ubik.
It is CARE.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  EX-DINKINS AIDE IS INDICTED


Lost in the Woods? All at Sea? Help Is at Hand, via Satellites
Navigation devices used by United States soldiers to find their way around the Saudi Arabian desert are available to sportsmen.
But yachtsmen and airplane pilots are among the few who have discovered the devices' usefulness so far.
The technology -- the Global Positioning System -- gets its information from satellites.
The newest G.P.S. devices are portable units about the size of a hand.
They weigh one to four pounds and operate on AA batteries or with an electrical adapter.


Acts of Hate From the Past: Bias Crimes in New York City Are Nothing New
Thirty-four years ago, Luis Garden Acosta was a pudgy 13-year-old eager to show off the streets of Brooklyn to a country cousin newly arrived from Puerto Rico.
But when he refused to step aside for six black teen-agers on De Kalb Avenue, he found himself shoved, cursed and dragged screaming down the street until blood seeped through his shredded clothing.
Days later, a gang of Hispanic youths surrounded him and shouted, "Get the chink!" refusing to believe that the boy with almond eyes was not Asian until he spewed out a torrent of Spanish pleadings.


Classical Music in Review
Mozart on Period Instruments Alice Tully Hall


Edmond C. Malhame, Publisher, 76
Edmond C. Malhame, a publisher of Catholic books, died on Jan. 23 at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 76 years old and was a resident of Manhasset.
He died of lymphoma, his family said.


Review/Television; Studying Ancient Religions As Shapers of the Present
"Legacy" is Michael Wood's search for the sources of religious thought that have endured into the 20th century.
In the six-hour series, which begins tomorrow at 8 P.M. on Channel 13, the English writer and narrator of such upscale productions as "Art of the Western World" and "In Search of the Trojan War" goes to Iraq, India, China, Egypt, Central America and, finally, to what he calls "the barbarian West" to learn how the past has shaped or misshaped the present.
The programs move so fast over such distances of space and time that you may feel left behind. (A map or two might have helped viewers to orient themselves, particularly in the Orient.) But Mr.
Wood's breathless enthusiasm and the evocative scenes, notably the festivals in India that continue to draw millions of villagers to Mother Ganges, carry one along.


Tyson's Accuser Remains Unshaken on Stand
Mike Tyson's defense attorney sought repeatedly today to challenge the testimony of an 18-year-old woman who has accused Tyson of rape, but after three and a half hours of cross-examination the woman and her account emerged largely unshaken.
The woman, who says the former heavyweight champion raped her in his hotel room early last July 19, was calm and direct as she answered pointed questions by Vincent J. Fuller about her intentions in meeting Tyson and her decision to go to his room.


Another Foreman Bout
The former heavyweight champion GEORGE FOREMAN will return to the ring April 11 against ALEX STEWART in the first fight in the 19,500-seat Nevada-Las Vegas campus arena.
The promoter, BOB ARUM, said the 44-year-old Foreman would receive $5 million for the fight, his second since losing a bid for the heavyweight title last April against EVANDER HOLYFIELD. (AP)


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about news coverage of the Presidential campaign referred incorrectly in some copies to the telephone response to the CBS program "America on the Line," televised on Tuesday night after the President's State of the Union Message.
Only about 1 out of every 100 callers was able to get through.


Calling On the Sun To Help Keep Cars Cooler
Engineers have found a new use for energy captured from the sun: keeping cars cool.
On a sunny summer day, the temperature inside a parked car can exceed 140 degrees.
That makes it very difficult for people when they enter the car, and it can age vinyl and other materials faster.


Arrest Death Prompts Call for Inquiry
The mother of a man who died in police custody on Wednesday called for an independent investigation of the incident last night, as she mourned a son she said had drifted into drugs despite her warnings.
The woman, Margie Smith, 57 years old, described her son William, 27, as kind to his family but quick with his fists in dealing with others, and said she worried about "his alcohol friends and dope friends."


Corrections
A headline yesterday about a murder-suicide in Rochester, Minn., misidentified the site.
The killings occurred in a hospital at the Mayo Medical Center, not at the Mayo Clinic.
Because of an editing error, the article about the shootings referred incorrectly to a chemical dependency unit at the Mental Health Institute of Cherokee, Iowa, where a victim, Dr.
Ralph D. Laskey, worked.
It is the mental health institute, not the chemical dependency unit, that has 208 beds.


Leonard N. Cohen, Retired Judge of New York Court, Is Dead at 71
Leonard N. Cohen, a retired justice of the New York State Supreme Court and a former Deputy Borough President of Manhattan, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 71 years old and lived all his life in the same Upper West Side neighborhood.
He died of a heart attack, said Judge Emily J. Goodman of New York County Civil Court, a friend of the family.


E. C. Boggan, 48, Dies; Handled Rights Cases
E.
Carrington Boggan, a leading advocate of equal rights for gay men and women, died on Jan. 20 at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 48 years old.
He died of AIDS, his family said.


Kurosawa, in His Style, Plans His Next Film
Like an aging actor who suddenly finds a way to inject new gusto into an old role, Akira Kurosawa played the arch and almost perversely defiant movie director to the hilt here this week, announcing that rather than retire at the age of 81 he would soon begin shooting his third film in three years.
Mr.
Kurosawa, a moody and domineering personality who has long been regarded as Japan's greatest living director, said he was calling the new movie "Mada Da Yo," or "Not Ready Yet." It will be an exploration of an aging writer's relationship with four devoted former students, based on the life of a postwar Japanese essayist, Hyakken Uchida.


Young Car Thieves Drive a Violent Road
This week it was a stolen Toyota Cressida.
Last week it was a stolen Nissan Maxima.
Each became a weapon in the increasingly violent clash between police officers and a tough new breed of young car thief.
In a rivalry that has become more costly and more dangerous in the last few years, the police here and in surrounding communities in Essex and Union Counties find themselves outmaneuvered by swarms of brazen combatants, some of whom deliberately ram police cruisers with stolen cars, either to provoke a chase or to disable a potential pursuer.


Man of No Prominence, Biegen Received Trust
He is not a prominent political figure, yet he counts the Governor of New York and the Mayor of New York City among his closer friends.
He has only modest standing in New York's high-powered financial community, yet he was entrusted with heading David N. Dinkins's campaign finance committees in 1985, 1989 and 1992.
And even after what some mayoral aides have described as a lackluster performance as a fund-raiser, last August he took on some of the duties of the executive director, a job that is normally entrusted to a full-time, paid professional.
Shortly after he became the only person in the campaign authorized to sign checks, he began writing some out to himself, law-enforcement officials said.
And by the time he was caught last week, he had siphoned off $158,000, they said.


Elizabeth Chase, 77, An Adviser to Javits
Elizabeth Coykendall Chase, a former campaign adviser to United States Senator Jacob K. Javits, died on Sunday at Stamford Hospital in Connecticut.
She was 77 years old and lived in Stamford.
Mrs.
Chase, a writer and public relations specialist, counseled Mr.
Javits in his first successful race for the House of Representatives in 1946.
She also was public relations adviser to the New York Citizens Budget Commission, a private organization, in the 1950's.


Horgan and Lohr, 8 Under, Share Pebble Beach Lead
Playing in nearly ideal scoring conditions, P. H. Horgan 3d and Bob Lohr took the lead today after two rounds of the A.T.&amp;T.
National Pro-Am.
They were tied at eight-under-par 136, a stroke better than Lanny Wadkins, Jeff Sluman Tom Sieckmann and Mark O'Meara, a two-time winner of this tournament.
On a sunny and mild day, Horgan had a 70 at Spyglass Hill and Lohr a 67 at Pebble Beach.


Mattingly's Signature Stance


Carnesecca Among Nine Named to Basketball Hall of Fame
Nine famous, semifamous and not-so-famous players and coaches were named to the Basketball Hall of Fame yesterday, including Lou Carnesecca, the St.
John's coach, who has had little else to be satisfied with this season.
The other new honorees are two former National Basketball Association stars, Bob Lanier and Connie Hawkins, as well as the hall's first international player, the first two women to be elected as players, and three other coaches, Jack Ramsay, Al McGuire and Phil Woolpert.


Bridge
One of the busiest clubs in the metropolitan area is moving today -- but not very far.
The Bergen Bridge Center in Teaneck, N.J., is crossing the street to comfortable quarters at 1415 Queen Anne Road.
There will be play today, but the opening party will be a week hence.
The diagramed deal played at the club was reported by one of its founders, Leonard Karp of Tenafly.
He sat West and heard his opponents bid aggressively to seven spades.


Quote of the Day
"Perhaps for the first time ever, there is now a real chance to put an end to despotism and to dismantle the totalitarian order whatever shape it may take." -- PRESIDENT BORIS N. YELTSIN.  [ 4:3. ]


Mattingly Well-Suited For Pinstripes but . . .
Don Mattingly created hysteria last season when he conceded that he had asked the Yankees to consider trading him.
Now the Yankees have a new manager in Buck Showalter, a new marquee player in Danny Tartabull and Mattingly wishes his old words would stop haunting him so he can play baseball.
And he wants to play for the Yankees. Sort of.


EX-AIDE TO DINKINS CHARGED IN THEFT OF CAMPAIGN FUNDS
Mayor David N. Dinkins's former campaign finance chairman and longtime political adviser was charged by Federal officials and a state grand jury yesterday with stealing $158,000 from the Mayor's re-election fund by writing 29 checks to himself.
Federal and state prosecutors charged that the former campaign official, Arnold I. Biegen, a Manhattan lawyer, engaged in a conspicuous theft that was followed by a desperate attempt at a cover-up.
They described several tense days last month in which other top campaign aides demanded financial records from Mr.
Biegen, who first said they were lost, then gave them up, and finally sneaked into the office of another campaign official and took some of them back.
Unresolved Mystery
The charges, which came in the form of a criminal complaint by United States Attorney Otto G. Obermaier and a grand jury indictment sought by the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, do not resolve the mystery of why Mr.
Biegen, by all accounts a highly paid lawyer sophisticated in the ways of complex financial transactions, would have attempted so blatant a theft.


CHRONICLE
While her husband took center stage yesterday at the United Nations summit conference, NAINA YELTSIN took a plunge into contemporary American art.
She toured the Whitney Museum, scoring a diplomatic success with those accompanying her.
"She was an interested and enthusiastic guest, a real pleasure to take around the museum," said FLORA MILLER BIDDLE, its chairwoman.


Sports Leisure; Breaking Dad's Heart? No, His State Record
When Kristen Somogyi was in the seventh grade, she told her father, John, that one day she was going to break his New Jersey state high school basketball career scoring record of 3,310 points.
At the time, it seemed like an outlandish statement because his record had gone virtually unchallenged for almost two decades.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Alpine Group Inc., Hackensack, N.J., a machine parts concern, agreed to acquire all the outstanding stock of Dataproducts New England Inc., a telecommunications and aerospace electronics company. *
Columbia Gas Systems Inc., Wilmington, Del., said Arthur Andersen, the auditing firm, had said Columbia's 1991 financial statements would include a comment that "substantial doubt" existed about Columbia's ability to continue as a going concern.


Alternatives to CD's
Low interest rates have left many bank customers scrambling to find safe investments that pay higher returns than savings accounts.
A higher return means taking increased risks, and savers should know what the risks are before they take their money out of certificates of deposit, savings accounts or bank money-market accounts and thus give up Federal deposit insurance protection.
Here are some alternative investments and their risks.
Alternative Risk


Joseph Valiunas, 68; Favored Free Baltics
Joseph Kestutis Valiunas, a longtime leader in the independence movement for the Baltic states, died on Saturday at Southampton Hospital in Southampton, L.I.
He was 68 years old and was a resident of Southampton.
He died of heart failure after a long illness, his family said.


Fire's Void Is Readily Filled in Milford
For years, Wanda Hornack has encouraged the children who come to her candy store to help her raise money for local causes.
This week, with her store damaged by fire, it was their turn to help her.
As Mrs.
Hornack walked through the store on Thursday afternoon, in the wake of a fire that hit 11 downtown businesses, the children from the Harborside Middle School down the street called out to her.
When she came out of the store, they ran over to hug her.


Off-Duty Officer Visiting Mother Is Shot to Death in the Bronx
An off-duty New York City police officer visiting his ailing mother was shot and killed in the elevator of her Bronx apartment house last night by two men in what the police said appeared to be an attempted robbery.
The officer, who had just attended a funeral for a fellow officer, was shot three times, in the neck, side and foot, about 8:40 P.M. and was taken to Lincoln Hospital just blocks away from the apartment building, at 1705 Andrews Avenue in the Morris Heights section.
He died on arrival at the hospital, said Sgt.
Ed Burns, a police spokesman.


Sidney Diamond, 91, Real-Estate Developer
Sidney R. Diamond, a real-estate developer and philanthropist who contributed to the restoration of Bethesda Fountain in Central Park, died on Thursday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 91 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from congestive heart failure, said his son, William J., the regional administrator of the United States General Services Administration.


Music Notes; New Prices Ruffle Met Subscribers
Some Metropolitan Opera subscribers saw red when they received their subscription renewal notices last week.
Prices for most of the Met's 3,800 seats were raised the customary few dollars, roughly 6 percent.
But some seats in the orchestra section -- about 100 for each performance, said Joseph Volpe, the company's general director -- have had their prices more than doubled as the section has been reconfigured.
One irate subscriber who paid $513 for a nine-opera series this year was billed $1,053 for the same seat next season.
Another, who over the last 20 years has gradually improved his seats within his price range, discovered that the seats he has held the last few seasons have been redefined.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about a meeting of Democratic Presidential candidates with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's Rainbow Coalition misidentified the state represented by former Senator Eugene J. McCarthy.
He is from Minnesota.


Making an Old Schooner New Again


Life Insurance Isn't Just for the Healthy
Many Americans with health problems find it difficult to buy life insurance.
But there are ways to do so, while easing the search.
The best approach is to use a specialist in the field, which is known as impaired-risk insurance.
Such specialists work with insurance agents to help people who have medical problems, serving as their intermediaries with insurance companies.
They seek out one of the insurers willing to take on risks that other companies shun.


Environmental Study Is Likely to Delay Quebec Hydroelectric Plan
In the last few days, environmental arguments against a huge new hydroelectric project proposed in Quebec have become far more likely to force further delay in the signing of a 20-year, $19.5 billion contract between Hydro-Quebec and the New York Power Authority, and in the project's construction.
At a forum Thursday night in Manhattan, the chairman of the Power Authority, Richard M. Flynn, said that an environmental review of the project's effects in Canada, including effects on native Cree and Inuits, might take 18 months to three years.
Therefore, he said, his agency will not sign the agreement by Nov. 30 as it earlier agreed.


Bush and Chinese Prime Minister Meet Briefly at U.N. Amid Protests
President Bush met with Prime Minister Li Peng of China today for the first time since Mr.
Li presided over Beijing's crackdown on democracy campaigners in 1989.
Mr.
Bush went ahead with the chilly, 20-minute encounter despite critics' charges that even a brief meeting would buttress the international standing of the Chinese Government and Mr.
Li.
The President contends that such contacts are worthwhile as a means of tempering Beijing's behavior through dialogue.
Hundreds of people protested against the meeting outside.


Only Eight in the Gate: Fly So Free Is Ailing
The opening of the national racing season for handicap horses suffered a jolt today when the star colt Fly So Free was withdrawn from Saturday's $500,000 Donn Handicap at Gulfstream Park because of a bacterial infection.
Fly So Free, the juvenile champion two years ago and the co-favorite for the Donn with Strike the Gold, was scratched from the race this afternoon when he was found to be running a temperature.
A subsequent blood test indicated the presence of an infection in his system, perhaps an abscess, although its precise nature was not yet known.


Judge Urges Town and Builder to Solve Dispute
A state judge today directed the Township of Berkeley Heights and a office- park developer to try to resolve their dispute over highway design, putting on hold the developer's demand for a $4.6 million refund.
The judge, John Pisansky of Superior Court, set deadlines through early April for new engineering studies, a report by a court-appointed mediator and a planning board hearing to deal exclusively with the road's design and traffic safety.


CHRONICLE
When RUTH GRUBER was in the Soviet Arctic as a foreign correspondent for The New York Herald Tribune in 1936, she interviewed a 104-year-old Yakut woman who berated her for not being married.
The woman warned, "Don't wait too long," Mrs.
Gruber recalled the other day.
"She brought out a birch-bark cradle, which had its own irrigation system and in which she had carried her 20 children, and insisted I take it," Ms.
Gruber said.
"She sounded just like my own mother, and I wondered had I traveled 11,000 miles to find another Jewish mother."
Seventeen years later and married, Ms.
Gruber had a daughter, Celia Michaels, and two years later a son, David Michaels; the cradle was used for both.


William L. Weissel, Philharmonic Aide, 80
William L. Weissel, a former assistant manager of the New York Philharmonic and executive secretary to its board, died on Wednesday at Doctor's Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from pneumonia, said his wife, Carmine.


Love of Challenge Lures Emtman to the N.F.L.
Insisting that money was not the main reason, all-America defensive tackle STEVE EMTMAN decided yesterday to pass up his senior season at the University of Washington to enter the National Football League draft.
So did quarterback TOMMY MADDOX of U.C.L.A. and linebacker MARCO COLEMAN of Georgia Tech.
"The main deciding factor was that of personal challenge," Emtman said at a news conference.
"I feel I am at the top of my game at the collegiate level and want to challenge myself at a higher level. I want it understood that this is not an issue of money but rather the opportunity to fulfill a lifelong dream of playing pro football."


International 2-6
PEACE SUMMIT AT U.N.
Proclaiming renewed hopes for a safer world, leaders of the 15 nations on the United Nations Security Council met jointly and said they would devote their energies to preserving peace.
They asked the new Secretary General to draft proposals to make the U.N. a potent peacemaker in trouble spots worldwide.  1


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sanchez Vicario Upset


Panel's Report on Homeless Is Criticized by Dinkins Staff
A commission appointed by Mayor David N. Dinkins gave him proposals yesterday to remake the city's homeless shelter system and immediately ran into criticism from major officials in his administration.
The officials, including Deputy Mayor Cesar A. Perales, questioned the practicality and cost of several major commission proposals.
Some officials criticized the plans to have most new shelters run by nonprofit organizations, to create a new agency to oversee the system and to use rent vouchers to help homeless families pay for apartments.


Sports of The Times; On Clothing: Emperor's New Rules
Michael Jordan has dunked on a lot of people in a variety of ways.
But this time, the Chicago Bulls superstar has outdone himself: he has dunked over the entire National Basketball Association.
Earlier this week, Jordan sent tremors through the N.B.A. -- and the sports-clothing industry -- when he told the league that it could no longer use his image on N.B.A. apparel.
He gave the exclusive rights to Nike, the world's largest manufacturer of sports clothing and sneakers.


Bonds Agrees to Deal: $4.7 Million for Year
Barry Bonds, who suffered bitter salary arbitration losses the last two years, eschewed the arbitrator yesterday and reached agreement with the Pittsburgh Pirates on a one-year contract that breaks ground on two fronts: He raised the one-season salary record to $4.7 million, and he escalated the level of players' hotel accommodations on the road.
Bonds, who can become a free agent after the 1992 season, became the first player to get a contract provision giving him a hotel suite on the road.
He will have that perk in San Diego, Los Angeles and San Francisco.


Tyson's Accuser Remains Unshaken on Stand
Mike Tyson's defense attorney sought repeatedly today to challenge the testimony of an 18-year-old woman who has accused Tyson of rape, but after three and a half hours of cross-examination the woman and her account emerged largely unshaken.
The woman, who says the former heavyweight champion raped her in his hotel room early last July 19, was calm and direct as she answered pointed questions by Vincent J. Fuller about her intentions in meeting Tyson and her decision to go to his room.


Camera
Despite a tough economic climate -- or perhaps because of it -- stock photography, the business of selling generic photographs to clients, is doing well these days.
Among the businesses that rely on stock photos are magazine and newspaper advertising, promotional photography, billboards, catalogues and direct mail.


In Glen Cove, Where Yesterday Is Today
STEP into the Veranda Restaurant and step back in time.
A decade or two ago, the Island's top restaurants were in Glen Cove and often labeled themselves northern Italian or continental.
Their menus were loaded with the extravaganzas of a carefree age.
Lobster Parisienne, tournedos Rossini, vichyssoise, crepe farcy and veal Normande were commonplace.
Waiters in tuxedos swooped around luxurious dining rooms in which diners were cosseted in sumptuous elegance.


Miss Koota Engaged
Dr. and Mrs.
Ivan R. Koota of New York have announced 1993 wedding plans for their daughter Lacey Gayle Koota and Randal Scott Putnam, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Putnam of Lincoln, Neb.
Ms.
Koota, 22 years old and a Barnard College graduate, is an assistant in visitors' services at the Museum of Television and Radio in New York.
Mr.
Putnam, 25, grdauted from Northwestern University and is studying law at New York University.


Britain Is Still Allowing Breast Implants
Britain's chief medical officer has told doctors that they can continue to use silicone gel breast implants despite a temporary suspension of the procedure in the United States.
Last month, the United States Food and Drug Administration recommended a 45-day moratorium on the supply or use of silicone gel implants while new information questioning their safety is evaluated.
Concerns focus on the possibility of reactions in the immune system caused by a leakage of silicone.


Audubon Society Alaska Cruise
The Massachusetts Audubon Society says the natural history staff accompanying its voyage among the fjords of Alaska in the spring "knows where the bears are likely to come to the shoreline, where humpback whales congregate and where good trails penetrate deep into the forest." The nine-day trip starting June 8 is aboard a shallow-draft vessel, the 70-passenger Sea Bird, which is particularly maneuverable close to the shores of southeastern Alaska.
When the vessel cannot get close, motorized rubber landing craft are used to land in bays and cruise around icebergs.
Embarkation is in Sitka, Alaska, after a flight from Seattle.
From Sitka, the Sea Bird heads into the 20-mile-long Tracy Arm and to Point Adolphus and Elfin Cove to look for whales and sea otters.
The route also includes Glacier Bay National Park, Le Conte Bay, Petersburg and Misty Fjords, where black-tailed deer, river otters and black bears are often spotted on shore.
The vessel returns to Prince Rupert, from where travelers fly to Vancouver.
The cost is from $2,360 a person, including one hotel night in Seattle, plus air fare (Seattle to Sitka and Prince Rupert to Vancouver) of about $410.
Information from the Massachusetts Audubon Society, (800) 289-9504.


Three Suggestions for Serving Scallops
SEEING sparkling fresh bay scallops in the market recently reminded me of the time I harvested them in Nantucket in the middle of winter.
Dressed in boots, orange waders and hooded slickers, we went out on the bay early one rainy morning in a tiny wooden boat.
We caught the scallops in dredges made of metal frames interwoven with string and iron rings, which scraped along the bay floor, dragging up the scallops and whatever else was down there.
The scallop hops along the sea floor by snapping together its two shells like a castanet, squirting water through membranes between the fluted edges of the shells.
The water is propelled by a single muscle, which connects the shells and opens them and closes them.
The muscle is the part we eat (in Europe, the roe, which is bigger than the roe of our scallops, is eaten, too, and the scallops are sold in their shells).


'Cowards' Can Stick to Telephones
To the Editor:
The videophone is to the telephone what the camcorder is to the tape recorder, only better: It's the benefit of really being all of you, sight and sound, and it's live ("Videophone: A Flop That Won't Die").
Now that's pretty scary.
But we'll get used to it.
The cowards can stick to the regular telephone.
I want to be seen!
And heard!
JOSEPH W. MOCARSKI  New Rochelle, N.Y., Jan. 12
The author is an adjunct professor at Iona College's School of Communication Arts.


U.S. Does Well to Hold Off in Recognizing Croatia and Slovenia
To the Editor:
In "Europe, Backing Germans, Accepts Yugoslav Breakup" (news article, Jan. 16), you report that the Danish Foreign Ministry believes it is time to recognize Slovenia and Croatia, "to fulfill the desire their people have expressed" for independence.
You report also that Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the German Foreign Minister, has asserted, "Hanging on to structures that people no longer want raises tension."


U.S. DENIES ROLE IN TOXIC DUMPING
The Federal Government denied this week that the Army had dumped toxic wastes at Love Canal or intentionally destroyed records of any dumping, as a chemical company has charged in trying to deflect some of $650 million in liability claims it faces.
"No evidence exists that the Government or its agents dumped cesium in Love Canal," Craig Galli, a Justice Department lawyer, said on Wednesday in closing arguments in a countersuit by Occidental Chemical Company, which has already been found liable for dumping toxic waste in the Love Canal neighborhood.
He was referring to one of the many toxic substances found in the 1970's buried beneath a residential area of Niagara Falls, N.Y.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League


Mill Museum In New England
A renovated mill that has been converted into a museum evoking the life of New England millworkers at the turn of the century is scheduled to open at Lowell National Historical Park, in Lowell, Mass., in June.
The main exhibit at the Boott Cotton Mills Museum will be a re-creation of the workday atmosphere of a cotton mill weave room, with 90 working antique power looms, some of which will produce cotton cloth.
Costumed interpreters will tend to the looms and park rangers will describe what it was like to work in the old mills.
Earplugs will be made availalble to visitors because of the high noise level.
Other exhibits will trace the history of Lowell from its transition from an agrarian to an industrial society and from its post-World War I decline to its revitalization in the 1970's.


The Tailor's Grandson
WHO WAS DAVID WEISER?
By Pawel Huelle.
Translated by Michael Kandel. 304 pp.
New York:  A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/ Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $17.95.


October Bridal For Ms. Baruch
Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Baruch of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elise Baruch, to John Trainor, a son of Charles J. Trainor of West Orange, N.J., and Karen Hughes of Montclair, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Baruch, 25 years old, is a radio and television producer at Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, a New York advertising agency.
She graduated from George Washington University, as did her fiance.
Her father is a producer of Off Broadway shows.


Gregory Isaacs, the Ruler of Reggae
Gregory Isaacs is the most exquisite vocalist in reggae, his pliable baritone equally at ease with silken ballads and slinky dance grooves.
He has made at least 40 albums in some 20 years of recording, a prolific output even in Jamaica, where frequent visits to the studio are part of a musician's way of life.
He is also halfway through his first tour of the United States in seven years. (New York is not on the schedule.)
That Mr.
Isaacs remains obscure to American audiences is as unfortunate as the neglect of a major Motown performer, especially when recent albums like "State of Shock" (RAS 3086; cassette and CD; available from P.O. Box 42517, Washington D.C. 42517) and "Boom Shot" (Shanachie 43093; cassette and CD; 37 East Clinton Street, Newton, N.J. 07860) show that he can still lay claim to his longstanding title as the "cool ruler" of reggae romantics.


On Rap, Symbolism And Fear
Over the last decade rap has become the epicenter of popular music and a significant influence on fashion, visual arts and language.
But to much of the American mainstream, rap is an outlaw music that otherwise well-informed people vilify and fear.
Rap marks a generation gap.
As young people dance to it, some elders pronounce it unlistenable and others are disturbed by its messages.
There's a perception gap, too, reinforced by media, both responsible and irresponsible, that reflexively connect rap and violence.
The reasons generally have less to do with rap's rhetoric than with larger tensions of race and class.
Trouble at the movie "Juice"?
Commentators point not just to its crime-story plot, but to its rap soundtrack. (No riots have been reported, however, at "The Addams Family," which has a theme song by Hammer.) People trampled to death at an ineptly promoted, poorly policed basketball game at City College in New York?
Out come the statistics about violence at rap concerts, although the rap celebrities were invited to shoot hoops, not to perform.


One Thing We Don't Need Is Tax Reduction; Bank Margins Erode
To the Editor:
Re "Cut in Rates Gives Banks a Windfall" (letter, Jan. 8): It is true that 27 years ago, the last time the discount rate (at which banks may borrow from the Federal Reserve) was 3.5 percent, the prime rate was 4.5 percent.
Thus, banks lending money at prime rate earned 1 percent.


Amy Lessing to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Lessing of White Plains have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Faye Lessing to Barry Neil Polen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Polen of North Brunswick, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.


Ways to Check Snow Conditions
Skiers who want quick information about snow conditions have a couple of new sources.
Killington, Vt., has a 900 phone line that puts callers in touch with people who have skied the area that day.
Three skiers employed by Killingcan be questioned about current conditions, where snow has been made and groomed and other information about the area.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
MAMA, DO YOU LOVE ME?
By Barbara M. Joosse.
Illustrated by Barbara Lavallee.
Chronicle Books. $12.95. (Ages 4 to 8) Children everywhere tease and test their mothers, and this little girl in Alaska is no exception.
The naughtiness she imagines -- "What if I put salmon in your parka, ermine in your mittens, and lemmings in your mukluks?" -- is charmingly illustrated, but does not daunt mama.


Boy, 11, Warns Family of Fire, but a Brother Dies
An 11-year-old boy making breakfast woke his family after a fire broke out in their Queens home yesterday, saving his parents, his aunt and a sister.
But the boy's 13-year-old brother died trying to escape the flames and smoke that rapidly consumed the small frame house, which had no smoke detectors.
In Harlem, a second child -- a 15-month-old girl -- died from burns and smoke inhalation in a fire that apparently began after an electric space heater ignited her bedding, a Deputy Fire Commissioner, Tom Kelly, said.


POSTINGS: Jersey Program; Borrowing for Renovations
New Jersey homeowners who want to refinance their mortgages to free up cash for renovations will have an easier time qualifying for the loans, thanks to a new program being offered by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency.
Under the program, borrowers can refinance up to 100 percent of the finished value of their houses.
Ordinarily, lenders refinance only up to 80 percent of a home's current appraised value.
The declining value of homes has hindered many homeowners seeking to refinance.
"This will help people make repairs that will increase the value of their homes," said Diane Campbell, an agency spokesperson.


Miss Fendrich to Wed G. B. Stevens
Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Welles Fendrich Jr. of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Caroline Fendrich to Gregory Blaisdell Stevens, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Stevens of Philadelphia.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Fendrich, 25 years old, graduated from Smith College.
She manages the Banana Republic store in Grosse Pointe, Mich.
Her father is the president of Princeton Growth Management, international consultants.
Her mother, Roberta Fendrich, is a relocation specialist with John T. Henderson Inc., a real-estate agency in Princeton.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 2, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
39
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
2
2
TWILIGHT'S CHILD, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) When she becomes owner of the Cutler's Cove hotel, a woman finds herself haunted by heartaches and scandals from the past.
3
1
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
4
2
ETERNITY, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.50.) The experiences of a mail-order bride in 19th-century Maine.
5
2
DAZZLE, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $5.99.) The familial, professional and romantic life of a woman who becomes a celebrity photographer.
6
1
FORGIVING, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A woman finds familial problems and love when she establishes a newspaper in Dakota Territory.
7
5
COYOTE WAITS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The murder of a Navajo tribal policeman involves an ancient artifact.
8
11
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
9
1
VITAL SIGNS, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A physician's quest for fertility brings her horrifying experiences.
10
10
COLD FIRE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A reporter tracks the course of a good Samaritan.
11
7
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Plume, $15.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
12
6
MURDER AT THE NATIONAL CATHEDRAL, by Margaret Truman. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A professor investigates the death of a priest.
13
1
SPARTACUS, by T. L. Mancour. (Pocket, $4.99.) The crew of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise is menaced by aliens when it goes to their aid.
14
2
THE CAT WHO KNEW A CARDINAL, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran investigates the murder of a despised man.
15
1
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) An elderly woman reminisces about six decades of life in rural Alabama.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
6
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
2
37
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
3
430
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
4
1
AND THE SEA WILL TELL, by Vincent Bugliosi with Bruce B. Henderson. (Ivy, $5.99.) An enigmatic 1974 murder case involving two American couples on a Pacific atoll.
5 *
1
CROSSFIRE, by Jim Marrs. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $13.95.) A Dallas journalist presents the case for believing that a conspiracy caused the death of John F. Kennedy.
6
29
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman.
7
11
HIGH TREASON, by Robert J. Groden and Harrison Edward Livingstone. (Berkley, $6.99.) Evidence to suggest that the assassination of John F. Kennedy resulted from a massive conspiracy.
8
115
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
9
30
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
10
14
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, feel, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
11 *
45
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspiration.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
25
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
73
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
54
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
8
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1992. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
5
7
THE FAT-BURNING WORKOUT, by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.95.) A program designed to trim the body and tone muscles.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


They Just Did It
SWOOSH
The Unauthorized Story of Nike and the Men Who Played There.
By J. B. Strasser and Laurie Becklund.
Illustrated. 682 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $24.95.


Malarchuk's Lesson
CLINT MALARCHUK, the Buffalo Sabres' goalie, has a powerful new anecdote for his lectures warning youngsters about the dangers of drugs and alcohol: a first-hand account suggesting that that alcohol and medication don't mix.
Malarchuk, who has been nursing a bad back and who was hospitalized for bleeding ulcers earlier this month, has been taking pain medication.


Karen Edelstein, Engineer, to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Alvin Edelstein of Wayne, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Karen Sue Edelstein, to Samuel David Bernstein, a son of Helene Bernstein of Houston and the late Larry Bernstein.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Edelstein, 29 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan and has a master's degree in mechanical engineering from Rice University.
She is a structural engineer in the space shuttle and space station programs at the National Aeronautic and Space Administration in Houston, Tex.
Her father is the chairman of pediatrics at Chilton Memorial Hospital in Pompton Plains, N.J.
Her mother, Bonnie N. Edelstein, is a social worker in the Lincoln Park, N.J., school district.


Scandals Tarnish Luster of the 'Year of Spain'
A series of widely publicized corruption scandals, including one involving illegal land speculation by the state-owned railroad company, has suddenly cast a pall over the beginning of what has long been proclaimed to be the Year of Spain.
Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez's Socialist Government had hoped that Spaniards would by now be preparing excitedly for the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, the World's Fair in Seville and the celebrations of the 500th anniversary of Columbus's voyage to the Americas, which all take place here this year.


Don't Invade My Privacy
To the Editor:
I am delighted to learn that consumer resistance is likely to doom the latest attempt to inflict a videotelephone on the public ("Videophone: A Flop That Won't Die").
In face-to-face conversation, I am obliged to maintain a reasonably pleasant and respectful demeanor regardless of provocation.
On the telephone, by contrast, I can purr sweetly into the mouthpiece while savoring the luxury of smirking at my interlocutor's stupidity or rolling my eyes skyward in boredom or disgust.
I resent this new technological invasion of my privacy.
LOUIS JAY HERMAN  New York, Jan. 17


Those Elusive V.A.T. Refunds
SEEKING a refund on the taxes paid on a purchase overseas puts people in the same mood as paying income taxes.
In theory, the refund is an enticement that a host country offers to foreigners to buy things while on a trip: Buy it, take it home and we will eventually refund our taxes.
But the headaches of trying to get a refund on a value added tax, or V.A.T., or on Canada's new goods and services tax appear to rouse more hostility than the tax itself.
About 20 countries, notably members of the European Community, have some tax that will be rebated for foreign visitors who buy goods above a certain value in a participating store and are willing to undertake the paperwork that is usually involved.
The minimum purchase in France recently rose to 2,000 francs, or $383, which must be spent in the same store; the minimum in Denmark is 600 kroner, or $100.
These refunds apply to taxes on goods to be taken home before use, or that are shipped directly home.


In Sayville, Arson Losses Are Numbing
SNOW has a way of softening the brutalities of life.
Even the harshest of landscapes turns gentle under a blanket of white.
The day after "someone tried to burn down Sayville," as one shopkeeper put it, it snowed.
The yellow police tape cordoning off the sidewalk on South Main Street barred the curious from what could have been a snow-covered skating rink rather than a walkway littered with broken glass and charred pieces of wood.


Uphill Racer
A.J.
KITT -- The American alpine skier with the best chance of winning a medal in Albertville, France, next week -- stands with his arms crossed in a blowing whiteout, staring up into the Austrian Alps.
Atop the mountain the snow is deep and shifting, the winds are fierce and the visibility is near zero.
It is four days before Christmas, and the 500-year-old town of St.
Anton is filled with holiday vacationers, many who have come to watch the prestigious, 63-year-old Arlberg-Kandahar races.
But snow has been falling on the picturesque ski village at the rate of a foot a day for several days in a row, and racing is doubtful.


Tale Inspires Many to Help The Neediest
Touched by the story of two elderly women, Julia and Minnie, whose loneliness and isolation were recounted in a Jan. 19 editorial in The New York Times, many contributors to the Neediest Cases Fund have written compelling letters about friends and family members who are paying a heavy price for living long lives.
"I give this in honor of a woman, like your examples in the editorial, aged 96 and bedridden," wrote Margaret Shea of Manhattan.
"She sees only those who go in and out of the apartment" to take care of her, and she has no relatives or friends.
"Her pension from years and years ago keeps her fed. She is completely dependent on strangers. She was one of my high school teachers."


June Wedding for Catherine Greiner
Mr. and Mrs.
E.
James Greiner of Garden City, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Catherine Ann Greiner, to Thomas Francis Jessop Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Jessop, also of Garden City.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Greiner, 25 years old, is a certified public accountant with Ernst &amp; Young in New York.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross, as did her fiance.
Her father is a senior vice president at NBC in New York.


Q and A
The 40-Year Mortgage Question: I have heard that a bank in California offers 40-year mortgages.
Is it possible to get such a home loan in this area? . . .
S.G.
Belwood, Manhattan Answer: Maybe.
Elizabeth Scott, president of Mortgage Advisory Service, a mortgage brokerage in Manhattan, knows of no New York or regional lender that currently offers 40-year loans.
However, both the Bowery Savings Bank and Great Western Bank offer these loans.
Both are lenders based in California with operations in New York City.


Ms. Rubin to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Rubin of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Kate Rubin, to Gary Lawrence Rothschild, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Rothschild of Wilmette, Ill.
A May wedding in planned.


Owners Give Players the Class AAA Treatment
In a dramatic escalation of a previously low-key practice, clubs this winter have unleashed a new negotiating weapon: the minor league contract for major league players.
More than 80 players who have played in the majors will go to spring training later this month working at least initially under minor league contracts.
The Houston Astros alone have 13 such players.
Some of these players are assured major league jobs; most, however, will have to prove they deserve the major league part of the contracts they have signed.
The difference in pay, of course, is major.
Unlike major league salaries, which even on the low side are worth hundreds of thousands of dollars, minor league pay in this type of contract is in the range of $7,500 a month.


Ms. Tierney Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth W. Tierney of Norwalk, Conn., have announced April wedding plans for their daughter Jennifer Elizabeth Tierney, and Michael Dennis Melaniff, a son of Madelynn Melaniff of Islip, L.I., and the late Dennis Melaniff.
Miss Tierney, 24 years old, is the public relations assistant for Lancome in New York.
Mr.
Melaniff, 30, is a foreign-exchange dealer for the Standard Chartered Bank, also in New York.


U.S. Does Well to Hold Off in Recognizing Croatia and Slovenia; Serbia and Kosovo
To the Editor:
The welcome prospect of United Nations peacekeeping troops intervening in the Croatian conflict brings to the fore the question of a similar effort in the province of Kosovo, another region of Yugoslavia in which Serbia has resorted to force to resolve an ethnic and political conflict.


Exhibiting Works With a Poignant Past
THE show at the Rye Art Cen ter comes out of pain and misfortune incarceration in concentration camps, paralysis from gunshot wounds, blindness, mental impairment and the like.
But you would never know it from the works nor, really, could you guess the ages of the artists, which range from 7 to 20.
Its poignant background notwithstanding, "Children of Courage," as an exhibition, requires no special pleading, and the credit for that must go not only to the artists but also to the organizations behind them, whose work goes beyond art therapy.


Florio and School Aid and Old Image
Try as it might, the administration of Gov.
Jim Florio cannot seem to shake the impression, earned in the early days of its unchallenged dominance of the State House, that it operates behind closed doors and keeps everyone else in the dark.
It is a perception that the Republicans are delighted to nurture -- even if it is no longer true.
The most recent example played out over the last six weeks in the politically explosive arena of school finances.
First, in late December the administration was forced to release school aidfigures that were lower than last year's, infuriating local school boards that had been counting on big infusions of money from the Governor's Quality Education Act.
The act is an enormous political target both because it funnels aid to poor districts at the expense of wealthier ones and because a large portion of its money comes from the 1990 tax increase of $2.8 billion that made everybody angry in the first place.
Loud Protests Follow
When local school boards received the lower aid figures, the boards and parents and teachers and students, especially in well-to-do and middle-income districts, protested loudly that they were being shortchanged.


Helen Roob to Marry Marc Jerome
Rona and Richard Roob of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Helen Roob to Marc Matthew Jerome, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen J. Jerome of Cresskill, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Roob, 24 years old, is an assistant women's sportswear buyer for Macy's in New York and a cum laude graduate of Tufts University.
Her father is the chairman of Benjamin Moore &amp; Company, the paint company, in Montvale, N.J.
Her mother is the museum archivist at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.


RECORD BRIEFS
Roussel: Symphony No. 3, 'Bacchus et Ariane' Suite No. 2; Ravel: 'La Valse,' 'Bolero'
Detroit Symphony conducted by Neeme Jarvi. Chandos CHAN 8996; CD.


Sunday Brunch; For Brunch, Add Snails and Fajitas
Brunch is no longer synonymous with eggs Benedict and blueberry pancakes.
While those dishes are available, the range of eye-opening choices now include snails in puff pastry, steak and egg fajitas and catfish stew.
Here are some restuarants that offer those and more.
Le Refuge
166 East 82d Street, (212) 861-4505 -- This romantic little French spot, a short walk from the Metroplitan Museum of Art, still has a subdued neighborhood feel, if your neighborhood happens to be the affluent East 80's.


Smith and Shuttleman Romp in the Coaltown
Mike Smith had a very good week.
Yesterday, the 26-year-old jockey bolted out of the gate atop Shuttleman in the featured eighth race at Aqueduct and led from start to finish to win the 13th running of the Coaltown Breeders' Cup by seven lengths.


Angkor Wat
To the Editor: I read with interest Barbara Crossette's advisory on Cambodia.
Having recently returned from Siem Reap, I can confirm that the tourist accommodations are below standard.
The only hotel used for foreign tourists is the Grand Hotel, built in the 1920's and badly in need of refurbishing.


A High Five In New Order
Twelve teams qualified for the Olympic hockey tournament, but only a half-dozen matter -- the same Big Six that have won 29 of the 30 medals awarded over the past 10 Olympics.
The United States figures to be eliminated in the knockout round.
Here is a brief scouting report on the other five:
1.
United Team: Young, wide-eyed and hungry.
No, these are not Minnesota college kids.
They are the two-time defending champions, the former Soviet Union, patched together without top National Hockey League players like Sergei Makarov, Aleksandr Mogilny, and Sergei Fedorov.
The United Team is not what it once was, but it will move the puck, take the hit, and showcase star forward Aleksei Zhamnov.


It May Be Time to Act, But No Option Is Good
Even as diplomats began evoking the possibility of military action in Haiti last week, they acknowledged that it was an expression more of utter frustration after four months of efforts to restore democratic order here than of a conviction that any foreign influence, including a multinational army, could right matters in the hemisphere's least stable country.
By any common measure, diplomats say, the officers responsible for the deaths of hundreds of Haitians in the September coup that overthrew the country's first elected leader, and its repressive aftermath, are as offensive a bunch as any of the foreign pariahs who have recently mobilized the United States or the world into indignant action.


An Era Encircled by Myth Is Seen Afresh
"There were no fairies in Russian folk tales," Nina Tikanova notes with typical perspicacity in "La Jeune Fille en Bleu" ("The Girl in Blue").
Reading the illuminating insights into Bronislava Nijinska, Leonide Massine and George Balanchine provided in this autobiography by a Russian-French ballerina who knew them all, I found myself engrossed in unexpected aspects of dance history.
These Russian-born choreographers came from the same culture as Miss Tikanova, now 82 years old and still living in Paris.
It would be stretching things to say that because they, too, had been deprived of fairies in their childhood, they found no room in their avant-garde ballets for such creatures.
But it is true they preferred the grotesque characters that they drew out of Russian folk sources.
Miss Tikanova's memoirs, recently published in French (by L'Age d'Homme), recall that they were modernists.
Like Stravinsky, they connected the dissonance in folk material with new art.
They were anti-Romantics and lived in a time of great upheaval.


Headliners; Motherhood
Seven years ago, an assistant professor of pediatrics and her partner found it impossible to have a child, though not for any of the usual reasons.
Both were women.
But biological limits aren't what they used to be.
After arranging to be artificially inseminated with the sperm of a friend, the professor gave birth to a boy named Evan.
The friend relinquished any rights to his half of the chromosomes, and the mother's partner -- both women choose to remain anonymous -- filed a request for adoption.
Last week, in what is believed to be the first such decision in New York State, a Surrogate Court judge in Manhattan granted the request.
"The fact that the petitioners here maintain an open lesbian relationship is not a reason to deny adoption," said Surrogate Eve Preminger.
"Today a child who receives proper nutrition, adequate schooling and supportive shelter is among the fortunate, whatever the source. A child who also receives the love and nurture of even a single parent can be counted among the blessed."


25 Years of Unabashed Elitism
It is perhaps the ultimate accolade -- not merely to have your name known, but to have it become an adjective.
Memories feel Proustian, music sounds Mozartean -- and clothing, linens, furniture and even whole rooms can be very Ralph Lauren.
Don't think for a moment that Mr.
Lauren is merely a fashion designer.
In the 25 years since he went into business as a designer of men's ties, his name has become a virtual synonym for upper-middle-class American taste.
He designs men's clothing, women's clothing, linens, bedding, rugs, furniture and tableware; while he has turned down requests to design the interiors of automobiles, one suspects that was only because he did not like their outsides, since what Ralph Lauren really wants is to design everything the eye can see.


Challenging Dinkins Over the Homeless
THE Mayor's 22-member commission on homelessness took only four months to come up with a plan that essentially told Mayor David N. Dinkins that his own plans were all wrong.
Instead of the city trying to build 24 shelters in middle-class neighborhoods, the commission said last week, nonprofit organizations should be hired to build and run them wherever they think best.
The shelters could even, theoretically, be built upstate or on islands in the East River.
Nonprofit groups like Daytop Village or Phoenix House, the commission argued, could house and treat a homeless addict for far less than the $18,000 a year the city spends to keep one on a cot in an armory.
And the construction could be done more cheaply, since nonprofit groups are less fettered by bureaucratic requirements.


Poised to Fit Into the Puzzle of Art History
Multiculturalism has its fans and its detractors, but one thing is certain: its more inclusive approach has resulted in the retrieval of lost artworks and forgotten artists, and this is good.
When these rediscovered efforts are exceptional, multiculturalism's merit is undeniable, as are its pleasures.
It is, after all, profoundly thrilling to witness the emergence of brand-new pieces in the ever changing, expanding puzzle that is the history of art.
The considerable achievement of William H. Johnson (1901-1970), a black American modernist active from the late 1920's to the mid-40's, is just such a brand-new piece, poised to fit into the puzzle of 20th-century American art.
At the moment, Johnson's late work, created between 1938 and 1945, is the subject of a remarkable and popular exhibition at the National Museum of American Art here, which is almost the sole repository of his work.


Animosity Upsets Order in Manhattan Court
To Dennis W. Quirk, the head of the New York State court officers' union, Nina Epstein and her Legal Aid Society lawyers in Manhattan are a "bunch of flunkies" he has vowed to have handcuffed and arrested if they give him and his officers any more trouble.
And if Ms.
Epstein and any of her colleagues in court are threatened by criminal defendants, Mr.
Quirk says they can forget about calling a court officer and had better look to the city police or an ambulance crew for help.


By Another Name


Scapegoats, Weasels In World of Football
TALK is cheap in college football but apparently quite expensive in professional football.
We have been reminded of this in recent days when the University of Washington weaseled out of a game against Miami, while a Buffalo Bills assistant coach was dismissed for being funny.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 24 about the Isle of Dogs in London referred incorrectly to American Express.
American Express is the parent company of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc.
Shearson Lehman Brothers' operations in Britain go under the name Lehman Brothers International.
The article also referred incorrectly to the planned location of both Lehman Brothers International and American Express.
The companies are scheduled to move to 20 Cabot Square, Canary Wharf, not 1 Canada Square.
The article also referred imprecisely to a building often referred to as the Pelli Tower.
Its official name is 1 Canada Square.
A letter pointing out the errors was received from the Canary Wharf developer, Olympia &amp; York, on Jan. 7.


Black Tie Affair Wins The '91 Gallop Poll
Black Tie Affair, who closed his 1991 racing season and his career with six straight victories at six different tracks, won perhaps the most important contest of his life today when he captured the Eclipse Award as the 1991 Horse of the Year.
The 5-year-old traveler, bred in Ireland, owned by Jeffrey Sullivan and trained by Ernie Poulos, won horse racing's highest honor in a three-way struggle with international overtones: He outpolled Arazi, the brilliant juvenile who raced sensationally in France last year, and Dance Smartly, the Canadian filly who won all eight of her races.


Editors' Note
A front-page article last Sunday described an American program of military aid to Iraq in the 1980's, during its war with Iran.
A related article, alongside the continuation, detailed allegations that an American company, the Terex Corporation, had built mobile missile launchers for Iraq in a plant it owned in Scotland.
The article reported that an investigator for a House committee, who was not identified, had said that a former Terex employee, also not identified, had "confirmed" the sale to Iraq.
It was unfair to report an accusation by an unidentified informant who was himself relying on an anonymous source.


At Work; The Fallout From Hill-Thomas
Last fall, when the Anita Hill-Clarence Thomas controversy escalated into a national catharsis on sex and relationships, the job problem hotline at Nine to Five, the Cleveland-based advocacy organization for working women, began ringing nonstop.
Before the hearings, Nine to Five fielded some 200 calls a week, most often on pregnancy-related issues.
After Hill-Thomas, calls multiplied exponentially, to 200 a day, virtually all about sexual harassment.
"People were almost bewildered," said Karen Nussbaum, Nine to Five's director. ' "You mean this is sexual harassment? You mean I could do something about this?' "


Laura Coash To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas R. Coash of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laura Elizabeth Coash, to Justin Darin Porter, the son of Donna Porter of Tuckahoe, N.Y., and Bruce J. Porter of Las Vegas, N.M., and a stepson of Zsolt Toth of Tuckahoe.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Coash, 26 years old, graduated from Boston University and is a graphic designer in the Stamford, Conn., office of Modern Telecommunications Inc., a New York-based television production company.
Her father is a senior vice president at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in New York.


Travel Is Flat This Winter, Agents Say
ON the outside, it looks like a glamorous business, but people on the inside know better.
With few exceptions, travel agents in Westchester say that although they are working harder than ever, business this winter has been flat, for the second year in a row.
"Customers are cautious," said Jeffrey Dash, owner of Dash Travel in White Plains.
"They are booking shorter trips later, and they're spending less."
Mr.
Dash added: "Air fares are still a mess. In Westchester, we have a lot of people who commute to Florida, and those who can't take advantage of the few promotional Florida fares this year find themselves paying 40 to 50 percent more on Florida routes than they did last year."


Mutual Funds; No Glow to the Environmentals
Environmental mutual funds, which invest in companies involved in solid- or hazardous-waste management, pollution control, recycling and the like, have mostly fallen flat since they were set up a couple of years ago.
In 1991, the best-performing environmental fund trailed the average stock fund by more than six percentage points while the worst performer actually lost money in a year when stock funds rose 30.7 percent.
Over all, last year's average return of 10.1 percent for the six funds in the group was near the bottom of the list of fund sectors, according to Lipper Analytical Services.


Results Plus
SKIING Austrian Wins Sabine Ginther of Austria won the last World Cup women's downhill before the Olympics by 1.27 seconds yesterday over Miriam Vogt of Germany in Grindelwald, Switzerland.
It was a huge margin for an event often decided by hundredths of seconds.
Ginther, who finished second in a downhill three weeks ago in Schruns, Austria, completed the 3.129-kilometer Tschuggen course in 1 minute 49.72 seconds.
Hilary Lindh of the United States was 11th in 1:51.93, the best finish by an American woman in a World Cup downhill this season. (AP)


Helping Hand, Of Sorts
To the Editor:
I learn from the article on CD's that the producer John McClure kindly fixed balances in CD reissues of Leonard Bernstein recordings.


Ms. Procario Plans to Wed
Saverio and Lydia Procario of Valhalla, N.Y.. have announced the engagement of their daughter Amanda Beatrice Procario to Edward Michael Addvensky, the son of Anne and Edward S. Addvensky of Nutley, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Procario, 26 years old, graduated from Fordham University, from which she also received a master's degree in elementary education.
She teaches fourth grade at Holy Rosary School in the Bronx.
Her father is the director of Fordham University Press in the Bronx.
Her mother is a public relations consultant in Valhalla.


Sea Cadet Pins His Name on The Donn
On the day when they rang up the curtain on the national racing season, Fly So Free stayed in the barn and Strike the Gold stayed deep in the pack.
But Sea Cadet, the California horse with no tail, went flying through the homestretch of Gulfstream Park this afternoon and won the $500,000 Donn Handicap by three lengths.
It was a battle mainly for front-runners, and it ended when Ron McAnally's 4-year-old colt flashed home in front of the long shot Out of Place, who held second place by a neck over Sunny Sunrise.
But the favorite, Strike the Gold, who won the Kentucky Derby last May, never generated his storied finishing kick and ran a dismal sixth in the field of eight.


In the Rebecca Mode
To the Editor:
It is sometimes fun to analyze a literary character as if she were a real person.
But the psychiatrist in Pat Conroy's novel "The Prince of Tides" is not written as a real person.
She follows a distinct literary tradition.
Dr.
Lowenstein's roles are those of a wise counselor, a mother-muse and an erotic object who is easily abandoned; these are a few of the traditional roles filled by Jewish women in literature.


Beth L. Silverman Married to Samuel D. Kotis
Beth Lynn Silverman, the daughter of Jerome and Nina Silverman of Lawrence, L.I., was married last evening to Samuel David Kotis, a son of Paula Kotis of Wellfleet, Mass., and the late Stanley Kotis.
Rabbi Irving Spielman officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence.
Mrs.
Kotis, 26 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and is completing requirements for a master's degree in international affairs at Columbia University.
Mr.
Kotis, 28, is a Foreign Service officer at the State Department in Washington.
He graduated from the University of Chicago and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption on page 25 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the Houston Grand Opera carry outdated references to the cast for a production of Wagner's "Parsifal." After the section went to press, the company announced that John Keyes would sing Parsifal and Dunja Vejzovic would sing Kundry.


A Word of Praise
To the Editor: On the evening of Dec. 8, 1991, I was very pleasantly surprised by an incident at La Guardia Airport that could have been unpleasant and costly for me.
My canceled flight was rescheduled and I had to use the Airport Transportation limo to reach USAir from Delta.
Inadvertently, I left my purse in yellow limo No. 198.
I received no assistance from security and the yellow emergency telephone went unanswered.


Bridge
The early history of bridge, as distinct from whist, is full of mysteries, and one of them has an entirely new explanation.
It concerns the origin of the game, which has strong roots in the 19th-century Ottoman Empire.
But why, in that case, does it have an English name?
Perhaps because British Army officers appear repeatedly in the story.
In 1843 a young English doctor, James Paget, described a weekend's recreation in a letter to his fiancee: "We improved our minds in the intellectual games of bagatelle and bridge for about two hours -- admirable occupations for reasonable creatures." It is quite unclear whether the bridge that he played was a card game.
Bagatelle was not.


ALBERTVILLE '92: Sports of The Times; The Eagle Is Grounded . . . Before the Big Crash
YOU probably don't even know the ski jumper's name.
As the ABC television voice intones, "the agony of defeat," Vinko Bogataj of Yugoslavia loses his balance in a spinning tangle of arms and legs.
Just the thought of it makes you wince.
And there, but for the grace of Olympic common sense, goes Eddie (the Eagle) Edwards.
Four years ago, Eddie the Eagle arrived in Calgary as Great Britain's best ski jumper.
Its only ski jumper.
He was fun, a skinny reddish-haired 24-year-old plasterer from Cheltenham, England, who squinted through pink glasses.
Olympic ski jumpers think of themselves as flying.
He fluttered.
But between his dead-last finishes in both the 70- meter and 90-meter jumps, this instant Olympic folk hero hopped down to Los Angeles to trade one-liners with Johnny Carson on the "Tonight" show.


From the Virtuosi, a Different Haydn
IT is a typically diverse program that the music director Richard Kapp has concocted for the Philharmonia Virtuosi appearance today at the State University of New York at Purchase, with only Haydn's D major Cello Concerto having a claim on the standard repertory.
Otherwise, there is the charming Symphony in F by Haydn's younger brother, Michael; a concertino by Bach's eldest son, Johann Christian, and "Choros No. 7" by Villa-Lobos, which Mr.
Kapp calls "a weird but fascinating little piece for the unusual scoring of saxophone, flute, clarinet, string trio and percussion."


Streetscapes: City College; A Case of Terra-Cotta Failure
THE 19th-century architect George B. Post had an engineering degree, excellent credentials and a reputation for sober, conservative designs.
So up at City College they are still wondering what happened at the turn of the century when Post used unproved technology for Shepard Hall, City College's main building of 1907 -- which has become the largest example of terra-cotta failure in New York City and perhaps the country.


Corrections
A quiz answer in the special Education Life section on Jan. 5 about international names in the news misidentified Entebbe.
It is a city in Uganda; the capital is Kampala.


Dinkins's Budget Plan: A Tougher City to Live In
The spending plan Mayor David N. Dinkins has proposed for next year and the three years after that would create a city where classrooms are more crowded, parks are dirtier, street and sewer repairs take longer and social workers have more work and less time to spend on each case.
The preliminary budget would produce a city where it would take longer to get a building permit, where the jobs of school guidance counselors would remain unfilled, where a caller seeking help in getting child-support payments would be greeted by an automated telephone system instead of a social worker.


U.S. STARTS RETURN OF HAITI REFUGEES AFTER JUSTICES ACT
Hours after the Supreme Court lifted an injunction that barred the forced return of Haitian exiles, the United States today began sending refugees back to Haiti from the American Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
About 150 Haitians boarded a Coast Guard cutter this afternoon for the trip to Port-au-Prince, the Haitian capital, said Lieut.
Comdr.
Gordon Hume, spokesman for the Joint Task Force managing the Haitian exile crisis, in an interview from Guantanamo.


Israeli Army to Mobilize Settlers Against Attacks
Under pressure to respond to a series of shootings of Israelis in the occupied territories, the army said on Friday that it would mobilize groups of Jewish settlers in the West Bank as military squads to help it react to future attacks.
A military spokesman confirmed reports that the army had formed "standby teams" of settlers who would be activated as reserve soldiers to set up roadblocks and cordon off areas in the event of an attack.


Kazakhstan's Dark Satanic Mills
Perhaps it was the desolate vastness of Kazakhstan that led Soviet leaders to believe it was just the spot to try out grandiose schemes.
Here, Moscow installed its space center and a major nuclear weapons testing range.
Here, too, Moscow decreed that mammoth factories, like the lead smelter (left) in Chimkent, an industrial city, were to be superimposed on a predominantly agricultural society.
Since the late 1920's, a succession of Kremlin directives, one seemingly more ambitious than the other, tried to transform a steppeland twice the area of Alaska, a region of endless prairie and rugged mountains, of rivers disappearing in desert sands.
First, the Kazakhs -- nomadic stockherders of Mongolian and Turkic origin -- were forced to become collectivized farmers.
Then, in the doomed Virgin Lands campaign beginning in the 50's, tens of millions of acres of grassland in the arid north were plowed and planted with wheat.
But what probably changed Kazakhstan more than any other edict from Moscow was its conversion into an industrial base.
Kazakhstan is rich in mineral deposits, and its industrial centers, developed since the 60's, are crowded with iron and steel works; copper, lead and zinc factories; cement and phosphate plants.
Kazakhstan was the Soviet Union's largest producer of lead.
Today, the sovereign republic, like the other components of the old Soviet Union, is joining the community of industrialized nations at the same time it is confronted with the legacy of past decades: hugely inefficient factories that have despoiled one of the most pristine lands in Central Asia.


CORRECTION
An article last Sunday about retail vacancies in Manhattan misstated the terms of Fila's lease for its new Madison Avenue store and misidentified the negotiating broker.
The lease is for $3 million over 10 years.
The brokers were Stuart S. Ellman and Helene Wall of Judson Realty.


THE NATION: Votes to Spare; Court Serves Notice of Its Transformation
Almost like a connect-the-dots drawing in a child's coloring book, a Supreme Court term takes shape gradually, one decision at a time, until a recognizable image appears.
For the current term, that moment occurred last week.
The 25 decisions handed down so far this term represent barely a quarter of the cases slated for decision by early summer.
But two opinions last week helped bring into focus a Court in the process of fundamental transformation.
It now appears President Bush's two appointees, Justices David H. Souter and Clarence Thomas, have brought not just incremental change but a quantum shift in the Court's center of gravity.


In Bear Market, Nicklaus Is Bullish on His Business
Jack Nicklaus, who will forever symbolize steely-eyed certitude, has in recent years led a life of profound ambivalence.
Each successive January now holds both the hope of resurgence and the specter of retirement.
Even as he pursues one more great moment like his victory in the 1986 Masters, the man who has often said that his greatest fear is embarrassing himself acknowledges he is not that many poor performances from quitting altogether.


Julia Murphy Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Murphy of West Hartford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Julia Elizabeth Murphy, to Mark Joseph Simon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Simon of Pompton Plains, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Murphy, 24 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College and is pursuing a master's degree in social work from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the president of the Center Capital Corporation, a commercial finance concern in Avon, Conn.


20 Years for I.R.S. Bombing
An aerospace engineer who had pleaded guilty to firing 13 bombs with a crude launcher at one Internal Revenue Service office last year and trying to blow up three others was sentenced by a Federal district judge on Thursday to 20 years in prison.
No one was hurt in the attacks by the bomber, Dean Harvey Hicks of Costa Mesa, whose tax deduction for an $8,000 donation he made to mail-order church had been turned down by the I.R.S.


Quotations of the Day
"Russia and the United States are charting a new relationship, and it's based on trust; it's based on a commitment to economic and political freedom; it's based on a strong hope for true partnership." -- PRESIDENT BUSH  [ 8:3 ] "From now on we do not consider oursleves to be potential enemies, as it had been presviously in our military doctrine. This is the historic value of this meeting." -- PRESIDENT YELTSIN  [ 8:3 ]


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine on Jan. 19 about the novelist Robert Stone misattributed a review of his novel "Children of Light" in The New Yorker.
The reviewer was Whitney Balliett.


CRIME
There's a description of a Texas tornado in John Lantigua's TWISTER (Simon &amp; Schuster, $18) with enough kick to blow the house down.
But then, much of the reportorial detail in this vivid regional mystery has that sort of punch.
Digging deeper, he uncovers more twisted motives for murder in the town's ancient feuds between cattle ranchers and oilmen, the land-grabbers and the land-drillers.


Felicia Credle Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Credle of Durham, N.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter Felicia Elizabeth Credle to Conor Joseph McGaley, a son of Dr.
Sean McGaley of Syosset, L.I., and the late Margaret McGaley Midland.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Credle, 32 years old, graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is a marketing and communications manager at the REL Consultancy Group, a management consulting firm in Harrison, N.Y.
Her father, a civil engineer, owns the Credle Engineering Company in Durham.


Alison Bernstein Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart A. Bernstein of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alison Mim Bernstein, to John David Shulman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen N. Shulman of McLean, Va.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Bernstein, 26 years old, graduated from Vanderbilt University and is a graduate student in social work at Catholic University.
Her father is the president of the Bernstein Companies, a Washington real-estate developer.


Bronx Youth Slain at Restaurant In a Dispute Over Places in Line
An 18-year-old Bronx man who just wanted his fast food on time paid with his life early yesterday morning, the police said.
The man, Mandell Walters, who had dreamed of playing basketball at a top university, was killed when he was shot in the head outside a White Castle restaurant in the South Bronx.
His was one of nine killings in New York City late Friday night and early yesterday morning, the police said.
The victims included a police officer shot while trying to visit his mother in her South Bronx apartment.


Bedside Books
To the Editor:
In his review of a book by Charles C. Mann and Mark L. Plummer (Jan. 5), Uwe E. Reinhardt writes, " 'The Aspirin Wars' is not exactly bedtime reading." This sentence stopped me in my tracks.
"The Aspirin Wars"
is
my bedtime reading, you see, and has been for the past three weeks or so.


Esther S. Hsieh Plans to Marry
Dr. and Mrs.
Jui Sheng Hsieh of Belle Mead, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Esther Szeyu Hsieh to William Min-Way Hou, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Shou L. Hou of Radnor, Pa.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Hsieh, 27 years old, is an account marketing representative with I.B.M. in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University, from which she also received a master's degree in mechanical and aerospace engineering.
Her father is a professor of mechanical engineering at the New Jersey Institute of Technology.


Double Standard On Sports Risks
To the Sports Editor:
The sentiment that Magic Johnson should forgo the Olympics because he might transmit H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, during competition reflects a double standard used for people infected with the virus.
The minute odds that the virus could be transmitted during a basketball game are certainly no greater than the chance that a major league fastball or an open-field tackle could kill or critically injure an opponent.
Mike Utley, the Detroit Lions player paralyzed in a football game this season, can confirm the inherent danger of athletic competition.


Virgin Atlantic Gets Safety Seats For Children
Safety seats for children 6 months to 3 years old are being introduced by Virgin Atlantic Airways.
The seats are being delivered this month, a spokeswoman for the airline said, and will be available as soon as they arrive.
She said Virgin Atlantic is the first airline to provide the seats, which are also the first to be approved by the Civil Aviation Authority in Britain.
The United States Federal Aviation Administration does not require the use of a safety seat.
The child's seat sits inside a regular seat and is attached by the standard passenger seat belt.
The child is then secured into its own seat by an adjustable five-strap harness.


Kimberly A. McGrath Is to Wed John W. Maki
Kimberly Ann McGrath and John W. Maki are engaged to be married in September.
Ms.
McGrath, 28 years old, is the assistant director of the Fresh Pond Day Treatment Center, a psychiatric treatment center in Cambridge, Mass.
She has a master's degree in psychology from Northeastern University and is a graduate of Gettysburg College.
She is the daughter of Thomas and Cynthia McGrath of Morris Plains, N.J.


Promotions for Bills
Bills Coach MARV LEVY didn't have to look far to fill the slot left by TED MARCHIBRODA when he resigned as offensive coordinator to become head coach of the Indianapolis Colts.
Levy gave the job to his offensive line coach, TOM BRESNAHAN, who will retain his line duties.
The running backs coach, ELIJAH PITTS, was given the additional title of assistant coach.
Marchibroda hasn't been idle either.
As his new receivers coach he named DWAIN PAINTER, who coached Pittsburgh's wide receivers. (AP)


INSIDE
Inquiry on Silicone Use
Despite warnings that the practice is unsafe and illegal, some doctors continue to inject silicone into patients for cosmetic reasons.
Page 18. 2 Charged in Officer's Death
Two men who turned up at hospitals with gunshot wounds shortly after an off-duty officer was killed were charged with his murder.
Page 30.


Making a Difference; A Market for Smog
Regulators, as a rule, do not like to promote deregulation, and James M. Lents, who heads the primary air-quality regulator for southern California, is no exception.
But last week Dr.
Lents announced that the regulatory agency would take a radically new course in trying to clean up the Los Angeles area's smog problem by freeing most large companies from the tight rules they have operated under in recent years.
In place of the old approach, Dr.
Lents and the staff of the South Coast Air Quality Management District proposed a long-studied concept that relies primarily on free-market economic forces to goad polluters into compliance.
Companies that are major polluters will simply be told how much they have to reduce their emissions each year, and then be left to make their own decisions on how best to achieve the goal.
Those that exceed the required reduction on their own will generate credits that can be sold on the open market; those that cannot meet the requirement or find it uneconomical to do so will have to purchase those credits on something akin to a smog market.


Using Video Telephones in Medicine . . .  . . . And For the Hearing Impaired
To the Editor:
A two-way video telephone ("Videophone: A Flop That Won't Die") might be extremely useful to hearing impaired people who depend on visual information for lip reading and/or using sign language to communicate.
They must now use special teletypewriters -- alone or in conjunction with a relay service -- to communicate via telephone.
While the devices work well, they are relatively slow and do not necessarily transmit nuances of expression easily conveyed by spoken, lip-read or signed language.
A videotelephone system would enable hearing-impaired people to communicate with one another, or with normal-hearing individuals, over a distance as easily as if they were in the same room.
JOSHUA M. GENDEL  New York, Jan. 16
The author is director of the technical services department of the New York League for the Hard of Hearing.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MEMORIES The Autobiography of Ralph Emery.
By Ralph Emery with Tom Carter.
Macmillan, $19.95.


I.O.C. Seeks Admittance For Provisional Members
The leadership of the International Olympic Committee moved today to permit Slovenia and Croatia, which have broken from Yugoslavia, to participate in the coming Winter Games at Albertville, France, as provisional members, and to allow five republics of the former Soviet Union to compete as one team under the Olympic flag.
These recommendations of the 11-member board of the I.O.C., which make official earlier proposals, are likely to be confirmed next week at a meeting here of the organization's general session, said Michele Verdier, a spokeswoman.
The Winter Games will start Saturday.


AGE BEFORE BEAUTY
The inference of Isabel Davis's Hers column "Age Before Beauty" (Dec. 29) is that she is searching for companionship on the Upper East Side, whereas she might consider "crossing Delancey" to find her "pickle man." The more modestly successful of us males are more realistic and don't need 25-year-old centerfolds to boost our egos.
Furthermore, we can even read The Times.
RAY ANTELMAN
Passaic, N.J.


A Hall of Fame Closes
Don't expect a wave of complaints, but the College Football Hall of Fame in Kings Island, Ohio, has closed its doors to the public indefinitely.
The hall, adjacent to an amusement park about 20 miles northeast of Cincinnati, opened in 1978 with expectations of attracting about 300,000 a year, or about 10 times the actual attendance.
The hall, whose officials hope to relocate it to a more popular tourist area, has been open to the public only on weekends in the winter, with a full schedule in the summer. (AP)


Talking: Jumbo Loans; Qualifying Becomes Tougher
IN higher-priced regions like the New York metropolitan area, many people who want to buy a home must apply for a jumbo mortgage.
A jumbo loan is one that exceeds $202,300, the current limit imposed by the Federal National Mortgage Association and Home Loan Mortgage Corporation -- known, respectively, as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac -- that regularly buy mortgages from lenders.
Such loans must be sold to private pools of investors who set their own rules about what is acceptable.


Jansen Finds His Balance
His was the saddest story of the 1988 Calgary Games.
He lost a sister, Jane Beres, to cancer the morning of his 500-meter race.
Then he fell during the race.
Two days later, after attending her funeral in Milwaukee, he was back for the 1,000-meter race, only to fall again.
In the four years since his private trauma became a public event, he has overcome the pain and improved as a skater.
Just a few days ago, he lowered the world record in the 500 meters to 36.43 seconds, which was two-hundredths of a second faster than his chief rival and the 1988 Olympic champion, Uwe-Jens Mey of Germany, had skated six days before that.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Chester, Conn. 205,000
250 Main Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; mudroom, screened porch, pond and waterfall views, 2.2 acres; taxes $4,179.
New Milford, Conn. 190,000
35 Upper Reservoir Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; decks, garage loft, 1.9 acres; taxes $2,372.
Stamford, Conn. 525,000
121 Fairview Avenue  6-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath 69-year-old waterfront, brick colonial; slate roof, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,308.
Armonk, N.Y. 330,000
7 Limestone Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 24-year-old raised ranch; fireplace, deck, family room, 1 acre; taxes $4,470.
Bedford, N.Y. 497,300
146 Cedar Hill Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; fireplace, den, family room, eat-in kitchen, sun room, 2.25 acres; taxes $6,500.
Rye, N.Y. 340,000
3 Allendale Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 53-year-old Tudor; fireplace, den, eat-in kitchen, dining room; taxes $7,019.
OTHER AREAS Bridgewater, N.J. 285,000
852 Dow Road  4-bedroom. 3-bath, 2.5 year-old colonial; fireplace, Jacuzzi, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3.500.
Murray Hill, N.J. 240,500
128 Old Stirling Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $5,381.
East Northport, L.I. 182,500
1033 Fifth Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 28-year-old colonial; deck, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,600.


Sarah Deffeyes Is to Marry in April
Prof. and Mrs.
Kenneth S. Deffeyes of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sarah Stover Deffeyes, to Robert Joseph Gralewski Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gralewski of Wilmington, Del.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Deffeyes, 22 years old, graduated from Princeton University, where her father is a professor of geology.


Women Are The Big Ticket in Skating
SOME people are not convinced that figure skating, with its ballet music and its style points, is even a sport.
I say, let Rickey Henderson try to steal second base while staying in sync with Erik Satie or Tchaikovsky, and see what kind of marks he gets.
Whatever figure skating is, CBS is going to show 44 hours of it from Albertville, all of them in American prime time.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bay Shore 350,000
27 South Penataquit Avenue  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath 75-year-old colonial; new eat-in kitchen, fireplace, basement, 2-car garage, 1.4 acres; taxes $8,800.
East Northport 182,500
1033 Fifth Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 28-year-old colonial; deck, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,600.
Glen Cove 265,000
47 Knott Drive  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; den, family room, 2 fireplaces, 1-car garage; taxes $5,400.
Laurel Hollow 735,000
65 Cedarfield Road  6-bedroom, 4-bath, 9-year-old farm ranch; family room, Florida room, basement, heated pool; taxes $12,500.
North Massapequa 160,000
14 Rosemary Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 75-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.
Seaford 175,000
3818 Mansfield Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, attic, finished basement; taxes $5,000.
OTHER AREAS Stamford, Conn. 525,000
121 Fairview Avenue  6-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath 69-year-old waterfront, brick colonial; slate roof, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,308.
Armonk, N.Y. 330,000
7 Limestone Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 24-year-old raised ranch; fireplace, deck, family room, 1 acre; taxes $4,470.
Murray Hill, N.J. 240,500
128 Old Stirling Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $5,381.


Hebrew Preferred Over German
To the Editor:
It is not only Wagner who offends the Israelis but the German language as well.
In 1967, soon after the end of the Six Day War, Leonard Bernstein and Isaac Stern gave a concert on Mount Scopus with the Israel Philharmonic to celebrate the reunification of Jerusalem.
The Tel Aviv Philharmonic Choir refused to sing Mahler's Second Symphony (the "Resurrection") in German.
Jennie Tourel, who had sung the soprano solo often, had to learn the words in Hebrew.
MICHAEL MINDLIN Los Angeles


Tchaikovsky's Candor
To the Editor:
Paul Griffiths's review of my biography of Tchaikovsky (Jan. 5) accuses me of "guesswork" and "supposition," since the evidence on Tchaikovsky's "secret life," as he puts it, "is not available." If Mr.
Griffiths is fluent in Russian, he might have consulted the primary sources and discovered what I described: namely, that much of the documentary material referring to the composer's homosexuality has never been censored and merely needs to be placed in the context of the mores of 19th-century Russia.


Making a Difference; CBS's 'Sports Strategy' -- Everything but a Payoff
For CBS, the sports business has been one long luge ride the past two years and Neal H. Pilson has been the man on the sled.
CBS was compelled to write off $604 million during the two-year period because of overspending on rights for sports events.
Mr.
Pilson, the president of CBS Sports, was the main architect of what was known for a time as the CBS "sports strategy" -- an effort to use big ticket sports events like the World Series, the Super Bowl and now the Winter Olympics to build CBS back to respectability in the television ratings.


Sunday Menu; Asian Chicken in a One-Dish Stir-Fry Meal
The speediest way to get a meal on the table short of carryout is to combine some of the dishes: the protein with the starch, the protein with the vegetable, the starch with the vegetable.
When all are combined, voila!
The one-dish meal.


POSTINGS: New Mall in Norwalk; A Fairfield ShopRite
Fairfield County is to get its first ShopRite supermarket late this year with the opening of Grade A ShopRite Plaza, a 120,000-square-foot mall that is now under construction in Norwalk.
The project unites the Cingari family of Stamford, owners of three Grade A Market supermarkets, with the Wakefern Food Corporation of Elizabeth, N.J., the cooperative umbrella under which ShopRite brands and services are offered in 185 stores.


Tampa
Each winter, Tampa revels in a round of tropical festivals and fairs, complete with booming cannons, rollicking parades and dress balls.
And each year, it seems more and more events pop up to tempt visitors: street parties with the scent of Cuban coffee hanging in the air, a vibrant art show that festoons the walkway along the Hillsborough River, open-air concerts that send a thumping beat across the bay and end in showers of fireworks and confetti.


How North Shore Handles Pets
It's appropriate to set the record straight regarding North Shore Animal League and its programs.
For many years the League has adopted, to quality homes throughout the metropolitan area, thousands and thousands of homeless puppies, kittens, dogs and cats.
Over 95 percent of these pets have been mixed breeds.
Each year, we've carefully monitored the effect that these adopted pets have on the pet population on Long Island.
The league has commissioned an independent statistical research group, whose results guide us in terms of the numbers of pets we adopt and the amount that must be spayed or neutered in order to prevent an exacerbation of pet overpopulation.
There has been a decided decline in the overpopulation problem over the last 10 years.
The surveys of participating shelters throughout the area indicate that the amount of homeless animals cared for by said shelters has decreased by approximately one-third.


Megan Kelly to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Kelly of Rockledge, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Megan Elizabeth Kelly to Paul Albert Morfogen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Zachary P. Morfogen of Boonton Township, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Kelly, 23 years old, graduated from St.
Joseph's University in Philadelphia.
She is a saleswoman in Philadelphiawith the State Farm Insurance Company.
Mr.
Morfogen, 26, graduated from Brown University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
He is a trader's assistant with Lehman Brothers in New York.


Meeting Venus


Social Events
Party for Citymeals
Feb. 2 -- The Professionals' Alliance, a group of people in their 20's and 30's who help Citymeals-on-Wheels feed the homebound elderly, is holding a fund-raising dance party at Tatou, 151 East 50th Street, starting at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $65, at the door.
Theatrical Milestone
Feb. 3 -- The Drama League will celebrate 75 years of promoting young playwrights and directors at a black-tie dinner at the Pierre.
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and entertainment by a number of Broadway and Hollywood stars.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 302-2100.
Films for Posterity
Feb. 4 -- The Anthology Film Archives is holding its first Preservation Dinner at Tavern on the Green.
Eileen Bowser, the film curator at the Museum of Modern Art, Martin Scorsese and others will be honored for their contributions to film preservation.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M., dinner at 7:30.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 505-5181.
Irvington Research Auction
Feb. 4 -- An art auction, dinner and dance to benefit the Irvington Institute for Medical Research, which concentrates on the immune system, will be held at Sotheby's.
Cocktails at 6 P.M., auction at 7.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 758-8250.
Aiding School Volunteers
Feb. 5 -- The New York City School Volunteer Program, which provides tutors for public-school students, will benefit from a party at Laura Belle, 120 West 43d Street.
From 7 to 10 P.M., there will be an open bar, hors d'oeuvres, a raffle and dancing.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 213-3370, or $70 at the door.
A Three-Day Benefit
Feb. 6 -- A three-day benefit for Performance Space 122, at its theater, 150 First Avenue (Ninth Street), will be a showcase for scores of artists, who will perform some 70 presentations of dance, song and drama lasting three minutes each.
A reception with the performers will follow the first show on Feb. 6 at 8 P.M.
Tickets, $99.95, for the first show and $25 for the 8 P.M. and 11 P.M. shows on Feb. 7 and 8, from (212) 477-5288.
Riding for the Disabled
Feb. 6 -- The New York Riding Program for the Handicapped, which is starting a therapeutic horseback riding program for disabled children and adults, will benefit from a cocktail reception and auction at Christie's East, 219 East 67th Street, from 6 to 10 P.M.
Joyce Dinkins will be the guest of honor.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 535-3917.
Runners at Rest
Feb. 8 --The New York Road Runners Club will hold a party at the Ritz, 254 West 54th Street, to benefit the club's safety patrol in Central Park.
A buffet dinner and dancing will begin at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 860-4455, extension 278.
Weizmann League Carnival
Feb. 8 -- The Weizmann League, young supporters of the Weizmann Institute of Science, a research center in Rehovot, Israel, is holding a casual-dress, carnival-style party at the Sheraton New York from 8 P.M. to midnight.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 779-2500.
Brunch for the Arts
Feb. 9 -- Theater Arts Productions of New York, a nonprofit ensemble dedicated to rejuvenating theater in the city, will benefit from a brunch at Dolce Restaurant, 60 East 49th Street, from 12:20 to 4:30 P.M.
Tickets, $50, at the door.
Information: (212)754-6238.
West Side Musical Gathering
Feb. 10 -- A 7:30 P.M. benefit concert for the Riverside Park Fund to maintain and improve the park will be held at the Promenade Theater, 2162 Broadway (76th Street).
The flutist Eugenia Zukerman will be the host and will perform with other musicians from the Upper West Side, among them Arnold Steinhardt and Ruth Laredo.
They will play music of composers who lived in the same area, including Leonard Bernstein, Victor Herbert, Sergei Rachmaninoff and George Gershwin.
A reception with the artists and a tapas buffet will follow at Alcala, 349 Amsterdam Avenue (76th Street).
Tickets, $125, or for the concert alone, $75, from (212) 870-3070.
Onward and Upward
Feb. 10 -- The Upward Afterschool Program, which provides homework assistance, computer instruction and sports activities for 1,200 children in Harlem, will benefit from a cocktail party and auction at Christie's, starting at 6 P.M.
Arthur Ashe will be the master of ceremonies for the auction.
Items will include special tickets to fashion shows and a trip to the opening of Disney World in France.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 206-0500.
Cancer Society Ball
Feb. 11 -- The New York City Associates Committee of the American Cancer Society will hold a Cupid's Ball at the Country Club, 209 East 85th Street.
Tickets for dinner and dancing from 7 to 11 P.M., $100, or for dessert and dancing from 9 to 11 P.M., $40, from (212) 586-8700, extension 390.  'Painting the Town'
Feb. 11 -- The Hudson River Museum will benefit from a screening of "Painting the Town," a documentary on Richard Haas, the muralist.
The film will be shown in the dining room of the Philip Morris Companies' headquarters at 120 Park Avenue (41st Street), where there is a Haas mural.
Cocktails at 5:30 P.M., followed by the screening.
Tickets, $25 for museum members, $30 for nonmembers, from (914) 963-4550, extension 12.


Steps to Be Followed Before Painting a Room
MAKING a room in your house ready to be painted consists chiefly of protecting surfaces that are not going to be painted and creating uninterrupted surfaces that will make the job easier.
Start by removing as many items from the room as possible.
That will not only simplify moving about the room while carrying painting equipment, but also eliminate the possibility of spilling paint on chairs, tables and other furniture.


Tyson's Driver Says Woman Was Dazed
The chauffeur for Mike Tyson during his 36 hours here last summer said today that the woman who has accused Tyson of rape appeared frantic and disoriented when she returned to the limousine from the boxer's hotel room early last July 19.
During three hours of testimony, the chauffeur, Virginia Foster, described what she recalled about the 18-year-old woman when she joined Tyson in the limousine early that day and when she came out of the fighter's hotel just over an hour later.


Lauren Suraci To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Philip T. Suraci of Wellsville, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lauren Elizabeth Suraci, to Christopher Laurence Johnson, the son of Charles Johnson of Simi Valley, Calif., and Linda Maggard of Glendora, Calif.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Suraci, 26 years old, is a legal assistant in Los Angeles at the law firm of Pillsbury Madison &amp; Sutro and a graduate of Bryn Mawr College.
She and her fiance recently completed two-year tours with the Peace Corps as fisheries agents in Cameroon.
Her father is the chief executive of the manufacturing division in Carlisle, Pa., of the Kinney Shoe Corporation.
Her mother, Elizabeth Suraci, is a registered nurse.
Ms.
Suraci is a great-granddaughter of Dominic Suraci, who founded the Palumbo Cigar Company in New York.


RECORD BRIEFS
Nielsen: Symphonies Nos. 1, 2
Royal Scottish Orchestra conducted by Bryden Thomson. Chandos CHAN 8880; CD.


Experts Try to Dispel Unease on Johnson
The likelihood that Magic Johnson could infect other basketball players with the virus that causes AIDS by playing in the National Basketball Association All-Star Game next Sunday or the Olympic Games this summer has been adamantly and emphatically dismissed by AIDS experts.
The chance that it could happen, they said, is so infinitesimally small that, to their minds, it is not worth worrying about.


Technology; Using the Body's Lubricant To Heal Scars and Knees
If one thinks of the human body as a well-oiled machine, hyaluronic acid is that oil.
This slippery substance lubricates the joints, protects delicate tissues in the eyes and helps the skin stretch and bend.
Now several companies hope to put hyaluronic acid to use in medicine.
They are working on applications in which the body's natural lubricant would be used to ease pain and facilitate the movement of arthritic knees, to prevent complications from surgery, to moisten dry eyes and even to smooth out facial wrinkles.


Angkor Wat
To the Editor: Having just been a tourist in Cambodia, and in the Angkor Wat-Angkor Thom complex, I take exception to Barbara Crossette's report (Travel Advisory, Dec. 8).
For brevity let me address only one of her statements: "There are no accommodations in the vicinity thought suitable for foreign tourists."


Parlez Vous Lindros? Sweden Says Yes
When he is not busy insulting entire Canadian provinces with his contractual demands, 18-year-old Eric Lindros can be seen dominating amateur hockey games with speed, bulk, creativity, and fearlessness.
Lindros was the first overall pick in the National Hockey League draft last year, and became the nemesis of all French-speaking Canada with his bitter rejection of the Quebec Nordiques, in part because French is the language of choice there.
"Why," asked Lindros, a native of English-speaking Toronto, "would I want to play for a team that's been in last place for the last one thousand days?"


Houston Dares To Be Different
The "Parsifal" at the Houston Grand Opera on Thursday evening will begin its second scene with agonizing stealth.
A great ring, shining from within, will float into view from above.
It will tilt and -- ever, ever so slowly -- descend around an equally glowing crystalline iceberg in the center of the stage.
From it Amfortas will extract the Grail.
Where is everybody?
The knights and their somber procession?
We hear their voices offstage, but people get short shrift in Robert Wilson's long-suffering but finally produced version of Wagner's music drama.
The Houston Grand Opera, in another of the calculated risks it has come to be known for, is giving the American premiere of Mr.
Wilson's marriage of glacial motion and neutron-bomb stagecraft -- one in which humans often disappear and only constructions are left standing.


The Littlest Picture Show: TV's Title Sequences
Almost 10 years have passed since Castle/Bryant/Johnsen, a three-person film company, got the assignment to create the main titles for a new NBC sitcom called "Cheers." Since then, the opening sequence they produced -- composed of 17 meticulously selected, hand-tinted archival engravings and photographs -- has become one of the most familiar 60 seconds in television history.
The award-winning series has earned millions of dollars for its producers, director, actors and musicians.
The "Cheers" logo, which was first drawn at C.B.J.'s tiny office on Third Street in Los Angeles, has been licensed, franchised and stamped on merchandise from beer mugs to T-shirts.
And what did Jim Castle, Bruce Bryant and Carol Johnsen get out of all this?
Mr.
Castle thinks for a while.
"The satisfaction," he says finally.


New Bridgeport Mayor, Same Old Quagmire
THROUGHOUT Bridgeport's bankruptcy bid last summer, a young lawyer named Joseph P. Ganim hung around the edge of the furor, telling anyone who would listen that his city should not go down that unknown road.
He also said something that sounded odd to outsiders more familiar with the troubles of Connecticut's largest city than with its hold on the hearts of its long-suffering residents: he wanted to be Mayor.


New York Hunting Seasons Extend Into the Deep Midwinter
Winter has finally bared its teeth in the Northeast, and he who goes forth with shotgun in hand will work hard for whatever wild game he gathers.
The ritual is unvarying year after year.
By mid-September in New England, New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, he who both hunts and fishes is in a frenzy of anticipation and indecision.
The dog days of summer have ended, streams and lakes are cooling, trout are feeding on the surface again, striped bass are gathering along the beaches before moving offshore and south, and high overhead on still, starry nights the first southward-moving Canada geese are crying.
Deer seasons are about to begin, as well as those for ruffed grouse, and feathered migrants, the geese, ducks and woodcock.


What Doctors Say About AIDS Reflects Fear, Not Prejudice
To the Editor:
In "The Doctor Won't See You Now" (Op-Ed, Jan. 12), James Gorman is apparently under the impression that the 30 percent of physicians who said in an American Medical Association survey that they felt no ethical responsibility to treat AIDS patients did so because they believe AIDS is a socially acquired or life- style disease, like coronary disease or lung cancer.
But Mr.
Gorman neglects to mention that it is impossible to contract a universally fatal illness from an accidental stick of a needle used on a coronary or lung cancer patient.
The responses had less to do with undesirability than fear.


Headliners; In the Rough
Minoru Isutani realized part of a dream in 1990 when he bought the Pebble Beach golf resort, one of America's most famous, for a whopping $840 million.
Now all he has to do is figure out how to pay for it.
Originally the Japanese businessman had planned to sell 760 private memberships for $740,000 each, a feasible price for wealthy Japanese.
But with the recession, the potential value of the memberships dwindled to $150,000.
That meant that Mr.
Isutani would have to sell so many memberships that an untouchable tradition at Pebble Beach -- public access -- would be threatened, and the California Coastal Commission rejected the plan.
Mr.
Isutani has a $400 million loan payment due later this year.
A spokesman said last week that Mr.
Isutani has not yet come up with a new plan for financing the purchase.
In a recent interview with the San Francisco Examiner, Mr.
Isutani admitted that he may have been a bit impulsive.
"I bought the property with 50 percent of my business mind," he said, "and 50 percent of my golf mind."


Bush to Public: Forget Saving, Spend Now
Call it George Bush's war on savings.
Behind the State of the Union rhetoric about getting the economy moving again lurked what seems to be an important part of Mr.
Bush's re-election strategy: Get Americans to stop saving for retirement and instead spend the money now.


THE NATION: Driven to Abstraction; With These Data, the Enumerator Always Wrings Twice
Each year for the last 110 of them, the Bureau of the Census has published The Statistical Abstract of the United States, a compendium of statistical detail about the country, from "Abortions" and "Abrasives, stone," to "Zinc, production and value." The 1991 edition, recently published, is the Census Bureau's largest and the first to tabulate the 1990 census results among its 1,490 statistical tables in 1,000 pages.
Besides reporting the big numbers, about the 1990 population (248 million) or steelworkers on the job (169,000, down from 399,000 in 1980, but producing the same tonnage), the Census Bureau culled other sources to collect small details about how Americans are living, where they are working and what they are eating (more broccoli).
The states are, of course, compared, though explanations are rare.
There is no clue as to why Maryland ranks first in doctors per 100,000 people, with 325, and Idaho last, with 120.
Or why Vermont is first and Utah last in percentage of undergraduates in state who are women.
Nor why New York was 44th in percentage of women who work -- 53 percent, versus Utah's 61 percent.


People Are Pawns Pushed by Politicians
"CHESS," a musical by Richard Nelson, Tim Rice, Bjorn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson, was a megasize overproduced Broadway show that lasted only a couple of eye blinks a few seasons ago.
This musical story about myriad forms of international and interpersonal game-playing had its defenders, however, and "Chess" has had numerous productions around the country since its short-lived Broadway sojourn.
Its most recent revival is at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale, where it continues through Feb. 16.


Headliners; On the Rocks
If the wine were cheaper, the accusation might have been bootlegging.
As it is, Lalou Bize-Leroy, a co-director of perhaps the most famous wine producer in Burgundy, the Domaine de la Romanee-Conti, has been ousted in a dispute over unauthorized "gray market" sales of some of the company's extremely expensive wines.
Mrs.
Bize-Leroy heads a separate wine exporting company that was authorized to sell Domaine wines only in continental Europe.
Aubert de Villaine said last week that a Swiss affiliate of Mrs.
Bize-Leroy's company had shipped Domaine wines to the United States, where a bottle of Romanee can go for $800, and some had been finding its way to Japan, where it may fetch up to $1,300 a bottle.
Mr. de Villaine, who controls 50 percent of the Domaine shares, joined forces with Mrs.
Bize-Leroy's sister, Helene Roch, who owns 25 percent, to oust Mrs.
Bize-Leroy, who also owns 25 percent.
Mrs.
Bize-Leroy told French reporters that she knew nothing about the gray market scheme and would take the issue to court.


Data Bank/February 2, 1992


Jennifer Zorek Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Warren W. Zorek of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Lynn Zorek, to Mark Stuart Pressman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Pressman of Brooklyn.
No wedding date has been set.
Ms.
Zorek, 33 years old, owns Zero In, a home accessories sales company in New York.
She graduated from Hampshire College.
Her father is a merchandising operations executive at Bloomingdale's in New York.
Her mother, Jane Zorek, is a collections representative at Williams Real Estate in New York.


Office and Infidelity
To the Editor:
Elaine Swift and Kenneth Finegold end "Has Clinton Said Enough?" (Op-Ed, Jan. 23) by quoting Thomas Jefferson, thought by many historians to have engaged in at least one clandestine affair.
By their standards, Jefferson's fitness for office would be in grave doubt today.


Jennifer Sachs Plans Wedding
Robert L. Sachs of Philadelphia and Dr.
Marcia Littell of Merion Station, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Sue Sachs, to Stephen Robert Dahnert, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Dahnert of Stroudsburg, Pa.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Sachs, 31 years old, is a fund-raiser at Vassar College.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, who is retired, operated women's clothing stores in Frankford, Pa., and Haddonfield, N.J.


Three Suggestions for Serving Scallops
SEEING sparkling fresh bay scallops in the market recently reminded me of the time I harvested them in Nantucket in the middle of winter.
Dressed in boots, orange waders and hooded slickers, we went out on the bay early one rainy morning in a tiny wooden boat.
We caught the scallops in dredges made of metal frames interwoven with string and iron rings, which scraped along the bay floor, dragging up the scallops and whatever else was down there.
The scallop hops along the sea floor by snapping together its two shells like a castanet, squirting water through membranes between the fluted edges of the shells.
The water is propelled by a single muscle, which connects the shells and opens them and closes them.
The muscle is the part we eat (in Europe, the roe, which is bigger than the roe of our scallops, is eaten, too, and the scallops are sold in their shells).


Mariners' Sale: More Support
To the Sports Editor:
Congratulations to Dave Anderson on his column supporting the proposed sale of the Seattle franchise ("Approve the Seattle Nintendos," The Times, Jan. 29).
Even though I own only a small part of the Baltimore Orioles franchise, I am one baseball enthusiast who is on your side.
SARGENT SHRIVER Washington


Janice Downey To Wed in May
Richard R. Downey and Mary Ann Serra of Cambridge, Mass., have announced the engagement of Mr.
Downey's daughter Janice Marie Downey to Dr.
Glen David Seidman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Seidman of Lancaster, Pa.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Downey, 31 years old, is a medical student at Boston University.
She graduated magna cum laude from Northeastern University.
Her father is a vice president of International Research Inc., a management consulting firm in Cambridge.
Her stepmother is a finance manager at the Digital Equipment Corporation in Maynard, Mass.


Children's Books
ROSA PARKS
My Story.
By Rosa Parks with Jim Haskins.
Illustrated. 192 pp.
New York: Dial Books. $17. (Ages 10 and up)


CAMPUS LIFE: Stetson; Poetry Readings Draw Students Of Varied Majors
Sometimes there's rhyme.
Sometimes there's reason.
But always there is the darkness, despite the occasional bursts of optimism, when the "Poetry at an Uncouth Hour" program begins at Stetson University each Thursday night at 10.
The student readers in the program count Allen Ginsberg, Emily Dickinson and Yeats wannabes among the computer-science majors, accounting majors and physics majors.
And there are the everpresent English majors who feel compelled to utter their creative musings in public.


Good News, Bad Team
He led his team in hits, runs and games played and was second in batting, home runs and runs batted in among the regulars.
Indeed, if his team were, say, the Minnesota Twins or even the Toronto Blue Jays, second baseman CARLOS BAERGA might find himself being toasted during the off season as a future Hall of Famer.
Alas, he plays for the Cleveland Indians, so Baerga, who hit .288 with 11 home runs and 69 runs batted in, has had to settle for being named the best player on the worst team in the major leagues.


The Runaway Supreme Court
Reconstituted by Presidents Reagan and Bush, the Supreme Court is off and running on a course more radical than the Presidents who appointed most of the justices.
Instead of the "judicial restraint" that Republicans have long yearned for, this new majority shows contempt for precedent, disrespect for Congress and indifference even to the arguments of this conservative Administration.
These are no longer fears.
The Voting Rights Act decision last week shows them to be fact.
No act of Congress of this generation has earned or received more respect.
Yet the Court casually accepts evasions of its purpose, casting aside a whole body of Federal lawmaking aimed at forcing white majorities to share political power with minorities.


FRANCE'S U.N. PLAN AT ODDS WITH U.S.
Diplomats say France appears to be heading for a clash with the United States over the command of United Nations peacekeeping forces after proposing that senior military officers from the five permanent Security Council members have a say in running such operations.
The French proposal, first outlined by President Francois Mitterrand in his speech to the Security Council summit meeting on Friday, will complicate the task the summit leaders set for themselves of strengthening the United Nations' peace-preserving role in the post-cold-war era, diplomats here say.


Doctors Continuing to Inject Silicone Despite F.D.A. Warnings, Agency Says
Despite warnings from the Food and Drug Administration that the practice is illegal, scores of doctors are continuing to inject silicone directly into the bodies of women, most often to puff up parts of the face or to smooth wrinkles, agency officials say.
The agency is investigating the most prominent of the doctors, including a dermatologist in New York, and is trying to track down a trade in silicone in which middlemen are believed to buy the material from the manufacturers under false pretenses for resale to the doctors.
Silicone injections have not been approved by the F.D.A., and only those doctors authorized to experiment on patients are allowed to use or obtain silicone for the procedure; currently, no doctors have that authority.


One Thing We Don't Need Is Tax Reduction; Discount Rate Magic
To the Editor:
The Federal Reserve has reduced the discount rate and in effect transferred billions of dollars among various groups in the United States.


Topics of The Times; Tanks a Lot
Goldfish were one of the great pleasures of his boyhood half a century ago.
For less than 50 cents, Woolworth's supplied him with a bowl, gravel, a bit of seaweed and a pair of fish.
Hours of pleasurable viewing, inevitably followed by tragedy: a dead goldfish floating belly up.
The expert at the dime store delivered the standard diagnosis: "fed 'em too much."
A few weeks ago, lured by a sale sign and someone's comment that fish viewing lowered blood pressure, he strolled into a local shop.
He asked for the 20-gallon tank with the base; at $40, it seemed a bargain.
But that, the clerk explained, was simply "a good start."


Steps to Be Followed Before Painting a Room
MAKING a room in your house ready to be painted consists chiefly of protecting surfaces that are not going to be painted and creating uninterrupted surfaces that will make the job easier.
Start by removing as many items from the room as possible.
That will not only simplify moving about the room while carrying painting equipment, but also eliminate the possibility of spilling paint on chairs, tables and other furniture.


Wall Street; An American Product Japan Likes
The United States is doing a booming export business in at least one homegrown product: the Chartered Financial Analyst designation, a professional certification program administered by the Association for Investment Management and Research in Charlottesville, Va.
The association, formed from the merger two years ago of the Financial Analysts Federation and the Institute of Chartered Financial Analysts, has seen an explosion in foreign interest in its accreditation program, which consists of three years of independent study and a set of grueling examinations.
In 1987, more than 80 percent of the candidates were Americans; today, only 68 percent are.


CAMPUS LIFE: Alabama; Fraternity Suspended 4 Years For Little Progress
The Sigma Alpha Epsilon national fraternity has suspended for four years its founding chapter here at the University of Alabama.
The national said that the chapter had made inadequate progress toward re-establishing itself in good standing since its suspension in 1988 on cocaine-trafficking charges.
"I can only say that there were very specific expectations outlined for them in many different areas and they simply fell short," said Mike Sophir, the national director of chapter development.


Data Update
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Dec. 91
Nov. 91
Dec. 90
Nation
$ 100,000
$ 97,900
$ 91,700
Northeast
137,300
138,300
134,400
Midwest
77,800
78,100
72,300
South
89,700
87,200
82,800
West
142,400
138,800
131,400
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.77
8.67
9.86
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.99
6.05
7.83
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.62
8.51
9.70
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.81
5.82
7.65
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.61
8.51
9.70
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.88
5.90
7.72
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.91
8.77
10.03
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.54
6.47
8.09
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.14
4.17
6.58
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.25
8.43
9.58
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


The Only Thing That Changes Is the Names of the Victims
Just last week a shrine of flowers that had rested outside a Bronx apartment house was taken away.
It was the last memorial to a 22-year-old man shot in December as he walked out of his building.
On Friday night there was a new reminder of the violence that has plagued this Morris Heights neighborhood: the killing of an off-duty police officer, who was shot in the same building, 1705 Andrews Avenue, in an attempted robbery, the police said.
The officer, Hilario Serrano, 29, and the victim in the December shooting, Walter Ortiz, 22, had been friends.


In Downhill, Things Are Looking Up for Kitt
Eight years after Bill Johnson won the downhill in Sarajevo, Yugoslavia, the United States has another gold medal hopeful in A. J. Kitt: Alva Ross Kitt IV.
It is no wonder that he has said the initials "stand for nothing." But in a way they stand for a lot about Kitt's character, which, unlike the bad boy image Johnson projected, is uncomplicated and uncontroversial.
Kitt is from the Rochester suburbs, the 23-year-old son of law book publishers.
He has climbed steadily during his five years on the United States team.
Kitt was the country's top downhill performer in the 1988 Calgary Olympics, finishing an inconspicuous 26th.
His breakthrough came on Dec. 7, 1991, when he stunned the Alpine community by capturing a World Cup downhill event at Val d'Isere, becoming the first American to win a downhill since Johnson, who had been the first to win since 1936.
Considering his success this season, Kitt has become the best and likely the only American hope for an Alpine gold.
The Olympic downhill will not be run on the Val d'Isere World Cup course on which Kitt won.
A new course was laid for the Games.


Changes on French Flights
Northwest Airlines has been awarded Boston-Paris rights by the Department of Transportation and, pending approval by the French Government, planned to start daily service this weekend.
The Minneapolis-based airline will operate over a Minneapolis-Boston-Paris routing, using DC-10 aircraft to Charles de Gaulle Airport.
The D.O.T. said it preferred Northwest to an application by American Airlines because Northwest was ready to start service earlier and because, unlike American's proposal, its plan was not limited to Boston-Paris.
Northwest also flies from Detroit to Paris.
Trans World Airlines already operates Boston-Paris service.
Air France will discontinue its weekly service from Kennedy Airport in New York to Nice and Lyons on March 27, but an airline spokesman says the move is temporary, citing "availability problems" with aircraft.
The airline intends to renew the service when it has enough planes to serve both cities nonstop, he said, adding that traffic on the route was healthy.
The current service departs Kennedy Friday evening, goes nonstop to Nice and then to Lyons before the return flight to New York on Saturday.
It will be operating during the Winter Olympics in the French Alps from Feb. 8 to 23.


It's Fun Today, but Will They Be Sore Tomorrow!


Anne Bernheim, Executive, Weds
Anne Bernheim, a vice president of Grey Advertising, was married last evening to Steven Lewent, a partner in the architectural firm of Graf &amp; Lewent, both in New York.
Justice Harold Silverman of State Supreme Court in the Bronx performed the ceremony at the Williams Club in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Lewent, 40 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Boston University.
She is the daughter of James Bernheim of West Palm Beach, Fla., and Patricia Mansur of Stamford, Conn.
Her father, who is retired, was a partner in the New York law firm of Parker &amp; Duryee.
Her mother retired as a piano teacher.


RECORD BRIEF
Various artists: 'Ska Bonanza'
Heartbeat HB 86/87; CD and cassette.


Jennifer Schenker to Wed Marvin Aaron in May
May wedding plans have been announced for Jennifer Joy Schenker, a daughter of Alice Schenker of Tewksbury, N.J., and the late Michael Schenker, and Marvin Barry Aaron, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Aaron of Mountain Brook, Ala.


Freshman Life Fully Explored
To the Sports Editor:
The article in Sidelines (The Times, Jan. 27) presented only one view of what the eligibility of freshmen for Ivy League varsity football might mean for their first year at college.


An American Modernist, at Home and Abroad
Some of this critic's most favorite American paintings are included in the centennial exhibition of the work of Stuart Davis (1892-1964), which one can still catch at the Metropolitan Museum for two more weeks.
The show is large -- 175 paintings and drawings, some of mural size -- and there are those who think that it could with advantage be smaller.
This regular visitor to the show does not agree.
For one thing, a thinned-down and generally approved version of Stuart Davis's career might leave out my favorite paintings altogether.
Quite apart from that, what we have in "Stuart Davis: American Painter" is something that goes way beyond Davis himself.


Laura Landro Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Sylvester P. Landro of Pittsburgh have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laura Landro, to John A. Herfort, a son of Judith Pearce of New York and the late Dr.
Robert A. Herfort.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Landro, 37 years old, is a media editor at The Wall Street Journal in New York.
She graduated from Ohio University.
Her father is a partner in Buckeye Marketing Group, a manufacturers' representative firm in Pittsburgh.
Her mother, Beverly Landro, is the admissions and education director of the South Hills Family Hospice in Pittsburgh.


Dead Mediterranean Dolphins Give Nations Pause
Hundreds of dead and dying dolphins have washed up on inlets and beaches of Turkey and Greece in recent weeks, victims of an epidemic that is racing through the eastern Mediterranean and that some scientists believe is linked to water pollution.
Specialists say this is the latest flare-up of a virus that killed at least 1,000 dolphins off Spain, France and Italy in 1990.
Biologists say the virus destroys the dolphins' immune system, allowing other diseases to invade and kill the animals.


Charity Program On Russian Tours
A tour company that specializes in the former Soviet Union is beginning a Feed a Friend program in which travelers on its trips are encouraged to take along a gift of food for children in St.
Petersburg.
The program was scheduled to start last week on a one-week visit by General Tours to St.
Petersburg and Moscow.
Alex Harris, president of General Tours, which has been organizing vacations in the Soviet Union since 1955, said that travelers could carry packages of nonperishable food as luggage and present them personally to youngsters in St.
Petersburg schools on the first day of their tour.
The program was worked out with the St.
Petersburg Tourist Bureau, which is the former Intourist office in the city, and the office of the Mayor, Anatoly Sobchak.


Can the Nets Smooth the Rough Edges?
It is a good thing the Nets' midterm grades are not totally based on the results of their disastrous five-game West Coast road trip.
Before swinging west, the Nets had won five games in a row for the first time since 1985-86, the last time they were in the playoffs.


The Lure of the 'Gadgetry'
To the Editor:
The 1960's are not the 1990's ("Videophone: A Flop That Won't Die").
Young singles and families, with and without children, are purchasing all sorts of devices designed to free them from unwanted, routine and dull telephone calls and opting for services and devices that increase their control and enjoyment of their communications.
Our research -- polling about 700 households nationally and completed late last year -- shows that almost two-thirds of the starting-out singles and one-third of families with teen-agers and young children are interested in the videophone.
And telephone users who seek more efficiency and time saving say they, too, are likely to buy a videophone.
Of course the price has to be "right" and today's digital technology will lead to lower costs.


For Tomba, Science Meets Sex Appeal as a Star Rises
HE may look natural at his work.
And his victories this season might well be because of a prodigious inborn talent for keeping his weight centered and forward while tracing the straightest, fastest line between two gates.
But in Italy, where Alberto Tomba is one of the country's most precious national treasures, no one is leaving anything up to Mother Nature.
"It was clear that Alberto had an unprecedented potential as a skier," said Giorgio D'Urbano, the conditioning trainer in the four-man equipe that has followed Tomba for the last three years, since the 1988 Olympic gold medalist in slalom and giant slalom slowed down and swelled up after a season of parades, dinners and guest appearances.


Wedding Held For Dr. Bhatia
Dr.
Renu Bhatia and Steven Jeffrey Petersohn were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
H.
Scott Matheney, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Lotos Club.
Dr.
Bhatia, 31 years old, is a management consultant in New York, where she was until recently an associate at Goldman Sachs &amp; Company.
She received a medical degree from the University of London and a master's degree in management from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Krishna and Jagdish C. Bhatia of London.
Her father is a retired mechanical engineer.
Her mother teaches at St.
Lawrence Infants School in Hillingdon, England.


Marriage of Poets In 'Oak and Ivy'
THE highfalutin blandness of "Oak and Ivy" underscores the unreasonable assumption that a theater can produce a satisfactory new play just in time for Black History Month.
Oddly, Kathleen McGhee-Anderson's attempt to dramatize the loving but strained four-year marriage between a legendary poet, Paul Laurence Dunbar, and Alice Ruth Moore, herself a poet and scholar, was hardly rushed into the Crossroads Theater Company's annual slot reserved for commemmorating the lives or works of seminal black figures.


A Dangerous Misrepresentation
To the Editor:
Edward Said's pernicious attempt to associate resistance to performing Wagner with proscriptions against the work of Salman Rushdie is at best a dangerous misrepresentation.
In Israel, recordings of Wagner's music are widely available, and his works are broadcast on the radio.
In countries in which Islamic fundamentalism holds the force of law, public revelation of private ownership of Mr.
Rushdie's "Satanic Verses" may bring torture and death.
To obscure these differences would be immoral.
DENNIS SLAVIN New York


H. Gregg Lewis, 77, Theorist in Economics
H.
Gregg Lewis, a leader in modern labor economics, died on Jan. 25 at his home in Chapel Hill, N.C., after a long illness.
He was 77 years old.
For 36 years beginning in 1939, Dr.
Lewis taught at the University of Chicago, where he directed the graduate program in economics for many years.
He was considered a principal member of the monetarist, free-market-oriented Chicago school of economics and was known among other things for his writings on labor supply and the impact of unions.


POWER STRUGGLE
Sam Howe Verhovek's article "Power Struggle" (Jan. 12) doesn't clearly counter Hydro-Quebec's claim that it can build the Great Whale project without New York.
It's not the electricity exports to New York but the dollar revenues from the United States that Hydro-Quebec desperately needs -- and not just to build but possibly to survive in its current form.


New Yorkers, etc.
There is at least one in every life: an acquaintance, a colleague or a friend who can't resist making a clever or amusing remark, even if it hurts.
Or worse still, an acquaintance, a colleague or a friend who not only can't resist indulging in facile put-downs but enjoys them.
Admittedly, the temptation is sometimes overwhelming, even for the nicest people, especially when a perfect comment pops into mind.
There is in almost everyone a little devil who occasionally takes over and comes out with a dig that should have remained unspoken.


Using Video Telephones in Medicine . . .
To the Editor:
"Videophone: A Flop That Won't Die" (Forum, Jan. 12) questions the value of A.T.&amp; T.'s Videophone when used for personal reasons.
However, before it is dismissed as inconsequential, its potential value in medicine should not be overlooked.
For the past two years, at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, research has been done using Visitel, a variation of A.T.&amp; T.'s videophone manufactured by Mitsubishi.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PELELIU Tragic Triumph: The Untold Story of the Pacific War's Forgotten Battle.
By Bill D. Ross.
Random House, $22.


Sunday Outing; Boulders, Sand, Treasure and Silence In That Faraway Land Called the Bronx
Save the $3,000 and skip Disney World: one of the most exciting adventure parks for children is nearby, and it never has lines.
It's free, and parking isn't a problem most of the year.
It's called Twin Island, and it's nothing more or less than the ragged outcrop of rock at the north end of Orchard Beach in the Bronx.
Although the 6,700-car Orchard Beach parking lot was built for the 800,000 people who visit the long sandy crescent in summertime, it is almost empty nine months of the year.
Dress warmly; park at the far northeast corner of the lot, near the handball courts; then walk out to the wide, flat promenade and white sand beach.
Look into the distance, and you can see City Island and the skyscrapers of midtown Manhattan.


IN FROM THE COLD
To support the idea that domestic animals have lost their fearfulness, Budiansky cites the difference in snow tracks made by domestic animals like dogs and those made by wild animals like foxes and wolves.
The former, he says, meander in "carefree fearlessness," while the latter move in straight lines.
A more reasonable explanation for this difference may be that domestic animals, with a more reliable and abundant food supply, can afford the extra energy required for meandering, while wild anmals must conserve calories by taking the economical route.
MICHAEL BERNSTEIN, M.D.
Portland, Ore.


Cuttings; Wintertime, Camellia Time
Winter is the camellia's shining moment.
Just as surely as spring brings tons of tulips followed by clouds of lilacs, midwinter is camellia time.
Of course, nothing in nature is absolutely predictable.
Sometimes camellias start as early as September and dwindle before February's final days.
Sometimes they don't show color until December and are still coming on strong in April.
But at some point between the shortest day of the year and the arrival of the first robin, there will be bushels of camellia blossoms to enjoy.


Denise Marcil Plans to Marry
Mrs.
George B. Marcil of Franklin Lakes, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter Denise M. Marcil to Turhan Tirana, a son of Rosamond Tirana and the late Rifat Tirana of Washington.
No date has been set.
Ms.
Marcil, a graduate of Skidmore College, is president of her own literary agency in New York.
Her late father, George B. Marcil, was the vice president of manufacturing of M. Serman &amp; Company, a women's clothing manufacturer in New York.


Valerie Bragg, Nurse, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford Bragg of Braintree, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Valerie Jeanne Bragg, to Gary Michael Byrne, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward R. Byrne of Swampscott, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bragg, 31 years old, is a nurse at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
She graduated from Curry College.
Her father is a draftsman for the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority in Boston.
Her mother, Jeanne Bragg, is a genealogical researcher in Braintree.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Newport, R.I.; Building Hotels For the Navy
CHALET SUISSE International, a budget hotel chain based in Wilton, N.H., is building a 150-room hotel on the Navy base here as part of a pilot program to create reduced-cost housing for Navy personnel.
The Navy awarded a contract to Chalet Suisse two years ago to build a "bachelor officers quarters" for Navy personnel visiting the Newport base.
The contract also calls for building a 150-room hotel at the submarine base in New London, Conn.


Business Diary/January 26-31
ECONOMY The Bush Economic Plan: Why Save When You Can Spend?


Corrections
A box in the Arts and Leisure section on Jan. 5 with a front-page article about country music misstated Bill Monroe's age and the date the Grand Ole Opry started broadcasting.
Mr.
Monroe is 80, and the Opry's first broadcast was in 1925.
The article also misstated the date Marty Stuart first appeared with Lester Flatt; it was 1972.
Because of an editing error, Mr.
Stuart's album "Tempted" was described incorrectly.
It was his second for MCA, but not his second overall.


Smerlas Is Re-signed
The New England Patriots have signed nose tackle FRED SMERLAS to a contract, the team announced yesterday.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
Smerlas, 34 years old, played in 16 games with the Patriots last season.
He had 19 tackles, including 14 unassisted.


English Baths
To the Editor: As assistant director of the Ramblers' Association, I was interested to read Iris Ihde Frey's article about bed and breakfast accommodation in England ("A Bit of Bed and Breakfast," Nov. 10), but was concerned to see that she has misunderstood why "hot water for the shower required a pull on a cord hanging from the ceiling in the opposite corner." I can assure her that this is not another example of English eccentricity, but rather an important safety measure.


Making a Difference; A Ticklish Quiz for the Japanese
When Alice Tepper Marlin, founder of the Council on Economic Priorities, visited Japan six years ago to describe the nonprofit organization's effort to evaluate the social and environmental responsiveness of American businesses, journalist Mitsuko Shimomura was fascinated.
As a result, the latest edition of the council's "Shopping for a Better World" guidebook for "socially conscious" consumers has entries for several major Japanese companies for the first time and Japan has its own version of such corporate ratings.
"I immediately wanted to do something like that in Japan," said the 53-year-old Mrs.
Shimomura, who was in New York last week to help launch the 1992 guidebook.
"The corporation is the center of Japanese society and you have to change corporate culture or nothing will change."


Ecuador
To the Editor: Your notice of the State Department warning on travel to Ecuador (Travel Advisory, Oct. 6) in particular cited high levels of street crime in Quito and Guayaquil.


How Plants Respond to Changes in Weather
THIS has been a fluky winter.
In many ways it has seemed more like spring, because so many of the days have been mild.
And where is that usual wintertime blizzard?
Snow shovels and snow blowers have not had any workouts.
The plants have reacted, too, if that is the word for it.
Some have already bloomed.
Many shrubs popped out with a few blooms last fall, particularly forsythias and lilacs.
Some of the earliest bulbs have even pushed their leaves high above ground just as if it were spring.
In some gardens the first of the witchhazels are in flower, and in others the snowdrops are out in full glory.


CBS Winter Vacation Ends After 32 Years
THE last time CBS ventured into Winter Olympics broadcasting was in 1960 in Squaw Valley, Calif.
A sum of $50,000 was paid for 15 hours of coverage over 11 days.
Walter Cronkite anchored the action that was captured by 12 cameras.
Seven Winter Olympiads passed without CBS.
But nearly four years ago, CBS paid (some say overpaid) $243 million for the rights to the Albertville Games.


The Curse of the Verbal Life Personified
PHILIP never met a man he didn't like.
Honestly.
Even though he likes everything, as well as everybody, he'd sooner spend an hour with a boor -- at an emotional remove -- than read a book, tour the galleries or attend a play or movie: the customary ephemeral distractions of his vacant, unpopulated existence.
In "The Philanthropist" (London, 1970; Broadway, 1971) Christopher Hampton, at age 24, created an extraordinary original character in the overly literal, disengaged fumbling and flustered Philip, a professor of philology and the precursor of the contemporary nerd.
He is an intended inversion of Moliere's "Misanthrope" -- but just as off-putting in his terminal niceness.


Common Knowledge
To the Editor:
The statement that Wagner's anti-Semitism "has come to light during this century" will astonish anyone with the slightest knowledge of 19th-century European culture.
Wagner's virulent anti-Semitism was common knowledge during his lifetime and found repeated expression in his published writings.


CAMPUS LIFE: Wisconsin; Recommendation For Gay Housing Draws Criticism
The University of Wisconsin at Madison should create an academic program, a campus center and possibly separate housing for gay, lesbian and bisexual students, a university committee report has recommended.
The Gay and Lesbian Issues Committee said these and other recommendations would free gay, lesbian and bisexual students from the violence, harassment and discrimination that persist even on a campus and in a city that the committee recognized as generally hospitable to such students.
The nine-member committee is made up of administrators faculty and staff members, students and Madison residents.


The Cold War: From Containment to Commonwealth
MARCH 5, 1946: Former Prime Minister Winston S. Chruchill of Britain warns of Soviet expansion and declares that an "iron curtain" has descended over Europe.
JULY 1947: George F. Kennan's "X" article in the journal Foreign Affairs sets forth "containment" as the major goal of American foreign policy.
JUNE 1948: The Soviet Union imposes a blockade on West Berlin.
The Allies, led by the United States, mount the Berlin Airlift, sending food and other supplies to the beleaguered West Berliners.


Coins
When the Japanese began their invasions of countries in Southeast Asia 50 years ago, they brought their own money, notes printed in Japan for use in local markets using local denominations.
Today, these occupation notes turn up in collections or as souvenirs, and sometimes they are valuable.
But most are worth only a few dollars, no matter how good their condition.
Still, they make marvelous reminders of World War II and of Japan's dream of empire.
In 1930, Britain and the Netherlands controlled most of Southeast Asia, while the United States controlled the Philippines and France governed Vietnam.
Japan wanted a larger part of the region's economy and so began developing what it called the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, a title that may be more euphonious in Japanese than in English.
Japan wanted to establish puppet governments to rule each country within an economic system dominated by Japan.
While Draconian, that system at first appealed to many nationalists in the various countries, who hated European rule.


Bush Policy Says Under-Age Drinking Is Drug Issue
The Bush Administration announced last week that drug use among high school and college students dropped again last year, but for the first time the White House recognized drinking among the young as a drug issue.
The Administration also said that cocaine and heroin use had gone up in the inner cities, and it called for more spending to counter the resurgence.


Long Conflict Deeply Marked the Self-Image of Americans
The cold war, gone but not lamented, had a powerful effect on America, not only on government, politics and military strategy, but also in a subtler and even contradictory way on what might be called the national psyche, the collective consciousness.
Fear of the sort suggested in Sidney Lumet's "Fail Safe," a 1964 movie ending with the nuclear destruction of Moscow and New York, certainly reflected at least one element of the American mind during the cold war, and anxiety over the possibility of annihilation may be one of its permanent legacies.


When Little Girls Grow Into Dragon Ladies
Jane Alexander is giving an astonishing performance in the Roundabout Theater Company's production of "The Visit" at the Criterion Center on Broadway.
So don't misunderstand me when I say that nothing about her seems real.
She is playing Claire Zachanassian, the world's richest woman, in Friedrich Durrenmatt's mordant drama, and all that money can buy she snapped up long ago -- oil wells, banks, airlines, Japan's biggest chain of bordellos.
No sooner has she stepped onto the railway platform of Gullen, her impoverished hometown somewhere in Central Europe, than it's clear she has also spent lavishly in a futile attempt to outwit the ravages of time.


Dr. Choi to Wed Dr. M. G. Huss
Mr. and Mrs.
Paul W. Choi of Morris Plains, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Mary Anne Choi, to Dr.
Michael G. Huss, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip L. Huss of Mt.
Holly, N.J.
An April wedding is planned.
Dr.
Choi, 26 years old, is an anesthesiology resident at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
She graduated from Upsala College, and received a medical degree from the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey/Robert Woods Johnson Medical School, as did her fiance.
Her father is the senior vice president of the Midlantic National Bank in Edison.
Her mother, Sook-Chong Choi, is a professor of biology at Upsala College.


World Markets; Bucking the European Bond Trend
The consensus strategy for bonds this year is to buy European.
Stuart C. Hochberger, the global fixed-income portfolio manager at Fiduciary Trust International in New York, agrees.
But last week he spotted an opportunity that has temporarily turned his attention back toward the United States.
He is making an aggressive move that depends on good timing over the next four or five months.
"I take an active approach to global management," he explained.


Diplomacy's New Dance: U.S. and Many Partners
In the last two weeks Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d has been swept up in a festival of multilateral diplomacy.
First he convened 47 nations in Washington to help coordinate aid to the former Soviet Union; then he flew off to Moscow to bring together 36 more countries to promote regional cooperation between Arabs and Israelis in the Middle East.
Those two conferences alone spawned 10 different follow-up working groups, which will collect data and no doubt plan more meetings.
But this sudden flurry of many-sided meetings raises a fundamental question: Is the United States increasingly sharing responsibilities with a host of other countries because this is a more effective way to solve problems, or because this is a more effective way to dodge problems -- by creating the appearance of working on them without the reality?
The answer is: both.


Where Have All The Women Gone?
To the Editor:
How dismaying: to tell readers how the psychiatrist portrayed by Barbra Streisand in the film "The Prince of Tides" measures up to the real thing, you canvass male psychiatrists  [ "Psychiatrists Analyze Dr. Lowenstein," Jan. 19 ] .
No female experts in sight?
Wonder what Dr.
Louise Kaplan, author of "Female Perversions," thinks.
Or Barbara Seaman, who is writing about doctors who sleep with patients.
Or innumerable others.
LOUISE BERNIKOW New York


POSTINGS: Orange County Condos; Sales Without Giveaways
The region's sickly economy has sent many home developers scrambling for buyers, with some resorting to such last-resort sales measures as auctions and deep discounts.
But the builder of a condominium community in Orange County, N.Y., is trying to buck the trend by opening his project with low prices designed to bring in bargin-hunting buyers.
The units in the Windsor Crest complex in New Windsor start at $107,900 for a two-bedroom apartment and go up to $139,900 for a three-bedroom residence.
With the first, 46-unit phase of development nearly completed, 9 residences have been sold.


Bonnie Blair, Still Golden
It was Bonnie Blair of Champaign, Ill., as much as anybody else who prompted the United States Olympic Committee to increase training and financial support for athletes.
Before the Calgary Olympics, she told of sneaking into a rink after hours because she needed the additional time to practice, and didn't George Steinbrenner, the U.S.O.C. vice president, love to use that as a reason to justify the many changes, even if he couldn't remember her name.
All that dedication paid off for Blair on the indoor track in Calgary, where she won two of the United States' six medals in the Games, a gold in the women's 500 meters in a world-record time of 39.10 seconds and a bronze in the 1,000 meters.
She also finished fourth in the 1,500 meters.


The Case of the Impotent Millionaire
FUGITIVE NIGHTS
By Joseph Wambaugh. 336 pp.
New York: Perigord Press/ William Morrow &amp; Company. $22.


TESTING POSITIVE
I admire Kim Foltz's efforts to be a participant in his treatment program and to find a safe haven for expressing his emotional concerns (About Men: "Testing Positive," Jan. 5).


The Gadfly C.E.O.'s Want to Swat
The corporate chief executives who gathered last month for a conference at Northwestern University's business school campus in Evanston, Ill., became nearly apoplectic when Graef S. Crystal made his presentation.
And who could blame them?
Mr.
Crystal had some fairly harsh things to say about the way C.E.O.'s are compensated.
He has been delivering his message with evangelistic fervor for several years, though frequently with all the impact of a pesky mosquito.
But suddenly he is being courted by the media and widely listened to by politicians, reformers, the public -- and even C.E.O.'s -- thanks mostly to the furor over President Bush's recent trip to Japan.
Seeking trade concessions, Mr.
Bush was joined by a gaggle of American corporate chieftains whose average compensation last year, in the midst of a protracted recession, was $3.4 million, six times the average for their Japanese counterparts. .


Across the Pacific
WAR PLAN ORANGE
The U.S.
Strategy to Defeat Japan, 1897-1945.
By Edward S. Miller.
Illustrated. 509 pp.
Annapolis, Md.: Naval Institute Press. $34.95.


The Nitty Gritty on U.S. Hockey: No Promises
THE operative word from the United States Olympic hockey coach, Dave Peterson, is "gritty."
As in: "I like our team. It's gritty and it's got character."


Speaking Out for Disabled People
CATHY E. JUNI of Bristol was recently elected president of People First, a statewide coalition of 11 self-advocacy groups for people with developmental disabilities.
Miss Juni, who was born in Brooklyn, N.Y., was committed to Willowbrook State School, an institution for mentally retarded people on Staten Island, when she was a teen-ager.
After two years she was transferred to Southbury Training School, where she spent 10 years.
Twenty-four years ago, when widespread deinstitutionalization was beginning, she joined an independent living arrangement in Connecticut.


One People in Two Worlds
As Idi Amin expels the entire Asian population from Uganda, early in Mira Nair's new film, "Mississippi Masala," soldiers halt a busload of fleeing Indians.
They order one woman outside, at gunpoint, and open her suitcase, searching for currency or jewels.
Instead they find a tape recorder and, still suspicious, demand she play the cassette already cued.
Out pours a song from an Indian film, its words translated by subtitles into English.
"My shoes are Japanese/ My pants are English/ My red hat is Russian/ But my heart -- it's all Indian.


The Big 3 Go for the Big One
So unexpected was the sweep by Kristi Yamaguchi, Tonya Harding and Nancy Kerrigan of the world figure skating championships last year that the organizers had to scramble to find a third United States flag for the awards ceremony.
They had only two on hand.
By now, the three skaters are established stars who could fill the podium in Albertville were it not for Midori Ito of Japan, the only other skater with a reasonable chance to prevent another sweep.


In Re: Clinton; Battle Report From the Ramparts of the Privacy Zone
VICTOR GOLD, a veteran of Beltway politics by way of the rough ceremonies of Louisiana and Alabama, thinks he knows when the nation's press and politicians began their current Dance of Confusion.
"Stop and think what's happened," says Mr.
Gold, a speech writer for Barry Goldwater and George Bush.
"The tabloids 10 or 15 years ago never touched politicians. They went after Hollywood. But sooner or later, they were bound to say, 'The politicians are celebrities and they're fair game.' David Brinkley used to say Washington is a town full of people who think they're celebrities. But that's no longer true. Washington is a town of celebrities."
Once politicians moved from being leaders to also being celebrities, Mr.
Gold adds, the tabloid press lost the fear that kept President Kennedy's star-chasing out of print.
"They used to think, 'That's real power. Don't touch that.' But they'll touch anything now -- a President, a Supreme Court justice, a candidate. As long as you've got a Geraldo and a tabloid press, we're pretty much driven by that."


'The Philanthropist'
PHILIP never met a man he didn't like.
Honestly.
Even though he likes everything, as well as everybody, he'd sooner spend an hour with a boor -- at an emotional remove -- than read a book, tour the galleries or attend a play or movie: the customary ephemeral distractions of his vacant, unpopulated existence.
In "The Philanthropist" (London, 1970; Broadway, 1971) Christopher Hampton, at age 24, created an extraordinary original character in the overly literal, disengaged, fumbling and flustered Philip, a professor of philology and the precursor of the contemporary nerd.
He is an intended inversion of Moliere's "Misanthrope" -- but just as off-putting in his terminal niceness.


Recycling Offers Real Economy
"Discovering Ways to Dump Garbage"  [ Jan. 5 ]  did not address a very important issue that is essential in dealing with the economic and environmental costs of solid-waste management.
Municipalities that make recycling the key component of waste management can prolong the life of existing nonpolluting landfills in rural areas and reduce the high cost of incinerator use and municipal solid-waste-composting facilities.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 19 about Seattle included an incorrect telephone number for the Supersaver program of hotel discounts.
The number is (800) 488-6540.


Wall Street; A Tax Catalogue Giants Might Like
For years, state and local governments have been battling for the legal right to force catalogue-sales companies outside their borders to collect sales tax on orders shipped into their jurisdictions.
The catalogue-sales industry has been fighting just as ferociously for the status quo, under which catalogue companies tax shipments only to states where they have stores, warehouses or some other "physical" presence.
A key lawsuit on this issue, the Quill Corporation v.
North Dakota, is pending before the United States Supreme Court and was argued in January.
The justices took a harsh tone with lawyers for the catalogue industry -- "there was blood on the floor," observed one tax-law-newsletter analyst.
That has prompted many on Wall Street to predict that a victory for the tax collectors is around the corner -- and that it will inflict substantial damage on the leading mail-order houses.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
THE NEW OBSTETRICS NURSE
"THERE were eyebrows raised when I hired him," said Dawn Price, assistant director of nursing at the Nassau County Medical Center.
"People asked why a man would want to be where there were only female patients and female nurses." And more than a few questioned why any man would want to be near a woman in labor if he didn't have to be.


Miss Barone to Wed in September
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Barone of Upper Saddle River, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Chrisann Barone, to Michael Louis LaPorte, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James LaPorte of Elmwood Park, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Barone, 25 years old, is an assistant treasurer of the Bank of New York.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her father, a former managing director of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the Wall Street house, is the president of Insurance Financial Services Inc., an investment banking consulting firm in New York.


Mel Hein, 82, the Durable Center of the New York Football Giants
Mel Hein, the great center-linebacker who was the iron man and captain of the Giants teams that won seven division titles and two league championships in the 1930's and 1940's, died Friday night at his home in San Clemente, Calif.
He was 82 years old and died of stomach cancer, his family said.


CAMPUS LIFE: Maryland Institute; Students' Deaths Inspire Art Show on Terrorism
At the heart of the exhibit at the Maryland Institute College of Art is "T/ERROR," a jumble of clothing, suitcases, shoes, toys, newspapers and bits of twisted metal scattered about the floor and hanging from the ceiling.
As visitors watch images of terrorism on a television screen, a voice drones overhead: "Passport please. Were you traveling alone? Are these your suitcases? Did your bags ever leave your sight?"
The exhibit is a vivid reminder of the wreckage of Pan Am Flight 103, which exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988, a result of a terrorist bomb.
It is also the Maryland Institute's poignant expression of collective grief over the deaths of two of its students -- Gretchen Dater and Louise Ann Rogers -- who were on Flight 103.


Wagner? Oh, Yes, There's Also the Music.
There has been much talk recently about Wagner's historical, political and moral significance.
But what about the actual music and its performance?
The latest batch of Wagner albums, devoted to three of the longest and grandest of that brooding master's late music dramas, provides a ready opportunity to consider the current state of Wagner performance.
For decades, we have heard laments about the decline of singing in general and Wagner singing in particular.
But the new recordings have one thing in common: they are uncommonly well sung.
Either we are in a Wagner vocal revival, or the situation wasn't so gloomy after all.
The real problem now seems to be on the podium.
Only one of the three releases, James Levine's Metropolitan Opera "Gotterdammerung," is really well conducted.


Steps to Be Followed Before Painting a Room
MAKING a room in your house ready to be painted consists chiefly of protecting surfaces that are not going to be painted and creating uninterrupted surfaces that will make the job easier.
Start by removing as many items from the room as possible.
That will not only simplify moving about the room while carrying painting equipment, but also eliminate the possibility of spilling paint on chairs, tables and other furniture.


Katharine Jones to Marry in May
Mrs.
Benjamin Franklin Jones 4th of Stonington, Conn., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Katharine Holdship Jones, to William McMichael Jones Jr., the son of Sallie deVou Frank of Pittsburgh, Pa., and William McMichael Jones Sr. of Ligonier, Pa.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Jones is the daughter of the late B. F. Jones 4th.
Miss Jones, 31 years old, is a summa cum laude graduate of Tufts University.
She is a senior associate at Germetz International, a Franco-American business consulting firm in New York.
Her mother, Penny Jones, manages antiques shows.


Congress Poised to Act But Maybe Not for Bush
On one level, it looks very much like business as usual on Capitol Hill.
Congress will almost certainly pass an election-year tax cut that it can say helps the middle class.
It is almost certain to reject President Bush's call to eliminate 246 Federal programs, slash mass transit and impose some still undefined cuts in Medicare.
Nor will it seriously try to enact Mr.
Bush's economic proposals by the March 20 deadline he set in his State of the Union Message.
But on another level, Congress seems different this year.
Both parties and Mr.
Bush have already found the right accounting gimmicks to "pay for" another extension of unemployment benefits, instead of using the issue as a political club the way they did last year.


New Performing Center for Norwalk
A NEW performing arts center is opening at Norwalk Community College, where three events are coming up this weekend.
"The 298-seat, three-story-high theater is an architectural gem," said a spokeswoman for the college, Joan Antell.
"Designed for flexibility, it will house a variety of activities, including concerts, dance, theatrical productions and lectures."
The honor of inaugurating the theater goes to the Fairfield Counts with a concert, at 8 P.M. on Friday, devoted to the music of Duke Ellington and other names from the Big Band era.
The following evening at 8, the focus switches to spirituals and show tunes, with Gigi Van Dyke leading the 30-voice Serendipity Chorale.
And next Sunday afternoon at 3, it's back to jazz with the Tom McClung-Andy Jaffe Piano Duo offering improvisations on compositions of both North and South American composers. (A 2 P.M. preview lecture- demonstration precedes the recital.)


Battle-Scarred Lawmakers Confront Spending
STATE residents who saw their taxes rise dramatically last year with the advent of the new tax on wages may soon face a new shock: getting a lot less for their money.
When the General Assembly goes back to Hartford this week, lawmakers in both parties say, deep cuts in spending are inevitable, with everything on the chopping block from higher education spending to municipal aid.
Although the income tax is producing about what was expected when it was passed last August, the state's other taxes -- notably sales taxes and the levy on corporate income -- have continued to slide, as the recession has eaten away jobs and profits.
And rising state spending on nursing homes and prisons, for instance, are battering the budget from the other side.


One Thing We Don't Need Is Tax Reduction; Reverse the Burden
To the Editor:
"Recession Puts a Harsh Spotlight on Hefty Pay of Top Executives" (front page, Jan. 20), illuminating as far as it goes, fails to make the point that tax inequity between the upper 1 percent and the rest of Americans has a direct and crucial bearing on our record budget deficits of the 1980's and 90's.


Duchesnays Are France's Home Team
Isabelle and Paul Duchesnay, a French brother-and-sister team, will carry the enormous expectations of the home country onto the ice with them.
But that should hardly faze them.
The Duchesnays have spent their careers inviting challenge, as the most innovative and provocative couple since Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean mesmerized audiences at the 1984 Sarajevo Games.


Elderly Become Addicts To Drug-Induced Sleep
Dr.
Philip Westbrook, director of the Sleep Disorders Center at Cedars Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, thought his mother-in-law had Alzheimer's disease.
She was confused and anxious.
She seemed demented.
But, Dr.
Westbrook discovered, the real problem was overdoses of several mind-altering prescription drugs.
His mother-in-law, Betty Cleminson, was taking three different kinds of benzodiazepines, which are sleeping pills and anti-anxiety compounds that can lead to drowsiness, amnesia and, paradoxically, more anxiety.
When the drugs made Mrs.
Cleminson agitated, "her husband thought she needed a little more sedation, so he gave her more sleeping pills," Dr.
Westbrook said.
But that only made her symptoms worse.
When she stopped taking the pills, she returned to normal.


Sports People


That Two-Piano 'Fella'
Frank Loesser always dreamed of a small-scale production of "The Most Happy Fella," says his widow, Jo Sullivan, a consultant for the Broadway revival now in previews.
"He wanted to go Off Broadway in a little theater," she recalled last week from her Long Island country home.
"Though he didn't have the guts to do it then, he had the two-piano arrangement done for that purpose."
It is this version, produced by the Goodspeed Opera House last May to accolades -- not least because of the stripped-down piano accompaniment -- that officially opens on Feb. 13 at the Booth Theater.
Spiro Malas and Sophie Hayden again play the Napa Valley immigrant grape grower in the 1920's and his much younger mail-order bride.


Beyond Classicism Lie Sequins for Men
Known for classicism, American men's wear designers seemed determined to break out of the mold in their fall collections.
It was all in the details.
Michael Kors showed sequins for men on vests and evening jackets, as well as cowhide vests and jackets.
Dinner jackets came in flannel and denim.


Noted With Pleasure
The Melancholy Dream
A boyhood on a hardscrabble farm in the West convinced the novelist Wallace Stegner that regret over our treatment of nature has become a strong element in our character.
An excerpt from his memoir "Wolf Willow" is included in "The Best of the West: An Anthology of Classic Writing From the American West," edited by Tony Hillerman (HarperCollins).
TXT&gt; One who has lived the dream, the temporary fulfillment and the disappointment has had the full course.
He may lack a thousand things that the rest of the world takes for granted, and because his experience is belated he may feel like an anachronism all his life.
But he will know one thing about what it means to be an American, because he has known the raw continent, and not as tourist but as denizen.
Some of the beauty, the innocence and the callousness must stick to him, and some of the regret.
The vein of melancholy in the North American mind may be owing to many causes, but it is surely not weakened by the perception that the fulfillment of the American Dream means inevitably the death of the noble savagery and freedom of the wild.
Fighting to Break the Chain
Sojourner Truth, an ex-slave, an influential abolitionist and an early advocate of equality for women, had a frank and forceful style of speaking, as this excerpt from an 1867 speech on women's rights demonstrates.
It's included in "The Female Experience: An American Documentary," edited by Gerda Lerner (Oxford University, paper).
I am above 80 years old; it is about time for me to be going.
I have been 40 years a slave and 40 years free, and would be here 40 years more to have equal rights for all.
I suppose I am kept here because something remains for me to do; I suppose I am yet to help to break the chain.
I have done a great deal of work; as much as a man, but did not get so much pay.
I used to work in the field and bind grain, keeping up with the cradler; but men doing no more, got twice as much pay. . . .
We do as much, we eat as much, we want as much.
I suppose I am about the only colored woman that goes about to speak for the rights of the colored women.
I want to keep the thing stirring, now that the ice is cracked. . . .
I am glad to see that men are getting their rights, but I want women to get theirs, and while the water is stirring I will step into the pool.
Living in Photographs
Startled by an ad for a new photographic product that asserted that without it one would be missing out on life, the novelist and poet Michael Anania went on to reflect on the way in which we depend on photos to validate our lives.
This is from "In Plain Sight: Obsessions, Morals &amp; Domestic Laughter" (Asphodel/Moyer Bell).
It is not merely that we are missing a photo-mechanical novelty, but that something crucial is missing from the rich, full life we all deserve.
By itself, the remark would be bizarre, even outrageous. . . .
In contemporary American culture, though, the need for images of ourselves has become so great that this sales pitch hardly seems extraordinary.
We use photographs to record our existence, in some ways to verify it.
We take more pictures of ourselves than of the things around us, and each of us carries through life albums or shoe boxes full of pictures that validate family, friends, childhood, marriage and nativity. . . .
In a life sustained by images, cameras and other recording devices take on a primary, active role, investing events with reality.
The Reluctant Author
Franz Kafka was deeply ambivalent about the publication of his work, as this tongue-in-cheek confession to a young admirer indicates.
It is included in "Kurt Wolff: A Portrait in Essays and Letters," edited by Michael Ermarth (University of Chicago).
Max Brod, Felix Weltsch, all my friends always manage to get their hands on something I've written and then confront me with a contract already drawn up.
I don't want to cause them any difficulties, and so things end up being published that are actually only very private notes or trifles to amuse myself.
Personal documents of my human failings are published and even sold, because my friends, with Max Brod in the forefront, insist on turning them into literature, and I don't have the strength to destroy these products of my solitude.
What I say here is naturally just an exaggeration and a bit of spitefulness toward my friends.
The truth is that I am so corrupted and shameless that I participate myself in getting these things published.
Then to excuse my weakness I make the forces working on me out to be stronger than they are.
This is fraud, of course.
I am a lawyer, you see -- that is why I can't keep away from wrongdoing.
The Community of the Ear
We go through our days largely unaware of one of the most remarkable (and common) elements of our environment: the complex recital of bird
song. This is from "The Pleasures of Watching Birds" by Lola Oberman (Walker).
Often I have the feeling of being the sole witness to a significant happening.
It comes to me in the fall when no one else at the shopping center is remotely aware of the steady stream of bluejays overhead; and in the spring, when blackpoll warblers, bringing up the rear of the migration in a massive overnight invasion, sing their songs unnoticed along every tree-lined street.
Hidden by late spring foliage, they are heard more than seen, but on foot or in the car I can count their numbers by their voices, and I marvel at the number of people who pass by, unaware that something tremendous is happening. . . .
It is as if we are members of a great secret society, picking up signals that are invisible and inaudible to the average human.


Albertville Concentrates on Big Picture
AS costs rose and problems multiplied, there were times when even the chief organizers of the 16th Winter Olympics questioned the wisdom of holding this month's Albertville Games at 13 sites sprawled over a 600-plus-square-mile area of the French Alps.
Everything, it seemed, had to go that little bit farther -- new highways and improved access roads, telecommunications, transportation, security, accommodations, even food supplies.
And it also meant dealing with 13 municipal governments.


Builder Incentives
To the Editor
Your article on Dec. 8 headed "Time For a Change in Builder Incentives?" raises a number of serious questions.


A Stricken Arab Militant Leaves France
George Habash, the Palestinian leader whose arrival here for medical treatment has set off a political storm, was allowed to leave the country today after Government-appointed physicians testified that he was too ill to withstand questioning by legal authorities.
Dr.
Habash, who is reported to have suffered several strokes, was taken to Orly airport by ambulance under police escort and put aboard an Algerian airliner that took him to his home in Tunis.
He was greeted by officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization, which is headquartered in Tunis.


Political Talk
Assessment Overload?
There is the "State of the Union" and the "State of the State." There is also the "State of the City" -- in fact, in New York City last month, there were no less than three versions of a "State of the City" speech, the traditional one by the Mayor, followed by others from the Comptroller and the City Council Speaker.


State of the Children
A phrase that used to appear on report cards applies aptly to President Bush on issues affecting children: "does not live up to potential." Mr.
Bush has pushed way ahead of his predecessor -- but he's not yet leading the parade.
Consider last week's State of the Union speech.
As he did last year, Mr.
Bush rightly asked for a sizable increase in funding for childhood immunization programs.
He also asked for a big boost in the nutrition program called WIC (for Women, Infants and Children).
That's still not enough to enroll every eligible child, but at least WIC can now cover all eligible pregnant women and infants.


Ms. Maher Sets A June Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Maher Jr. of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Jane Elizabeth Maher, to Timothy Michael Higgins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Higgins of Glen Rock, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Maher, 25 years old, teaches the second grade at Epiphany School in New York.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father is a vice president and the treasurer of Citibank North America in New York.
Her mother, Jeanne Maher, is a guidance secretary at Norman Thomas High School in New York.


Court Again Rejects How Texas Finances Schools
The Texas Supreme Court has again ruled that the state's "Robin Hood" method of financing its public schools is unconstitutional.
But recognizing the potential damage of its decision, the court has given the Legislature until June 1, 1993, to devise an alternative.
The court's 7-to-2 decision, on Thursday, threw out the plan passed by the Legislature last April.
It said the plan was unconstitutional because it amounted to a statewide property tax and was levied without voter approval.


Purer Sound, At a Price
To the Editor:
The "CD's phenomenal success" story  [ "The Compact Disk Is Here to Stay . . . for a While," Jan. 19 ]  omitted the most startling fact of the new medium: its higher cost.
Not only are we buying reissues of music we already have, but we are paying almost twice as much for CD's.
We no longer have a choice of less expensive vinyl.
Was this costly change market-driven or was it forced on the buyer when LP pressings of new material were eliminated in favor of the CD?
FRANCIS W. RODGERS Rensselaer, N.Y.


Dangerous Liaison


A la Carte: Ringing in the Year of the Monkey
THE Year of the Monkey, 4690 on the Chinese calendar, is being celebrated this weekend at restaurants all over Long Island.
The Year of the Monkey is said to be an especially good one for business, which should be welcome news to hard-hit Long Islanders.
It is also supposed to be an excellent year for conceiving children.


Tech Notes; A One-Day, On-Site, No-Frills Building
A Virginia company is producing a mobile factory that allows crews of 15 or less to manufacture and erect a steel building in a single day.
The company, M.I.C.
Industries of McLean, Va., maintains that such structures are ideal for a variety of commercial and industrial uses.
The buildings are usually arched, in a style similar to a Quonset hut.
The mobile factory is mounted on a 25-foot-long trailer bed and towed to the construction site.
There, galvanized steel coil is fed into a panel-forming machine, and a hydraulic guillotine cuts each panel to length.
For arched structures, the panels are fed into a forming machine, which curves them.
The panels are seamed together using an electrical crimping system.
The sections are then hoisted into position and welded onto the foundation.


Special Today: Albertville '92/Section 8A


Katherine E. Lawyer to Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Lawyer 2d of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Elizabeth Lawyer, to Matthew Laurence Sperling, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan G. Sperling of Rye.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lawyer, 23 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is the administrative assistant to the chief executive of the United States-Mexican Development Corporation, an international consulting concern in Ridgefield, Conn.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE LAST VOYAGE OF SOMEBODY THE SAILOR, by John Barth. (Anchor/Doubleday, $11.) A contemporary journalist trapped somehow in medieval Baghdad tries, like Scheherazade, to talk himself out of the mess.
Last year our reviewer, Jonathan Raban, found the result exhaustive and exhausting -- an "ingenious multi-story fiction in which every floor turns out to be another false bottom."
THERE ARE NO CHILDREN HERE: The Story of Two Boys Growing Up in the Other America, by Alex Kotlowitz. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.) After winning a Robert F. Kennedy Journalism Award in 1987 for a series of articles about life in the Henry Horner Homes, a project on the West Side of Chicago, Alex Kotlowitz told one of the residents, LaJoe Rivers, that he wanted to write a book about her children.
"But you know, there are no children here," she replied.
"They've seen too much to be children." He went ahead, producing a work that our reviewer, Laura Washington, called "a sensitive, troubling examination of . . . the effects of violence and poverty on inner city children."


Three Suggestions for Serving Scallops
SEEING sparkling fresh bay scallops in the market recently reminded me of the time I harvested them in Nantucket in the middle of winter.
Dressed in boots, orange waders and hooded slickers, we went out on the bay early one rainy morning in a tiny wooden boat.
We caught the scallops in dredges made of metal frames interwoven with string and iron rings, which scraped along the bay floor, dragging up the scallops and whatever else was down there.
The scallop hops along the sea floor by snapping together its two shells like a castanet, squirting water through membranes between the fluted edges of the shells.
The water is propelled by a single muscle, which connects the shells and opens them and closes them.
The muscle is the part we eat (in Europe, the roe, which is bigger than the roe of our scallops, is eaten, too, and the scallops are sold in their shells).


Prime-Time Heroes
No one told me that because I am black I couldn't be Superman.
No one told me I couldn't be Peter Gunn, the wild, wild James West or John Drake, Secret Agent Man.
These television paladins of yesteryear came up during a recent dinner conversation.
A companion told me a black friend of his, roughly my age, had felt hobbled by the lack of African-American heroes and the prevalence of negative stereotypes on television during his childhood.
While I knew that television programs could adversely affect self-esteem, I also knew, through my own experience, that it needn't be that way.
And as my 4-year-old son and 16-month-old daughter hurtle through the world, I know I must do my best to nurture them the way I was nurtured.


How to Be Europe's Big Power Without Awakening the Old Fears?
Germans, it turns out, may be having a harder time than others at figuring out what to make of their recent commandeering of the common European policy toward Yugoslavia.
Even the minimal fears that their audaciousness aroused abroad have proven distressing to the Germans, and they are now engaged in a debate over whether they might have been too assertive after all.
The hand-wringing is over the leading role Germany is taking not only in Yugoslavia, but in defending its economic and political interests throughout central Europe and in lobbying for aid for the impoverished republics that were once the Soviet Union.


Ms. Lehrich to Wed Thomas Augst
Susan Lehrich Greenburg of Caldwell, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Tamar Rebecca Lehrich, to Thomas Edward Augst, a son of Bertrand Augst of Paris and Jeanine Augst of Kensington, Calif.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lehrich, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Yale University, where her fiance graduated summa cum laude and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a third-year law student at Harvard University.
Her mother, who is retired, was an English teacher at Livingston (N.J.) High School.


Q and A
Seville Expo Tours
Q.
Are there group tours to the exposition in Seville in 1992 that combine it with stays at paradors in other parts of the country? -- R. Reckel, Washington


Virginia Byers Wed in Darien
Virginia Dwight Byers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Byers of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to Frederic Eustis Churchill Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Churchill Sr. of Grafton, Mass.
The Rev.
Walter H. Taylor performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Churchill, 24 years old, is a management associate at Citibank in New York.
She is a graduate of Williams College, as is her husband.
Her father is the president of the Travel Alliance, a travel management company in New York.
Her mother, Victoria Byers, is the director of development for the Hackley School in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Did Ito Leap Before She Took a Look?
NOT long after the Calgary Olympics in 1988, the International Skating Union shook the very foundation of figure skating by eliminating compulsory figures from singles competition.
The move was based on the rationale that they were too boring for television to air, too time-consuming for coaches to teach and too expensive for parents, who had to pay the coaches.


Laptops on the Go
To the Editor: I found Conall Ryan's article "Taking Off With a Laptop" (Travel, Jan. 12) extremely helpful, but would like to make two suggestions.
As a writer and English instructor, I have traveled professionally with a Zenith SuperSport 286 (20 megabytes, 12 1/2 pounds including adapter and cord) for five years.
I rarely bother with the three-pound battery because of its weight and the brevity of many domestic flights owing to the hub system.
What I take instead is at least one extension cord with a three-pronged adapter for use in motel rooms, which seldom have accessible three-pronged outlets.
An exception is at the budget Knights Inns, where the rooms are outfitted with no less than six heavy-duty three-pronged outlets (several above the bureau-desk for convenience).
Recharging the Zenith battery still requires plugging in the computer.


Athletes vs. Agents, Off Court and In Court
Winning still means everything, but athletes, in their new role as plaintiffs, are learning the lingo of litigation, and agents, suddenly cast as defendants, are outraged.
And everyone's professing resentment that some of the most lucrative alliances in the sports world have come unraveled.
The sue-me, sue-you blues has hit the three giants of the sports management business, International Management Group, Advantage International and ProServ.


How Plants Respond to Changes in Weather
THIS has been a fluky winter.
In many ways it has seemed more like spring, because so many of the days have been mild.
And where is that usual wintertime blizzard?
Snow shovels and snow blowers have not had any workouts.
The plants have reacted, too, if that is the word for it.
Some have already bloomed.
Many shrubs popped out with a few blooms last fall, particularly forsythias and lilacs.
Some of the earliest bulbs have even pushed their leaves high above ground just as if it were spring.
In some gardens the first of the witchhazels are in flower, and in others the snowdrops are out in full glory.


Nina A. Wolff, Artist, Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Walter C. Wolff of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nina Adrienne Wolff, to Jonathan David Feld, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester S. Feld, both of whom are deceased.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Wolff, 29 years old, is an artist.
She graduated from Skidmore College and also received a bachelor's degree in architecture from Pratt Institute.
Her father is the president of Bon Marche Inc., home furnishings stores in New York.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE FORTUNETELLER A Jest. By Mac Wellman. Sun and Moon Press, Paper, $11.95.


The County's Walkers Share Their Favorite Paths
"THE first time I saw it my eyes widened and my breath stilled. I remember wishing that I was with someone so I could share this 'treasure in the woods' with them. Each time I see the view, it is like the first time -- my face still expresses my delight."
This is how the Rev.
Janice Rost described the joy of coming upon the Mianus River Gorge while walking in the gorge preserve in Bedford.
After a two-mile walk on wooded trails, Ms.
Rost, an interfaith minister, said, the gorge itself suddenly came into view.
Since then, the Bedford Hills resident added, the gorge preserve -- which, however, is closed in winter -- has become her favorite local place to walk.


Dr. Ruth Anne Kelly to Wed in April
Mr. and Mrs.
William Thomas Kelly of Elkton, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Ruth Anne Kelly to Dr.
John Thomas Queenan Jr., the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Queenan of Washington.
An April wedding is planned.
Dr.
Kelly and her finance are chief residents in gynecology and obstetrics at the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
The bride-to-be, who is 31 years old, graduated from Georgetown University and received her medical degree from the University of Maryland.
Her father owns Kelly Heating and Air-Conditioning Inc. in New Castle, Del.
Her mother, Ruth A. Kelly, owns O'Donnell &amp; Company, a tax consulting firm in Elkton.


AGREE TO EXCHANGE VISITS
President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia today proclaimed a new era of "friendship and partnership" as they declared a formal end to seven decades of rivalry, then agreed to exchange visits in Moscow and Washington by year's end.
Meeting in casual winter clothes under snowy skies at the Presidential retreat at Camp David, Md., the two leaders reviewed the prospects for further support for Mr.
Yeltsin's program of reforms and for arms control proposals that could reduce the number of nuclear warheads that each nation deploys to as few as 2,500.


Nicola Le Clair, Banker, to Wed
Donald G. Le Clair of Amport and Mrs.
Howard J. M. Baveystock of Bentworth, both in Hampshire, England, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nicola Louise Le Clair, to Walter Forman Wickes 4th, the son of Mrs.
Donald Rede Carse Jr. of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Walter Forman Wickes 3d of London.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Le Clair is an account officer with the Union Bank of Switzerland in London.
She graduated from Oxford University.
Her father retired as the managing director of Le Clair Precision Ltd., an engineering company, in Amport.
Her mother is a partner in High Breck Vintners, a wine importing concern in Bentworth.


U.S. Expectations: 'Better' Before 'Best'
For most countries, the era of the modern Olympics began in 1896, when a French baron named Pierre de Coubertin reinvented the Games in a style and manner befitting the ancient Greeks.
For the United States, the modern era began on Feb. 24, 1988, four days before the end of the Winter Olympics at Calgary, Alberta, when the United States Olympic Committee announced the formation of an overview committee to learn why a country of such vast wealth and resources was producing only two gold medals, one silver and three bronzes in winter sports and badly trailing smaller countries like Switzerland, Finland and Austria.
George Steinbrenner, the erstwhile baron of baseball's New York Yankees, was introduced as the chairman of the committee, which was also concerned about the Summer Games.
Many Changes in World and in Sports
An awful lot has happened since then.
The committee worked a year and introduced many changes that the U.S.O.C. adopted.
The world reconfigured, with the Soviet Union disappearing and separate republics taking its place, the Germanys uniting and South Africa ready to rejoin the Olympic family this summer after a 32-year absence.


Yeltsin, a Charmer, Ventures Into Capitalist Den
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia challenged and charmed New York's business leaders on Friday night with such a forceful sales pitch for his country that some said later they were more likely to consider ventures in Russia than before.
Guests at a dinner for Mr.
Yeltsin at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York said the Russian leader scribbled notes furiously throughout the meal, and was disarmingly frank about his own ignorance of the fine points of capitalism.


Time, Tides and the Winter Sea
AN old editor taught me about the symmetrical event.
Perhaps the "old" should be qualified.
He insisted he was old, with clear memories of neglected wars, and asked to be addressed as Grandfather Taylor, though he was actually 65, which a few years of further investigation demonstrates is not old.
Grandfather Taylor was very fond of the story that began someplace in left field and he would not be hurried past preamble, foreword or introduction.
But after participles recouped at the brink of fusion, the nub of the story was that his wife bought some expiring potted flowers at a benefit rummage sale and put them into the garden with no great hope.
But the plants survived, and each year when they bloomed, he knew he was about to be summoned to clear out the attic for the rummage sale.
Up from the warming soil, out of the attic, another year rounded.
That, he said, was a symmetrical event.


All About/Retailers; Down the Scale With the Major Store Chains
Last week, when R. H. Macy &amp; Company filed a Chapter 11 bankruptcy action, it was just the latest in the series of calamities to hit the nation's retailing industry.
Two years of dismal sales and huge accumulations of debt, largely from the leveraged buyouts of the 1980's, have pushed some of the country's largest retailers to the brink.
Since the beginning of 1990, Federated Department Stores, Allied Stores, Carter Hawley Hale, Ames and Hills have all filed for Chapter 11.
More than 1,000 department-store outlets have been affected -- some closed, others with their staffs and inventories cut and all with the need to scramble.
Fortunately, the problems of the bankrupt chains are not those of the entire industry.
Few retailers are as deeply in debt as Macy's and some of the largest chains have had strong sales even in the recession.
Though final figures are not yet in -- retailing's fiscal year ends in March -- analysts expect 1991 to be a strong year for Wal-Mart, K-mart, the Gap, the Limited and Dillards.
Emphasis on Upsizing  One-Stop Concept Gets a New Spin
The list of who is doing well illustrates one of the most important lessons for retailers in the 1990's: Low-priced apparel is the seller.
As a result, according to Kurt Bernard, president of Bernard's Retail Marketing Report, many department stores will be allocating more space for low-priced and what the industry calls "bridge" lines, secondary designer lines that sell for about 40 percent less than the primary apparel lines.
The popularity of these lower-priced fashions is shown by the reported $150 million a year in sales of Donna Karan's D.K.N.Y.
Bridge Line, Mr.
Bernard said.


Faults Overshadow Achievements
To the Editor:
Unfortunately for Wagner, the liberal implications of his artistic vision were overshadowed by his Bayreuth disciples whose virulent anti-Semitism and Nazi connections have forever condemned the master's name in the eyes of many Jews  [ "Wagner, Nazis and the Israeli Soul," Jan. 12 ] .


Ancient Objects Take Artistic License With 'The Odyssey'
Odysseus has lashed himself to the mast of his ship to resist the "honey-sweet songs" of three winged sirens, two of whom serenade him from a rocky perch while the third dives into the sea.
Save for one detail, this vividly painted scene, on a Greek vase from the fifth century B.C., accurately recalls Homer's account of the seductresses in "The Odyssey": "Come here to us fabled Odysseus, great glory of the Achaeans, heave your ship to so you may hear the song we two sing."
For those who know their Homer, three sirens instead of two may seem a slight discrepancy.
However, numerous variations on Homer's heroic tale from the eighth century B.C. were discovered during the organizing of " 'The Odyssey' and Ancient Art: An Epic in Word and Image," an exhibition on view through March 2 at the Edith Blum Art Institute at Bard College.
The 63 Greek and Roman objects -- pots, sculptures, coins, mirrors and lamps -- depict more than 20 themes from "The Odyssey," many of which differ in detail from the poet's story as it has come down to readers today.


It Takes Only a Moment
To the Sports Editor:
In "50 Candles for Ali; Let Them Glow Awhile," (The Times, Jan. 17) Robert Lipsyte, who writes so wonderfully about sports figures, is both "sad and relieved' that Ali "never became more important than you were when we were young."


Between Courses at 4 1/2-Hour Dinner, 575 Cigars Smoked With Great Glee
They didn't sing "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" on Tuesday night at Windows on the World but they should have.
Because it did.
At the restaurant's first Cigar Lovers' Night, no fewer than 575 stogies, none of them Cuban, were handed out to the 84 men who attended.
Two of the four women present stuck to cigarettes.


Dr. Hochman to Wed
June wedding plans have been announced for Dr.
Lisa Gail Hochman, a daughter of Naomi Hochman of West Orange, N.J., and Eli H. Hochman of New York, and Dr.
Marc Steven Rudoltz, the son of Sheila and Melvin Rudoltz of Bellmore, L.I.
Dr.
Hochman is a research fellow in dermatology at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
Dr.
Rudoltz is a resident in radiation oncology at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Journal; Debate Without Rules Shows Issues and Flaws
The Democratic Presidential candidates tried something a little uncharacteristic in their debate Friday night: deregulation.
It was their third debate on national television and their first without any rules -- no fixed rotation of questions, no time limits on answers, no formal closing statements.
It worked remarkably well.
The discussion sometimes wandered or got bogged down in bureaucratese, but the candidates' personalities and philosophies emerged as they bickered about infrastructure, capital gains taxes and health care plans.
Unlike so many debates, this one left a television viewer with a sense of what distinguished each candidate.


Techniques Built on Practice, Practice and Technology
PICTURE Kristi Yamaguchi, the California figure skater as delicate as a Japanese floral print, grunting and lifting barbells.
Picture it -- and believe it.
"Oh, sure, Kristi lifts," said Dr.
Jay T. Kearney, who runs the sports-science division of the United States Olympic Committee.
"You need that upper-body strength for triple and quadruple jumps."


Power and Permanence


U.S. to Reveal Tapes in Trial of Ex-Rochester Police Chief
Federal prosecutors are expected to make public next week tapes that they say led to the arrest of a former Rochester Police Chief, Gordon F. Urlacher, on charges of embezzling $300,000.
"There were two Gordon Urlachers," Bradley Tyler, a prosecutor, told jurors at the outset of Mr.
Urlacher's trial, which started on Wednesday in Federal District Court here.
One, he said, who "by all outward indications was getting the job done" and "Gordon Urlacher the thief."


Review/Dance; Reliving Five Decades in an Onstage Progression
There was rich fare to sample when Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance performed on Thursday night in the second program of its two-week season at the Joyce Theater.
One of the highlights of the evening was "A Fine Line," a new solo choreographed to music by Witold Lutoslawski.
It is essentially a simple dance: an interrupted progression across the stage in front of a line of chairs.
But each of those five chairs is labeled to represent a decade of dancing.
And the performer is Mr.
Louis himself, a noted solo dancer with an acuity of gesture and inflection that is hard to match.


Japan Said That?
To the Editor:
One doesn't have to look much further than the photograph on the front page of The Week in Review for Jan. 26 to understand why United States industry can't compete anymore.


Review/Theater; The Darkness Beneath Small-Town Banalities
Although she is barely literate, the title character in Romulus Linney's "Woman Without a Name" begins to keep a journal.
At first, she simply records her day-to-day household activities, as if in an almanac.
But beneath the small-town banalities of life in the United States at the turn of the century, we can hear the beat of a different, very dark story, one of frustration, rage and violent death.
Eventually, the journal and the play itself become a journey of discovery.
As wife and mother, the Woman (Barbara Andres) has been a contradictory combination of overbearing maternal concern and terrible parental neglect.
As her children die, one after another, and as her marriage stagnates, she is forced to confront the fearful fact of her own culpability.


Miss Schwartz to Wed Samuel Gaer
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard C. Schwartz of Old Brookville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Marni Alison Schwartz to Samuel Harvey Gaer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Gaer of Paramus, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Schwartz, 25 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Samuels &amp; Grossman.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and Brooklyn Law School.
Her father is the president of the International Newspaper Printing Company in New York.
Her mother, Gilda Schwartz, is the company's vice president.


Cars That Whirrr And Burn Rubber
Say "electric" and the car that comes to mind is smooth-riding, quiet and almost antiseptically clean.
It's not exactly the model muscle car.
But muscle is how the General Motors Corporation is positioning the Impact, the two-seater that it plans to bring to market in the mid-90's.
To meet California requirements that 2 percent of each car company's sales in the state be "zero emission vehicles" by 1998 -- a requirement that only battery-powered cars can now meet -- G.M. has focused on a sales virtue that it thinks will give it perhaps the best chance of reaching such a high penetration: performance.


The Show-And-Tell Debates
The Democratic hopefuls had their hands full of visual aids again on their third televised primary debate Friday night.
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, who held up a dollar bill in the first debate, flourished magazine articles supposedly critical of Arkansas's Governor, Bill Clinton.
Paul Tsongas, the former Massachusetts Senator, again held up his economic plan, now adding last Sunday's health-care editorial from The New York Times.
The displays risk looking cute, but things have come a long way since a candidate named Ned Coll held up a rubber rat in a 1972 New Hampshire debate.
Visual aids and all, the debates this year are the best, and getting steadily better.


Public &amp; Private; Little Big Woman
It was by way of being a national in-joke when George Bush began his State of the Union address by saying that he'd tried to persuade Barbara to deliver it.
It has long been tacitly understood that Barbara Bush is both more likable and more liberal than her husband.
Funny thing.
That's how Marilyn Quayle is perceived, too -- not as more likable and more liberal than Dan, but as somehow a superior product, smarter and infinitely more sure of her syntax.
And the word on Hillary Clinton, who assumed her husband's surname to advance his political career (and who, perhaps for the same reason, assumed his accent as well) is that she's more intelligent and thoughtful than Bill, tougher and more ambitious.


A July Wedding For Miss Rainis
Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene C. Rainis of Mendham, N.J., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Ellen Gerardine Rainis and the Rev.
Michael Jay Peters, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles R. Peters of Reading, Pa.
Miss Rainis, 26 years old, graduated from Bryn Mawr College and is studying for an M.A. in history at East Stroudsburg University.
Her father is a partner in Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company, a private bank in New York.


A Cheerful New Spot in Ridgefield
THE name Sam's Grill may evoke images of a smoky bar a la Bogart, Bergman and "Casablanca," but nothing could be further from the reality of this cheerful, inviting new restaurant in Ridgefield.
Sam's Grill is in the cozy, romantic premises formerly occupied by a French restaurant called Le Coq Hardi.
The credo of Sam's Grill seems to be serving moderately priced light dishes, simply prepared without rich and heavy saucing, in a warm and casual atmosphere.
Even the cellar setting has been lightened.
The stone walls and post-and-beam construction have been painted white, other walls have salmon-patterned paper, and there is a profusion of live plants and artful silk flower arrangements.


How Plants Respond to Changes in Weather
THIS has been a fluky winter.
In many ways it has seemed more like spring, because so many of the days have been mild.
And where is that usual wintertime blizzard?
Snow shovels and snow blowers have not had any workouts.
The plants have reacted, too, if that is the word for it.
Some have already bloomed.
Many shrubs popped out with a few blooms last fall, particularly forsythias and lilacs.
Some of the earliest bulbs have even pushed their leaves high above ground just as if it were spring.
In some gardens the first of the witchhazels are in flower, and in others the snowdrops are out in full glory.


TESTING POSITIVE
It is a sad commentary on the way we finance health care that many people like Kim Foltz who are H.I.V. positive are more frightened by the prospect of destitution than by illness and death.
If you become too sick to work, you not only lose your job, you also lose your health insurance when you need it the most.
What we need is a national health insurance system that is not tied to employment.
ROBERT J. YAES, M.D.
Lexington, Ky.


Making a Difference; Kia's Man in America
W.
Gregory Warner has taken plenty of risks in his time.
He did his share of helicopter skiing -- coptering in to remote peaks with a few other daredevils -- until three years ago, when he came within 20 feet of sailing off a cliff in the Canadian Rockies.
But he still seeks out the steepest slopes for regular downhill runs.
And he doesn't turn away from the fast track on the work front, either.
Last week, Mr.
Warner was named to lead the North American startup of the Kia Motors Corporation, South Korea's second-largest auto maker after Hyundai.
Kia plans to import a new compact sedan in 1993, tentatively called the Sephia, to compete against the Honda Civic and Toyota Corolla.
In 1994, Kia will roll out a compact sport-utility vehicle dubbed the Sportage.


Wedding Plans For Miss Carter
Elizabeth Babson Carter, a teacher at the Chapin School in New York, and Lieut.
Timothy Brian Rooney, a pilot in the United States Navy, are engaged to be married in September.
Miss Carter, 22 years old, is an assistant kindergarten teacher and a graduate of Dartmouth College.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
D.
Martin Carter of New York.
Her father is a professor of dermatology at Rockefeller University and Cornell University .
Her mother, Anne Babson Carter, is a poet and writer.


Airline Rules On Pet Travel
Information about preparing pets for air travel, including United States Department of Agriculture regulations, is provided in an updated version of the Air Transport Association's pamphlet called "Air Travel for Your Dog and Cat." The association, which represents United States airlines, advises passengers traveling with pets to notify airlines 24 to 48 hours before scheduled departure and to arrive at least an hour early.
Airlines require a health certificate for animals from a veterinarian.
The Agriculture Department requires animals to be at least eight weeks old, fully weaned and housed in approved kennels with food and water scheduled attache.
The pamphlet is available free by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to Air Transport Association, 1709 New York Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20006.


Hearings Give Voters a Voice on Redrawn Districts
The wriggly, politically charged lines of proposed new districts for the State Legislature have already been compared to eels, shoehorns and fanciful characters out of a Dr.
Seuss book.
Now state residents and politicians are getting their say in public hearings on the plan.
If the first of a dozen hearings, held Friday in Buffalo, is any indication, the list of adjectives describing the handiwork of a joint legislative panel is far from complete.


Yuppies Go Gracelessly Out of Style
Here are two differences between the yuppie and the dinosaur: the dinosaur took longer to become extinct.
And the dinosaur probably had a larger brain.
Yuppie characters in recent films have grown more and more embarrassing in their expensive habits, unexamined behavior and unwavering egocentricity.
The more obsolete they become, the more cringing they are apt to provoke in uncomfortably like-minded members of the movie audience.


Chess
In today's modern game, patience is becoming a greater virtue than ever before.
With computer-aided opening analysis, the likelihood of bad opening errors is decreased and one-sided games become rarer and rarer.
So, however intense your ambitions, you must reconcile yourself to lengthy, relentless maneuvering to get the advantage.
Still more patience is needed to wear down the opponent's resistance until you reach the point where your imagination tells you a smashing finish is available.
Only then do you go for the kill.


'Florio II': Remaking an Image
AFTER one of the stormiest two-year openings to an administration in memory, Gov.
Jim Florio is looking to recapture the public support he lost through enactment of an ambitious tax program in 1990 and to position himself for a possible bid for re-election in 1993.
The Governor said he was taking a page out of his book as a Congressman, when he met with patrons of a diner in Camden to get the public pulse, and would increase his travels around the state during the next two years.
Perhaps never before in the state has a chief executive entered office with a clearer idea of what he wanted to do and then managed to alienate the very people he was trying to help by the manner in which he achieved his goals.


A May Wedding For Lydia Davis
Lydia Joanna Davis, the vice president of promotion for Johnson Publishing Company, and Jacques Wayne Eady, a sales director, both of Chicago, are to be married in May.
Ms.
Davis is a magna cum laude graduate of Howard University and a daughter of the Rev.
Dr.
Henderson Davis and the late Ruth V. Davis of Indianapolis.
Her father retired as the historian of the African Methodist Episcopal Church in Indianapolis.


CAMPUS LIFE: Yale; Campus Cooking: 'Edible Complex,' Not Mystery Meat
Tired of flaccid vegetables and mystery meat in the college cafeteria?
Then imagine a stimulating meal of Nietzsche's Nachos, I Think Therefore I Ham Salad and Multicultural Tuna, culminating with the Banana Split Personality -- enough for two.
These are just some of the less-than-scholarly offerings in "Tray Gourmet: Be Your Own Chef in the College Cafeteria," a new cookbook from Lake Isle Press written and illustrated by three 1990 Yale University graduates.


Karen Dennehy Plans Wedding
Patrick B. Dennehy of Hopewell Junction, N.Y., and Mary J. Halpin of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Marie Dennehy to Joseph Alvarado, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Alvarado of South Ozone Park, Queens.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Dennehy, 25 years old, is an investigator in the New York office of the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
She graduated magna cum laude from Pace University.
Her father is a senior vice president of the European-American Bank in Uniondale, L.I.


O'Meara Attacks Pebble Beach Again
Shooting another strong round on the course that has become his personal playground, Mark O'Meara put himself in prime position today to become the first four-time winner of the A.T.&amp; T. Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.
O'Meara fired a four-under-par 68 at Pebble Beach Golf Links that gave him a 54-hole total of 11-under-par 205.
It was two shots better than Jeff Sluman, who had a 70 at Poppy Hills, and three better than Howard Twitty, who shot a 70 at Poppy Hills; Tom Lehmann, who had a 67 at Pebble Beach; first-round leader Mark Wiebe, who had a 70 at Poppy Hills, and defending champion Paul Azinger and Raymond Floyd, who had scintillating 64's at Pebble Beach.


Travel Service Opens in Prague
American Express has opened a travel office in Prague to make vacation and business travel arrangements, provide foreign exchange and check cashing services and to replace lost or stolen American Express cards and traveler's checks.
With this opening in Czechoslovakia, the company says, it has established a full presence in central and Eastern Europe.
It also has offices in Budapest, Moscow and Warsaw and in the former East German cities of Dresden and East Berlin.
The company has representative travel offices in Bulgaria, Romania, Estonia and Yugoslavia.
The representative offices are operated by independent travel agents who act as American Express service centers; the regular offices include American Express travel agencies.


Susan N. Stark Plans to Marry
March wedding plans for Susan Nauth Stark, the director of institutional support for the International Rescue Committee in New York, and Charles Christopher Alberti, an assistant district attorney in Middlesex County, Mass., have been announced by the prospective bride's mother, Mrs.
Benjamin Allen Stark of Ramsey, N.J.
Miss Stark, 36 years old, is also a daughter of the late Mr.
Stark, who owned and published The Want Ad Press in Ramsey.
She graduated from Wheaton College.


Miss Klebanoff to Be a June Bride
Mr. and Mrs.
Ellis F. Klebanoff of Bala Cynwyd, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elisabeth Klebanoff to Dr.
Andrew Abraham Jennis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay M. Jennis of South Orange, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Klebanoff is the director of European special projects at Institutional Investor magazine in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is president of the Klebanoff Store Equipment Company in Bala Cynwyd.
Her mother is a sales agent with Prudential Preferred Properties in Gladwyne, Pa.


AGREE TO EXCHANGE VISITS; U.S. Looking for New Course As Superpower Conflict Ends
Like many Americans of his generation, 42-year-old John Driscoll holds many memories of the cold war, particularly the fear that came with the air raid drills at school, when he and the other students crawled under their desks, practicing for the day the Soviet hydrogen bombs fell.
"It seems surreal now," he recalled recently, a short time after the Soviet Union formally announced its demise.
"Every summer, when I heard heat lightning over the city and the sky would light up, I was convinced it was all over. My whole childhood was built on the notion that the Soviets were the real threat."


Yankee Fans Bundle Up in Caps, Shirts and Uniforms
The Yankees invited their fans to meet the players and get autographs this weekend at the Jacob Javits Center, and the scene was stunning as a maze of people sought signatures with the zeal of Washington lobbyists.
If the event had needed to steal its name from a movie, it could have been "The Night of the Living Yankee Fans."
Everywhere you turned, there were Yankee fans.
Some wore diapers and some wore suits -- make that, a few wore suits.
Most of these crazed fans wore clothing with the Yankee name emblazoned across it: jackets, shirts, caps and uniforms.


Cabin Spraying
To the Editor: On a British Airways flight from Istanbul to New York with a transfer in London the flight attendant announced just before landing at Heathrow that she would be "disinfecting" the cabin, as required by the U.K.
Health Department.
A review of the procedure followed, but no explanation of the rationale.
Our four family members felt violated and uncertain of the potential hazards, not so much to ourselves, but to other passengers, asthmatics and young children in particular.
As she walked down the aisle, the attendant sprayed insecticide over our heads.
We experienced the humiliating feeling of being treated like chattel, deloused before deportation.


Presidents Bush and Yeltsin: 'Dawn of a New Era'
Following are the text of a declaration issued yesterday by President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin at a meeting at Camp David, Md., and excerpts from a news conference they held afterward.
The text of the declaration was transmitted by The Associated Press and the excerpts from the news conference were provided by Reuters.
Mr.
Yeltsin spoke through a translator at the news conference.
JOINT DECLARATION


Commercial Property: The Convention High; For Manhattan's Hotels, No Fear of July Doldrums
SIX months from now, New York City, traditionally a Democratic town anyway, will be positively swarming with Democrats.
Local Republicans may find that daunting, but Manhattan hotel operators see a lip-smacking prospect.
They are preparing to play host to the 30,000-or-so delegates, reporters and their ancillaries -- and, of course, tourists -- that the Democratic National Convention, which begins on July 13, will bring to town.


How Criminals Are Made
It has long been known that cancers and other diseases can run in the family.
Now the Justice Department has found evidence that criminality can also be a family affair.
More than half of all juvenile delinquents imprisoned in state institutions and more than a third of adult criminals in local jails and state prisons have immediate family members who have also been incarcerated, according to recent Government figures.


Ms. McLoughlin Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward S. McLoughlin of Garden City, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kara Marie McLoughlin, to John Michael Hillebrecht, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Hillebrecht of White Plains.
An August wedding in planned.
Ms.
McLoughlin, 27 years old, graduated from Duke University and is a graduate business student at Columbia University.
Her father is a salesman in New York for Samsung America, a men's clothing manufacturer.
Her mother, Mary Jo McLoughlin, is the executive director of the Patrina Foundation, a New York philanthropy that supports women's education.


Perspectives: Tax-Foreclosed Housing; Phasing Out Centralized Management
ALL in one breath the words spill from Felice Michetti, New York's Commissioner of Housing Preservation and Development -- "boiler-burner-roof-windows-kitchen-plumbing-bathroom."
This is the standard moderate-rehabilitation package for city-owned, tax-foreclosed residential buildings.
Ms.
Michetti knows the litany well.
Years ago she was deputy commissioner in charge of the housing agency's Office of Property Management.
The office is responsible for the occupied portion of the city's tax-foreclosed housing stock.


Two With Bullet Wounds Charged in Officer's Death
Two men who turned up at hospitals with gunshot wounds late Friday night were charged yesterday with the murder of an off-duty New York City police officer, who was shot a few hours earlier as he was on his way to his mother's apartment for a birthday party.
The police said the two men were injured during a struggle in an elevator at 1705 Andrews Avenue in the Morris Heights section of the Bronx that began as a robbery and ended in the death of Officer Hilario Serrano, 29 years old.


Missing Link of Parkland Is for Sale
THE "verdant glades, picturesque meadows and stretches of woodland" known as the Bronx River Parkway Reservation stretch from the Kensico Dam south to the Westchester County border, enveloping the river in its midst.
Except for one glaring detour.
There's a missing link where the river leaves the reservation, flowing instead through an industrial area that has grown up along its banks.
The 24-acre site has come on the market as three lots, one of them a wooded parcel west of the Bronx River between the parkway and the river, which County Legislator Katherine S. Carsky wants the county to acquire.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; After Ordeal, Is Clinton Tempered Now, or Burned?
After attending the father-daughter party at the Little Rock Y.W.C.A. on Thursday night, Bill and Chelsea Clinton went home to the Arkansas Governor's Mansion and the 11-year-old taught her father a card game called "Spite and Malice."
"It is a game which is quite appropriate for the last few days," Mr.
Clinton said dryly.


John E. Alcorn, 56, an Illustrator and Designer in Many Media, Dies
John E. Alcorn, a noted illustrator and designer whose versatile work ranged from a United States postage stamp to book jackets for the Rizzoli publishing company and movie titles for Fellini, died on Monday at the Laurence and Memorial Hospital in New London, Conn.
He was 56 years old and lived in Lyme, Conn.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 19 about New Rochelle misstated its age.
Settlement by Huguenot refugees began in 1688, and the city celebrated its tricentennial in 1989.


Many State Lotteries Feel the Pinch of Recession, and Perhaps Monotony
Lottery revenue in many states is sagging or stagnant under the pressure of the recession, driving the states to mount new and more exotic games as well as more aggressive advertising campaigns to bolster ticket sales.
Thirty-three states and the District of Columbia have lotteries, and in the fiscal year that ended in July 1991, 11 lottery agencies posted declines in revenue from the previous year, according to figures compiled by the North American Association of State and Provincial Lotteries.
In seven other states, revenue was essentially flat.


Rev. Emily J. Enders Weds Rev. John L. Odom
The Rev.
Emily Jane Enders, pastor of the Glenwood Presbyterian Church in Glenwood Landing, L.I., and the Rev.
John Lamar Odom, pastor of the First Presbyterian Church in Oceanside, L.I., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Neta L. Pringle performed the ceremony at Christ's First Presbyterian Church in Hempstead, L.I.


Builder Incentives
To the Editor:
While your article on tax incentives for builders tried to be even-handed in its analysis of the appropriateness of maintaining them for the developers of commercial real estate in New York City, I fear that it left a perception that such incentives are the panacea for the city's much publicized economic malaise.
Nothing could be further from the case.


Three Suggestions for Serving Scallops
SEEING sparkling fresh bay scallops in the market recently reminded me of the time I harvested them in Nantucket in the middle of winter.
Dressed in boots, orange waders and hooded slickers, we went out on the bay early one rainy morning in a tiny wooden boat.
We caught the scallops in dredges made of metal frames interwoven with string and iron rings, which scraped along the bay floor, dragging up the scallops and whatever else was down there.
The scallop hops along the sea floor by snapping together its two shells like a castanet, squirting water through membranes between the fluted edges of the shells.
The water is propelled by a single muscle, which connects the shells and opens them and closes them.
The muscle is the part we eat (in Europe, the roe, which is bigger than the roe of our scallops, is eaten, too, and the scallops are sold in their shells).


Jumping the Barriers to a Refinancing
HARRY LeFEVRE will receive an extra $12,000 this year -- without a raise, overtime or moonlighting.
The 41-year-old high school teacher from Amawalk, N.Y., will merely refinance his home.
"We wanted to look at a way to improve our cash flow," said Mr.
LeFevre, who is trading his 9.87 percent, 15-year, fixed-rate mortgage for a 4.25 percent, one-year adjustable-rate loan.
Closing costs and points, about $10,000, will be rolled into the lifetime cost of the mortgage.


Whimsical vs. Wearable
When it comes to creating a collection, most designers reveal both a lively imagination and a practical approach to fashion.
Isaac Mizrahi, known for his inventive fantasies, always presents plenty of basic, wearable clothes in his shows.
Here are examples of how Mizrahi and two other top talents expressed both their fanciful impulses and down-to-earth instincts for spring.


St. John's Takes UConn By Storm
Jim Calhoun could not have known how right he would be.
The coach of the Connecticut Huskies, sitting on top of that wacky Big East conference basketball standing, had looked ahead to yesterday's game against wounded St.
John's and repeated an ominous thought.
We can now call it Calhoun's Thesis: A good Big East team, badly in need of a victory, will win.


Steps to Be Followed Before Painting a Room
MAKING a room in your house ready to be painted consists chiefly of protecting surfaces that are not going to be painted and creating uninterrupted surfaces that will make the job easier.
Start by removing as many items from the room as possible.
That will not only simplify moving about the room while carrying painting equipment, but also eliminate the possibility of spilling paint on chairs, tables and other furniture.


Raise a White Flag and Watch Umpires Zip to the Rescue
Following a trend in yacht racing, umpires are in action on the America's Cup race course for the first time in the 141-year history of the event.
Their job isn't easy.
Being an umpire for a yacht race is like a baseball umpire observing games and making judgments from a motor bike.
The umpires cover the cup races in 30-foot powerboats, two judges to a boat.
While the powerboats are more agile than the 75-foot sailboats they encircle, the motorized craft are vulnerable to the sheer size and momentum of the bigger sailboats.


This Time Around, Devils Appear To Hit Road With a Vengeance
The fact that the Devils had only nine victories on the road was the biggest blemish on their 1990-91 season.
That poor performance culminated in their elimination from the playoffs by the Penguins in Pittsburgh in the seventh game of a first-round series.
Coach Tom McVie of the Devils has been trying hard for the last several weeks to convince observers -- and perhaps his players -- that the 1991-92 Devils are vastly different in this regard.
The results are beginning to justify his claim.


Russian Works Come to the Forefront
WHAT started as the Rutgers University Art Gallery has long since metamorphosed into the Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum here, at the corner of George and Hamilton Streets.
And, having prospered for 25 years, 21 of them under the direction of Dennis Cate, this repository of prints, painting and sculpture is celebrating its anniversary with a bevy of shows.
Chief among these is "New Directions," so called because the recently acquired collections featured require larger premises.
To this end, the museum, propelled by an anonymous gift of $1 million, has embarked on a five-year fund-raising campaign.


A Comic From 'Uncool Commack'
IF Julie Halston's one-woman show, "A Lifetime of Comedy," which opens tonight at the Actors' Playhouse Off Broadway, is a hit, Dolly and Rudolph Abatelli, her unorthodox parents, and Carole Abatelli and Mary Mansourimoeed, her dissimilar sisters, can share the honors.
The quirks of Ms.
Halston's family furnished the 36-year-old actress with the essence of an autobiographical jaunt that begins with what she calls her "weird upbringing in uncool Commack." It includes a side trip to Wall Street and winds up with Ms.
Halston's emergence as a self-described "manic bewigged comedian" and as the diva of an outrageous Off Broadway troupe.


Headliners; Past Imperfect
Maybe Josef Duchac figured it was no big deal -- politicians the world over change with the times.
In 1990, he launched a successful run for the job of Premier of Thuringia, one of Germany's five eastern states, by showing up shortly after unification and presenting himself as a staunch anti-Communist supporter of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union.
Funny thing, though, he always refused to discuss his past.
But, bit by bit, things came out -- like the fact that he had been an officer in the East Gerfman security police and that in another post he had the power to evict critics of the Government from state housing.
The breaking point came when newspapers published pictures of Mr.
Duchac in pre-unification days dressed in a clown suit for the entertainment of an audience of secret police.
This, he said, was just a harmless expression of his interest in theater.
But Mr.
Duchac's fellow Christian Democrats in Thuringia's legislature weren't buying it.
They voted last week to throw him out of office.


New York's Unprotected: Anderson, McNeil, Others
The Jets and the Giants didn't pull any surprises today as they released the lists of the players they were leaving unprotected under Plan B free agency.
Both teams' lists were made up of veteran players with high salaries, older players with roots in the metropolitan New York area, kickers who spent parts of last year injured and players still recovering from injuries.


Missing From Politics: The Blueprints for the Future
In their State of the Union Messages and budget presentations, Presidents used to stress bold ideas -- a Great Society, say, or a Star Wars missile defense system.
Their challengers in New Hampshire often were politicians like Nelson A. Rockefeller and Hubert H. Humphrey with long track records and national identities.
Giants sat in Congress with names like Taft and Dirksen, Rayburn and Fulbright and Mansfield, men with distinct world views, recognizable faces and respect that transcended party lines.
There were bad times, to be sure.
Nuclear war was a constant threat.
Recessions came and went.
People were segregated by race.
Students demonstrated.
Cities burned.
But by and large Americans were confident things would improve, probably for themselves and certainly for their children.


Making a Difference; Mr. Kumagai Turns to Oil
In his 43 years at Mitsui &amp; Company, Japan's giant trading house and the leader of the powerful Mitsui group, Naohiko Kumagai has spent most of his time focusing on textiles, Japan's first great export after World War II.
As president, a post he has held since June 1990, he has a new challenge: getting oil and gas out of Russia, and making as few political mistakes as possible doing it.
Last week Mitsui won the hotly contested rights to explore for -- and likely to develop -- the undersea fields near Sakhalin Island, off the coast of Siberia.
The biggest business deal yet between the former Soviet republic and Japan, the exploration rights cover an area close enough to northern Japan to build a pipeline to Hokkaido, Japan's northernmost island.
That has long been a dream of industrial planners who worry that Japan is dangerously dependent on the Middle East for oil.


Pamela Fullerton to Marry Thomas Hamlin
August wedding plans have been announced for Pamela Ann Fullerton, a daughter of Allen W. Fullerton of Boston and the late Kathleen A. Fullerton, and Thomas Martin Hamlin Jr., a son of Mr.
Hamlin of Jupiter, Fla., and Mary Cole of Clifton Park, N.Y.
Miss Fullerton is an account supervisor with Leonard, Monahan, Lubars &amp; Kelly, an advertising and public relations concern in Providence, R.I.
Mr.
Hamlin is a marketing manager at Wang Laboratories in Lowell, Mass.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Supermarket Seeds
Q.
Is it possible to germinate seeds that I have in the spice rack in my kitchen, or have they been treated so this won't happen? -- Barbara S. Rosenthal, Scarsdale, N.Y.
A.
Supermarket spice and herb seeds are not treated to prevent germination and many "definitely will grow unless they're dreadfully old," said Debbie Peterson, the editor for the Rare Pit and Plant Council newsletter in New York, a private horticultural society.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the engagement of Jeanne O'Connor to Don Grolnick misidentified his mother.
She is Muriel Grolnick.


Art vs. Commerce
THERE'S NOTHING LIKE A SKIRT made from rare vintage fabric to brighten up a spring wardrobe.
That is, unless you're talking men's wear.
Fantasy and whimsy do not glide easily down the runways of men's fashion.
American designers rarely indulge in such playfulness.
"New York's men's shows are never about ideas," says Jon Weiser of Charivari.
Yohji Yamamoto, one of the few designers who put everything that comes down the runway into production, thinks it is "our job to design something unexpected in each collection, because we have to change, little by little. To the timid American businessman, it may seem like fantasy, but you keep offering these changes, like little drops of poison, and then, over time, the potion starts to work."


Patrice Sheps, Student, to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Isidore Sheps of Hewlett Bay Park, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Patrice Ann Sheps to David Charles Karp, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joel Karp of New York.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sheps, 23 years old, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and is studying for a Ph.D. in French literature at Columbia University.
Her father is a dentist in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Anita Sheps, is an elementary-school teacher in the New York public schools. .


Boston Presents a Midwinter Fling
Dance programs, skiing and skating on the Common, children's art workshops and cooking competitions are on the program of the Boston Festival, a monthlong celebration with indoor and outdoor activities and entertainment, starting on Feb. 14.
Open rehearsals by the Boston Symphony Orchestra at Symphony Hall on Feb. 20, and a concert by the Boston Pops Orchestra at South Station on March 8 (starting at 2 P.M.) -- both free to holders of the festival button -- are also among the dozens of events.


Marion Mullen to Wed W. A. Walsh
Marion Stetz Mullen and William Andrew Walsh, attorneys in New York law firms, have announced their engagement.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mullen, 26 years old and a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elias J. Stetz of Locust Valley, L.I., is an associate at Brown &amp; Wood.
She graduated summa cum laude from the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University and received a J.D. from New York University.
Her father retired from the Navy as a commander.
Her mother, Nancy Stetz, is an elementary-school teacher in Locust Valley, L.I.


A Banner Day for Islanders Is Blunted by Dose of Reality
A game that began with a celebration of their glorious past ended with a bittersweet reaffirmation of their mundane present today when the Islanders rallied to tie the Philadelphia Flyers, 5-5, at Nassau Coliseum.
The result kept the Islanders 1 point ahead of the Flyers, who sit in last place in the Patrick Division.
After the Islanders had squandered a two-goal lead in the third period to fall behind by 5-4, Derek King sent the game into overtime when he turned in a shot by Tom Kurvers on the power play with 66 seconds left in regulation.
The goal was King's 31st of the season, the most on the team.


POSTINGS: 3,500 Rental Units;
The Local Initiatives Support Corporation announced last week that 29 corporations invested $128 million last year to help finance 3,500 units of low-income rental housing.
The units will be developed in New York City, Jersey City, Newark and elsewhere in the nation through two of LISC's subsidiaries, the National Equity Fund and the California Equity Fund.


State Moves Against '900' Number Schemes
WHEN Sherry Haggerty of Newton received a notice in the mail telling her that she had been pre-approved for a gold credit card, she was initially somewhat skeptical.
The presence of the familiar Visa and Mastercard logos, however, quelled her skepticism.
She called the "900" telephone number printed on the notice.
A short time later, she received a catalogue and a gold plastic card.
"The gold card was nothing like a Visa or Mastercard," Ms.
Haggerty said.
In fact, she said, the card was good only for ordering merchandise from the catalogue itself.
And even though she ordered nothing, Ms.
Haggerty was nevertheless charged for the card.


Morrilton Journal; Old-Time Politician Tells the Truth, Maybe
For years, there was talk that the elections in Conway County were rigged.
But there was never any hard evidence.
Then, a few weeks ago, 200 forged paper ballots from a 1968 Democratic primary were discovered in a Piggly Wiggly grocery sack in the attic of a house once owned by a deputy sheriff, who died in 1974.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
150TH ANNIVERSARY
Several events will take place this year at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford as it celebrates its 150th anniversary.
The first, an exhibition, "Ralph Earl: The Face of the Young Republic," opens today and runs through April 5.
Elizabeth Mankin Kornhauser, curator of American paintings for the museum, said that it is the first major examination of the painter's work.


New Ships, New Destinations
LAST year at this time, cruise line executives were nervous.
There was a war in the Persian Gulf, a recession at home and Americans simply weren't taking cruises.
"It was as if the phones had been disconnected," said Rod Seeley, president of Cruise Pro, a cruise-only travel agency in Thousand Oaks, Calif.
In addition, three enormous ships were about to be launched, adding more than 6,500 berths to the market.
The industry's response was a blizzard of discounts, everything from 2-for-1 promotions to deep reductions on last-minute reservations.
Apparently, the ship lines got the desired result, for according to the Cruise Lines International Association, a trade organization, cruise ships had an occupancy rate of around 87 percent in 1991, about the same as in 1990, not bad for a year that once looked disastrous.
A year later, there is still a recession, and 18 new ships are set to start cruising, offering more than 12,000 additional berths.
Yet throughout the cruise industry, there is a mood of cautious optimism.
"We've certainly had a much better start to the year," Mr.
Seeley said.
"This may not be a banner year for the cruise lines, with all the discounting, but it's going to be a banner year for the consumer."


June Wedding For Lisa Fuller
Lee M. Fuller Jr. of New York and Anina Porter Fuller of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Gretchen Fuller to Dirk Arnold ten Grotenhuis 4th, a son of Susan and Dirk A. ten Grotenhuis 3d of South Pasadena, Calif.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fuller, 26 years old, graduated from Georgetown University and is studying for a master's degree in social welfare at the University of California at Berkeley.
She was the volunteer coordinator for the Jesuit Volunteer Corps in Kansas City, Mo., and a case manager at Covenant House in New York.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother is a painter in Bronxville.


Tyson's Driver Says Woman Was Dazed
The chauffeur for Mike Tyson during his 36 hours here last summer said today that the woman who has accused Tyson of rape appeared frantic and disoriented when she returned to the limousine from the boxer's hotel room early last July 19.
During three hours of testimony, the chauffeur, Virginia Foster, described what she recalled about the 18-year-old woman when she joined Tyson in the limousine early that day and when she came out of the fighter's hotel just over an hour later.


Miss Maier Marries on L.I.
Stephanie Annette Maier, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rudi Maier of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to Matthew Gale Pattison, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter E. Pattison of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
William Meyer performed the ceremony at the Lutheran Church of the Resurrection.
Mrs.
Pattison, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Massachusetts and is an appraiser for James Felt Realty Services in New York.
Her parents, who are retired, were the owners of the Tulip Bake Shop in Floral Park, L.I.


Denise Beaumont to Marry in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Andre V. Beaumont Jr of Melville, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Denise Marie Beaumont to Ronald Stuart Resnick, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Resnick of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Beaumont, 30 years old, is a private skating instructor and a former professional ice skater.
She graduated from Empire State College Her father is an elementary-school teacher in the Plainview-Old Bethpage School District on Long Island.


Dr. Christopher Kales; Noted Skater Was 35
Dr.
Christopher P. Kales, a physician and a former professional ballet dancer and national figure skating competitor, died Jan. 23 at New York University Medical Center.
He was 35 years old and was a resident of Manhattan.
He died of encephalitis resulting from complications from AIDS, said Patrick M. Webb, his companion of 14 years.


TESTING POSITIVE
Foltz writes that he did not want to be tested until there was a treatment for the virus.
"I didn't want to know, if there was nothing that could be done." He indicates elsewhere in the article that he was sexually active, and he says he realizes that "safe" sex is not quite safe.
Did he feel no moral obligation to others with whom he was in intimate contact -- to find out for their sake, even if he had nothing to gain personally from the knowledge?
AMITAI ETZIONI Editor, The Responsive Community, Rights and Responsibilities
Washington


On the Street; Merrily Men's Coats Flow Along
In each decade, men's coats establish a signature length and style.
At the turn of the century, the calf-length greatcoat, large and shawl-collared and lined with nutria, was the star of the moment.
In the 1930's and 40's, coat hems rose to just below the knee, with camel's-hair and vicuna polo coats in favor.
In the 50's, coat lengths moved to above the knee and the styling echoed velvet-collared British officer coats.
For the 90's so far, coat lengths have dropped dramatically from the top of the calf to the lower calf.
The styling elements of this oversize coat are drawn from a number of decades: the stadium, steamer and polo coats of the 20's and 30's; raglan-sleeved coats of the 50's, and the greatcoat of the early 1900's, first designed for motoring in open cars.
These greatcoats were a uniform of the Wall Street robber barons.
Of course, other people wore them, too -- like Enrico Caruso.


New Chairman Installed to 'Invigorate' G.O.P.
Richard N. Bond, a political consultant with close ties to President Bush, was installed today as chairman of the Republican National Committee.
Mr.
Bond succeeds Clayton K. Yeutter, who was named Friday night to a newly created White House post, with Cabinet rank, to oversee economic and domestic policy.
The move was part of a reorganization of the White House staff geared to the President's re-election campaign.


Ms. Davison Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Warren M. Davison of Baltimore, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elise Ruth Davison, to Charles Alan Morris, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Floyd M. Morris of Potomac, Md., and Lauderhill, Fla.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Davison, 27 years old, graduated from Harvard University and is a law student at the University of Maryland.
Her father is the resident partner in the Baltimore office of Littler, Mendelson, Fastiff &amp; Tichy, a San Francisco law firm.


Joshua Kuvin to Wed Ms. Karetnick
Naomi and Barry H. Karetnick of Livingston, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Betsy Alisa Karetnick to Joshua Saxe Kuvin, the son of Dr.
Seymour Kuvin of West Orange, N.J., and the late Judy Saxe Kuvin.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Karetnick, 25 years old, is a television production associate for the Wall Street Journal Report in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is a senior vice president of Oppenheimer &amp; Company, the Wall Street investment house.
Her mother is a counselor at Middlesex County College in Edison, N.J.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Quayle's New Hampshire Theme: A Vote for Bush Is a Message to Congress
For those who might equate a vote for George Bush with an endorsement of his tenure, Vice President Dan Quayle would like to offer an alternative.
Campaigning today in New Hampshire, Mr.
Quayle exhorted New Hampshire Republicans to consider a vote for the President as a way "to send a message" to Congress.


Review/Fashion; Brash Men's Wear: 4-Piece Suits and Lots of Leather
To those who say there is nothing new in men's fashion, last week's fall showings presented several surprises.
Despite hard times, New York's men's wear designers mounted big, expensive shows, and the ideas were flying: washable leather, bodysuits, stretch blazers, down-filled cashmere jackets, matching shirts and ties, and four-piece suits.


Topics of The Times; The Stamp of Self-Indulgence
"I am proud to be recognized for my commitment to frugal and effective government," boasts Representative Dana Rohrabacher, Republican of California, in his latest newsletter.
He has an odd notion of frugality.
Mr.
Rohrabacher, running for re-election in a district transformed by reapportionment, used his free mailing privilege, known as franking, to blanket new areas gained in the redistricting with self-promotional mail.
Such blatant electioneering cheats taxpayers and discourages potential opponents.
But he was merely availing himself of a loophole in the franking rules designed to protect incumbents.
It permits members to send mail into their new districts once a redistricting plan is final.


Dollar Is Up Across the Board
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
125.70
123.55
131.05
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6125
1.5925
1.4680
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1745
1.1703
1.1593
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7858
1.7960
1.9750
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$356.75
$354.50
$365.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Ask Not Which Show Tunes Won the Tony
The Tony Awards for best musical and best score have always represented a tug of war between complacency and boldness.
Meredith Willson's score for "The Music Man" was chosen over the more ambitious "West Side Story" in 1958.
Stephen Sondheim's shimmering music for "Sunday in the Park With George" lost out in 1984 to Jerry Herman's old-fashioned tunes for "La Cage aux Folles." And in a fit of Broadway nostalgia last June, the voters chose as best score "The Will Rogers Follies," a musically formulaic slice of old-fashioned razzle-dazzle, over "The Secret Garden," whose gently innovative folk-pop score offers up universal truths about the survival of the spirit.
Columbia Records has since released original cast albums of both "The Will Rogers Follies" and "The Secret Garden," and all anyone has to do is compare the two to realize that artistic justice was again not served by the Tonys.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
Purchasing survey, in percent
47.4
47
Construction spending, percent change
-0.8
0.6
Tuesday
5.7
5.6
Thursday
Unemployment claims, in thousands
464
470
Factory orders, percent change
0.6
-0.3
Friday
Nonfarm payrolls, thousands
31
-50
Unemployment, percent
7.1
7.1
Monday: Canadian leading indicators  Tuesday: Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meets  Wednesday: Productivity *
February Treasury re-funding  Thursday: Bundesbank council meets  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending Jan. 18  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 355,000
227 West 17th Street  3,500-sq.-ft. open loft; elevator, 1 bath, 12-ft. ceilings, 120-ft. southern exposure, 16 floor-to-ceiling windows; maintenance $2,385, 60% tax-deductible (Brokers: Joffee La-Salle/Stribling &amp; Associates)  Fort Washington 115,000
160 Cabrini Boulevard  (Castle Village)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 850-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; part-time doorman, dining foyer, sunken-living room, Hudson River view; maintenance $698, includes gas and electricity, 28% tax-deductible (Broker: Perry-Stein Real Estate)  Greenwich Village 1.4 million
84 Perry Street  5-bedroom, 5-bath, single-family, 4-story town house; dining room, maid's room, drawing room, playroom, 8 fireplaces, rear garden, 20- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $7,000 (Broker: William B. May) Greenwich Village 325,000
1 Sheridan Square  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. condo in a prewar building; elevator, dining area, windowed kitchen, 12-ft. ceilings, fireplace, wrapped-terrace, 3 exposures; common charge $553, taxes $3,000 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Upper East Side 215,000
250 East 87th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, windowed kitchen, balcony; maintenance $973, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Carnegie Hill Properties)  West Side 147,500
165 West 66th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 850-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, renovated kitchen, balcony; maintenance $730, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: West Side Properties)  BRONX  Baychester 115,000
2218 Garrett Place  4-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached house; dining room, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $760 (Broker: Cancro Realty)  Throgs Neck 165,000
368 Balcolm Avenue  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; dining room, in each; 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; 100% tax-abated (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Crown Heights 200,000
1607 Carroll Street  2-family, brick, semi-attached house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit, 2 bedrooms in other; dining room in each; 2-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,350 (Broker: Helmar Brokerage Ltd.)  Park Slope 163,750
103 Prospect Park West  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. duplex-co-op in a brownstone; dining area, private roof rights, 2 exposures, Prospect Park view; maintenance $667, 70% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  QUEENS  Forest Hills Gardens 225,500
180 Burns Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, 2-story brick town house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, terrace over 1-car garage, finished basement, 22- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,486 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  Kew Gardens 47,000
83-11 139th Street  (Broadmore)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dinette, remodeled kitchen, west exposure; maintenance $345, 52% tax-deductible (Broker: Kraham Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Manor Heights 237,000
211 Gower Street  2-family, detached high ranch; 3 bedrooms, 2 1/2-bath, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; 1-car garage, 47- by 105-ft. lot; taxes $2,377 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)  St.
George 67,500
350 Richmond Terrace  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 860-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; windowed, dining ell, Manhattan skyline view; maintenance $469, includes gas and electricity, 39% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty Corp.)


Party With Friends


Bias Law Casts Pall Over New Orleans Mardi Gras
Every year for more than a century, the grand finale of Mardi Gras has come when Rex, the King of Carnival, and Comus, masked chieftain of the city's oldest carnival club, rendezvous for a midnight toast to usher in Ash Wednesday.
But not this year.
Citing a new city ordinance that bans discrimination in Mardi Gras groups, Comus and his followers have announced they will be staying home.
In a city whose identity is so tightly intertwined with the rambunctious 12-day festival that precedes Lent each year, that decision by the very same organization that invented the modern-day Carnival has been greeted with dismay.
But the withdrawal of Comus and Momus, another old-line carnival club, or krewe, has also ignited a rancorous debate that focuses not only on the future of Mardi Gras, but also on what kind of city New Orleans is and aspires to be.
Some Hesitate to Parade
Having just been through the most divisive governor's race in Louisiana history, New Orleans does not relish yet another confrontation with its racial problems.
But the brief sense of community that resulted from blacks and whites working together to defeat David Duke has now given way to expressions of bitterness, signs of what The New Orleans Times-Picayune described in a recent editorial as "a new racial anger" brought on by the ordinance.


Grand Prix Gridlock: Where Else but City?
Everyone who couldn't believe there would ever be an Indy-car race through the streets of Manhattan can keep on disbelieving.
For the time being, anyway.


Dating in the 90's: Romance and Caution Go Hand in Hand
Stephen Siciliano fell hopelessly in love last spring.
Out of the 150 people at a dance sponsored by the Westport Unitarian Church Singles Group, one woman in particular stood out, recalled Mr.
Siciliano, the vice president for sales at a wholesale bakery in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
Beverlee Bartha of Northford "was wearing this cute navy blue sailor's outfit and had a knockout smile," Mr.
Siciliano said.
"I took one look at her and thought, 'Wow.' "


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  BUSH AND YELTSIN UNITE


Julia Rosson To Wed in May
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Rosson of West Hartford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Julia Beth Rosson to Daniel Adam Small, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert L. Small of Canton, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Rosson, 31 years old, is press secretary to Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
Her father is the chief of gastroenterology at Hartford Hospital.
Her mother, Eileen Rosson, is a social worker with the Jewish Family Service of Greater Hartford.


Rosemary Peters Is to Marry Joseph Costello
Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Peters of Bay Head, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Rosemary Veronica Peters to Joseph Eugene Costello, a son of Alice T. Costello and the late Thomas F. Costello of Crestwood, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Bridgewater 285,000
852 Dow Road  4-bedroom. 3-bath, 2.5 year-old colonial; fireplace, Jacuzzi, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3.500.
Freehold 91,000
96 Tulip Lane  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-year-old condominium town house; c/a, h/w floors; monthly maintenance $128, taxes $2,445.
Glen Ridge 230,000
176 Midland Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 45-year-old ranch; 2-car garage, large property, full basement; taxes $9,706.
Howell 154,500
13 Canaan Court  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old colonial; family room, 2-car garage, c/a, w/w carpeting; taxes $3,026.
Jackson 92,000
109 Joan Court  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old condominium town house; c/a, fireplace, den, monthly maintenance $110; taxes $2,918.
Murray Hill 240,500
128 Old Stirling Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $5,381.
OTHER AREAS Stamford, Conn. 525,000
121 Fairview Avenue  6-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath 69-year-old waterfront, brick colonial; slate roof, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,308.
Armonk, N.Y. 330,000
7 Limestone Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 24-year-old raised ranch; fireplace, deck, family room, 1 acre; taxes $4,470.
East Northport, L.I. 182,500
1033 Fifth Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 28-year-old colonial; deck, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,600.


A Pet Project Of Karajan's Bears Fruit
When i was in Salzburg in 1989, just a few weeks after Herbert von Karajan's death, the Austrian hills were alive with the sound of gossip.
The conductor had been buried one night in complete secrecy, with only the family, some servants and three close friends present.
There was also the future of the conductor's considerable musical empire at stake; he had been the acknowledged ruler of the Salzburg Festival and had just resigned from the directorship of the Berlin Philharmonic.
Moreover, one record company, Deutsche Grammophon, had been so identified with his work that it often received, by some estimates, more than a third of its annual income from the sale of his recordings.
But when the music and recording businesses converged in that Austrian town for the summer festival as if in tribute to their once regnant master, most of the speculation seemed to be about Karajan's unseen videos.
The conductor had spent six hours a day in the basement of his house near Salzburg, working in a state-of-the-art studio on video versions of the mainstream repertory.
In one interview, he predicted they would be the "ultimate witness to our age." He had invested at least $30 million in their production.


CAMPUS LIFE: Ohio; University Bans Overnight Guests Of Opposite Sex
The Dean of Students of Ohio University says the university will continue to enforce a policy that forbids students from having guests of the opposite sex stay in their rooms overnight, despite concerns about the policy's enforceability.
The university began enforcing this policy, which has been in its student handbook for years, last fall because of increased concern for the safety and privacy of students, said Joel Rudy, dean of students.


THE GUIDE
RAILROAD EXHIBITION
"Rolling Steel: Railroad Art and Artifacts" is the title of an exhibition opening Tuesday and running through March 23 at the College of New Rochelle.


The Executive Computer; Digital Returns to PC Wars
The giant Digital Equipment Corporation, which fumbled its early efforts in the personal computer market, has opened a bold, multifaceted offensive to win a major share of the corporate desktop computer market.
In effect, Digital has created a new, multibillion-dollar personal computer company.
Digital, of Maynard, Mass., has long been a power in the so-called back end of corporate computing, where its midrange VAX systems are used for departmental and company-wide tasks like document management, electronic mail and network services.
Unlike its main rival, the International Business Machines Corporation, Digital has had virtually no presence on the desktop.


Rare Wood Offers Optical Game
THE 12 meticulously constructed bowls by Bob Stocksdale, on display in the Contemporary Craft Gallery of the Newark Museum, possess the classic silhouettes of ancient Chinese porcelain vessels.
They are perfectly proportioned, with surfaces as smooth as Oriental glazes.
The similarities stop right there; these vessels are cut from wood, not built with clay.
With skill and incredible control, Mr.
Stocksdale, a 79-year-old self-taught woodturner, forms bowls with walls that range from one-eighth inch to three-sixteenths inch in thickness.
He does not give them fanciful titles; the labels simply list the rare wood from which each piece was cut.
Seven of the works are from his private collection.


Buffalo Flies Past Montreal


For Little Girls, Everything Is Beautiful at the Ballet
EVEN the youngest dancer can grasp the proper attitude for ballet, as this class of little girls at the State University of New York at Purchase recently showed.
The spring term for the SUNY Youth Ballet program began with placement classes, and one beginning group of 14 girls aged 6 through 9 lifted their chins, stretched out their arms and pointed their toes for Ann Owen, the program's acting director, and Sheran Hevenor Daniele, a teacher.


The Games: New Spins on The Old Rivalries
THEY will be unlike anything of their kind ever staged, expansive and expensive, memorable for breathless beauty and endless traffic.
The Albertville Olympics of 1992 open Saturday as a tribute to the glory of the French Alps, the unlikely cooperation of chichi winter-resort towns and a certain
je ne sais quoi
that the beauty of the region will mask any logistical nightmares of utilizing 600 square miles of countryside at once.
These are the 16th Winter Games since the competition began in 1924 and the fifth held in the general area, although they are the first to embrace so many mountains, valleys, goats, sheep and snaky roads.


The Downhill and Its Racers: Glamour and Glory
The Alpine downhill, the glamour event of the Winter Olympics, is also one of the leadoff events this year.
The men will ski next Sunday in Val d'Isere, on a course designed by Bernhard Russi of Switzerland, the downhill gold medalist in 1972.
Val d'Isere is the hometown of 1968 Olympic gold medalist Jean Claude Killy.
The downhill is the purest sort of sports event -- pure speed.
The competitors have only one run, against the clock.


The Dallas Touch In London
Texas hospitality has come to London in the form of a luxury hotel.
The Lanesborough, which opened on New Year's Day, is named for a Viscount Lanesborough, who once owned a house at the site, and is managed by the Dallas-based Rosewood Corporation founded by Caroline Rose Hunt, daughter of the Texas oilman H. L. Hunt.
The 95-room hotel, formerly St.
George's Hospital at Hyde Park Corner, is across from Hyde Park and not far from Buckingham Palace.
The 19th-century building was restored and equipped at a cost of about $180 million.
In each guest room, Regency-style furniture conceals fax machines, CD players and other technological amenities.
Guests at the Lanesborough are given their own stationery and business cards, private phone and fax number.
Butler service is provided 24 hours a day, and the hotel has two restaurants, one British and the other international.
Rates range from about $342 for a single room to $4,500 (calculating the pound at $1.80) for the five-room Royal Suite.
For information and reservations: (800) 999-1828 or, in London, (71) 259-5599.


Sound Bites From the Sundance Festival
The Sundance Film Festival has become one of the most important in the country.
Every January, actors, directors and other movie industry types abandon Hollywood and New York for this festival of independent films, some competing for prizes in dramatic and documentary categories and others shown out of competition.
I asked some film people at this year's festival, which ended last Sunday, to offer one vivid impression of Sundance.
The only taboo was plugging their own films.
Their answers suggest that there was a great deal of culture shock floating around Park City.
Some responses are obviously tongue in cheek.
Aren't they?


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; In Fairfield County, the Cachet Persists
FAIRFIELD COUNTY'S appeal to home buyers, even during real estate slumps, has been demonstrated clearly in this recession.
While the county's home market has suffered free-falling prices and overloaded inventories, it has been sustained better than most areas by a stream of buyers seeking its cachet and its proximity to New York, particularly now that its properties are attainable at lower cost, many of them through foreclosure.


Europe's View of 'Veronique': A Matter of State
As its title might well suggest, Krzysztof Kieslowski's movie "The Double Life of Veronique" has a double life.
In France, home of fine cheese, wine and existentialism, critics and moviegoers have found the Polish-French co-production insightful, romantic and sensitive.
But in Poland, where concerns are often more quotidian, reviewers and spectators alike are leaving the theater scratching their heads.


As East Meets West, Germany Adjusts Compass
Three guys in bulging spandex suits heave a gleaming cigar of a bobsled onto a trailer, after a fourth lays strips of old carpet to shield the runners.
No coaches are in sight, and no help comes from a tractor driver, who leans on an elbow, counting the clouds going by.
Harald Czudaj's four-man team has just run 47.97 seconds, a record for the course at Konigssee, the premier west German bobsled run, far from his course in Altenberg in old East Germany.
He's running hard to squeeze out local aces like Rudi Lochner and Christoph Langen, the big hopes of the west German bobsledding clubs.


Seize the Hour, Day or Moment
AS RICHARD NIXON, IN the Great Hall of the People in Beijing, lifted a glass 20 years ago to toast the beginning of a new relationship between the United States and China, he quoted from a poem by Mao Zedong: "So many deeds cry out to be done/Always urgently./The world rolls on./Time passes./Seize the day. Seize the hour."
When it came to titling his new book, however, about America's challenges in a "one-superpower world," the former President seized neither the day nor the hour.
The title:
"Seize the Moment."
That was no spur-of-the-day decision; Mr.
Nixon wanted to instill an even greater sense of urgency, or to express the essence of the idea without slavishly following the cliche.


How Plants Respond to Changes in Weather
THIS has been a fluky winter.
In many ways it has seemed more like spring, because so many of the days have been mild.
And where is that usual wintertime blizzard?
Snow shovels and snow blowers have not had any workouts.
The plants have reacted, too, if that is the word for it.
Some have already bloomed.
Many shrubs popped out with a few blooms last fall, particularly forsythias and lilacs.
Some of the earliest bulbs have even pushed their leaves high above ground just as if it were spring.
In some gardens the first of the witchhazels are in flower, and in others the snowdrops are out in full glory.


BEST SELLERS: February 2, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
2
HIDEAWAY, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died finds himself and his family haunted by visions of evil.
2
1
17
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
3
12
2
LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $21.95.) The fifth volume in the series "The Corps" tells of an attempt to rescue two marines on an island in the Solomons during World War II.
4 *
5
6
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
5
3
16
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
6
7
3
BLINDSIGHT, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $21.95.) A woman physician seeks to find the cause of a series of strange deaths of Manhattan yuppies.
7
4
11
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the life of Edwina Winfield.
8
8
24
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
9
15
2
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $21.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware to the rescue of an actress menaced by a man recently released from prison.
10
11
96
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
11
1
SUCH DEVOTED SISTERS, by Eileen Goudge. (Viking, $22.) Jealousy, betrayal, vengeance and love mold the lives of four sisters through two generations.
12 *
6
18
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II. (LP)
13
9
47
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
14
10
6
LILA, by Robert M. Pirsig. (Bantam, $22.50.) On a sailboat cruise down the Hudson, a philosopher reflects on the nature of our society.
15 *
1
McNALLY'S SECRET, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $21.95.) The sleuth Archy McNally's pursuit of a stolen block of priceless stamps uncovers scandals on Florida's Gold Coast.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
16
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
2
2
9
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
3
5
9
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A reporter's account of an N.B.A. championship season spent with Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls.
4
4
20
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
5
6
3
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers Group West, $22.95.) A lawyer's presentation of the case for believing that the C.I.A. was involved in the death of John F. Kennedy.
6
3
11
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
7
1
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on her own and other women's struggles to achieve self-esteem.
8
8
23
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Thoughts on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
9
11
7
THE WORLD IS MY HOME, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) The autobiography of the popular novelist. (LP)
10 *
7
12
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
11
9
5
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning from the 19th-century American Indian.
12
12
33
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
13
10
61
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
14
6
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) The story of an Auschwitz survivor in the Catskills, told in comic-book form.
15
13
13
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel, with his view of the Iran-contra affair.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
9
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
2
3
4
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
3
2
9
THE BEST TREATMENT, by Isadore Rosenfeld. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Advice from a physician on a host of medical problems.
4
5
THE CARBOHYDRATE ADDICT'S DIET, by Rachael F. Heller and Richard F. Heller. (Dutton, $19.95.) How to cope with an addiction to carbohydrate-rich food.
5
5
19
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
A CASE OF CURIOSITIES, by Allen Kurzweil. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) Mr.
Kurzweil's first novel sets a 20th-century narrator in quest of an 18th-century mechanical genius; the result is a witty, curious and studied account of a mentally lively age.
THE FIELD DAY ANTHOLOGY OF IRISH WRITING, edited by Seamus Deane. (Field Day Publications/Norton, $150.) With 4,044 pages in three volumes, this whopping, generous collection takes the Hibernophile reader right up to 1991.
NIELS BOHR'S TIMES: In Physics, Philosophy and Polity, by Abraham Pais. (Clarendon/Oxford University, $35.) What did the 1922 Nobel laureate in physics actually do to be so much admired?
This first major biography of Bohr illuminates his contributions.
VIOLENCE, by Richard Bausch. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A masterly novel that explores public and private forms of violence with persistence and sensitivity.
THE "ABORTION PILL": RU-486, a Woman's Choice, by Etienne-Emile Baulieu with Mort Rosenblum. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The discoverer of the antihormone RU-486 lucidly explains the discovery and its workings, his views on social responsibility, and the political barriers, here and elsewhere, the drug has run into.
FUNDAMENTALISMS OBSERVED, edited by Martin E. Marty and R. Scott Appleby. (University of Chicago, $40.) The first of five volumes in an encyclopedic study of fundamentalist movements in just about all the religions and regions of the earth.
JOURNEYS IN DREAM AND IMAGINATION, by Artur Lundkvist. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $17.95.) An amazing, lyrical out-of-body travel book by a Swedish poet and essayist who returned from a two-month coma with a remarkable store of imagery.


Diane Manning To Wed in April
Diane Borst Manning, a management consultant in New York, and Norman Edward Berg, who retired as an executive of the Boy Scouts of America, are to be married in April.
Ms.
Manning, 54 years old, is the chief executive of the Manning Organization, a New York management consulting concern, and the president of her own real-estate investment firm in Roswell, N.M.
She teaches management courses at Sarah Lawrence College, the New School for Social Research and the City University of New York.
She graduated cum laude from Wagner College and has an M.B.A. from New York University.


HDTV Faces Its Future
For all the talk about high-definition television, few people have ever seen it.
This year, for the first time, the public will have a chance to take a look.
At the 1992 World's Fair, to be held in Seville, Spain, between April and October, thousands of video displays on the fairgrounds will employ high-definition technology.
Commonly called HDTV, high-definition television yields a sharper and more detailed picture and involves every aspect of the technology -- cameras, transmission, VCR's and the television screens themselves. (Although present home equipment would continue to function, new sets and VCR's would be needed to display the improved picture.)


James H. Halpin, 89, Former Leader in Bar
James H. Halpin, a former leader of the New York City Bar Association, died on Monday at his home in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 89 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


One Thing We Don't Need Is Tax Reduction
To the Editor:
There should be no tax reduction now. This is why:


Harkin's Presidential Candidacy Is Endorsed by Rangel and Farrell
The Presidential candidacy of Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa was endorsed yesterday by Representative Charles B. Rangel and Assemblyman Herman D. Farrell Jr., the chairman of the Manhattan Democratic organization.
At a news conference outside the Adam Clayton Powell State Office Building in Harlem, Mr.
Rangel said Senator Harkin is the only candidate with "a clear vision for ending the economic misery that has resulted from 12 years of Reaganomics."


Mutual Funds; Placing Bets on Past Winners
What happens if you buy the preceding year's top-ranked fund each January, hold it for a year and then switch your money into the best performer of the just-ended year?
For the period from 1975 through 1990, your investment would be worth about 3.5 times the cumulative performance of the average stock fund, according to a study by the No-Load Fund Investor, a newsletter in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The study took the best diversified no-load domestic equity funds available for sale in each year of the study, excluding gold funds and funds that invest only in narrow market sectors.
Investors would have reaped an average gain of 26.7 percent annually compared with 16.1 percent for the average stock fund.


'A Moral Component'
"If we're going to be a world leader, we need to be able to say we have some values and we want to take some leadership in an area like children's needs. But we're 56th among all nations in immunizations, and our infant mortality rate is higher than Cuba's. We need to see our role as a world leader having a moral component as well as a military component.
"We have an enormous opportunity to provide leadership in the area of limiting nuclear proliferation and promoting and encouraging and nurturing geniune democracies in many parts of the world. This is where collaboration with other wealthier nations becomes critical. The old 'we-have-the-answers' style is not one that will serve us well in the future. There is a lot of successful community development work going on in other countries.


ALBERTVILLE '92


Riley Stays Consistent, And So Do the Knicks
It is no surprise to Gerald Wilkins of the Knicks that the members of the team have accepted their roles this season, that they have played unselfishly and that they are more consistent than in seasons past.
After all, Pat Riley is their coach.


IN FROM THE COLD
Stephen Budiansky says, in his article "In From the Cold" (Dec. 22), that it might not be an environmental disaster if the human population were to reach 12 billion by the middle of the next century.
Countless animal and plant species would be driven to extinction by appropriation of their habitat, but so what?
Extinction is a natural process.


Style Makers; Georgina von Etzdorf, Fashion and Textile Designer
An 18th-century barn seems an unlikely place for a fashion designer to work, but Georgina von Etzdorf is quite comfortable in the Wiltshire countryside, where cows are more common than haute couture.
With a view of a meadow and a changeable sky, Miss von Etzdorf imbues silk Jacquard, velvet and chiffon with vibrant swirls, diamonds and stripes.
She works the fabric into scarfs, ties, gloves, dressing gowns, blouses and waistcoasts.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE SELLING OF THE GREEN The Financial Rise and Moral Decline of the Boston Celtics.
By Harvey Araton and Filip Bondy.
HarperCollins, $20.


Kronberger, Going for 5
Petra Kronberger, a 22-year-old Austrian, has already managed to do what no other woman ski racer has ever done.
During a 38-day span between December 1990 and January 1991, she won an event in each of Alpine skiing's five disciplines: slalom, giant slalom, Super G, downhill and combined.
She is considered a strong gold medal possibility in the Olympic downhill, combined and Super G, with an outside chance at a medal in all five.
The pressure of being a national hope for Austria, as the country attempts to rebound after 10 years of Swiss domination, might be a negative factor.
But Kronberger has had to overcome adversity and long odds most of her life.
Her parents were of modest means, her father a truck driver and her mother a restaurant dishwasher.


For Art and Old Friends
WEDNESDAY -- The Museum of Modern Art galleries were filled for the black-tie preview of the William S. Paley collection of paintings, sculptures and drawings donated to the museum by the Paley Foundation.
There were two events: a dinner at 7 P.M. for the Paley family, museum trustees and friends; and a reception from 9 to midnight for more than 1,500 guests.
Mr.
Paley, founder of CBS, was closely associated with the museum for a half century.
The collection opens to the public today.
Oscar de la Renta celebrated the debut of his new woman's fragrance, Volupte, with a formal presentation and dinner at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


When Walk in the Woods Meets Computer Design
Wolfgang Schaedler, coach of the United States Olympic luge team, takes summertime walks in the Liechtenstein woods for his scientific inspiration.
He watches branches bend in the wind and birds dive for worms as he ponders the perfect downhill sled.
Mark Reeves, technical support leader for the sponsoring Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company in St.
Paul, mounts a computer on his luges and executes calibrated alterations in suspension, fabrication and aerodynamics.
He has discovered that the steel runners splay a few too many millimeters during high-speed turns, and that denser weights worn by sledders are speedier and less wind resistant than the bulky, lead ones.


Kathleen Ellen Fulgham Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Russell W. Fulgham of Seattle have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kathleen Ellen Fulgham, to Howard Max Rossbach, the son of Mrs.
J.
Howard Rossbach of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Judge Rossbach.
No date has been set.
Ms.
Fulgham, 35 years old, graduated from the University of Washington, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a vice president of the Puget Sound Bancorp in Seattle.
Her father is a retired office administrator with the Social Security Administration in Seattle.
Her mother, Joan Fulgham, is a retired elementary-school teacher in Renton, Wash.


Dr. Cheryl Solomon Is to Wed Steven Koenig
Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Solomon of Hicksville, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Cheryl Robin Solomon to Steven Craig Koenig, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Koenig of Seaford, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Dr.
Solomon, 30 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Albany and the Chicago Medical School.
She is a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow, L.I.


A Plan With Something For Everyone To Swallow
WHAT if David N. Dinkins proposed a budget and nobody groaned?
That's more or less what happened last week when the Mayor released the latest in a long line of gloomy spending plans for New York City that prompted measured praise from many quarters, instead of the howls of outrage he has heard for so much of his term.


This Week
If you neglected to protect newly planted or exposed broadleaf evergreens, you can still reduce water loss by shading with burlap or evergreen boughs.
If the ground isn't frozen, give them a deep drink of water now and then.
Browning leaves and dried up twigs are signs of desiccation, a major cause of winter damage.
The 1992 Long Island Gardening Calendar is ready.
The calendar is a useful compendium of monthly tips, and this year's edition features rock gardens, miniature houseplants, bonsai and more.
Send a $4 check payable to Cornell Cooperative Extension-Suffolk County, attention Darlene Brickman, 246 Griffing Avenue, Riverhead, L.I. 11901-3086.


Sports of The Times; Side Door Lets Davis Into Hall
SOONER or later, the Pro Football Hall of Fame had to be embarrassed by leaving its side door open.
And now it has.
Al Davis, the major-domo of the Los Angeles Raiders, was announced a week ago as one of this year's inductees even though he did not receive the required number of "yes" votes in the secret ballot of the selection committee.


United They Stand After Union Fell
When the mostly Russian hockey team quicksteps onto the ice for the first time at the 1992 Winter Olympics, keen spectators are likely to blink, in confusion or nostalgia.
The arrogant red of the Soviet uniforms, worn by the swift, deft and powerful teams that dominated international ice hockey for decades, will remain.
But the letters C.C.C.P., Cyrillic for U.S.S.R., will be gone from the jerseys, just as the Soviet Union has disappeared, replaced by a jumble of independent countries.


Reformer Takes Oath as Teamster Chief
With pennants proclaiming "The New Teamsters" and chants of "Carey, Carey, Carey," the union that became a national symbol for corruption and mob influence, today inaugurated a democratically elected insurgent, Ronald R. Carey of Long Island City, as its president.
"On Monday morning, I will begin my work as president by setting an example with the following measures," Mr.
Carey proclaimed from the steps of the glass-walled Teamsters headquarters near the Capitol.
"The Teamsters' limousine, the condominium in Puerto Rico, the luxury jets, they're all going on the market next week." Members Invited Into Office
Then, like Boris N. Yeltsin inviting Russian common folk into the Kremlin, Mr.
Carey yelled to the crowd of about 500 rank-and-file members: "Now I invite all of you to join me. This building belongs to you once again."


At Home on the Prairie


From Acura, A Legend To Live With
MY friend Sally can tell you that Cal Ripken batted .323 last season and that Mozart's favorite drink was Pilsener (although he also liked punch.) She is smart about a lot of things, but she is also somewhat benighted when it comes to seat belts.
I give her a ride now and again, and she usually manages to get half the belt around her and half of it behind her.
Still, she wants to wear it, and she always asks if the car du jour has an air bag.
Alas, the answer usually is no.
But manufacturers are cozying up to the concerns of people like Sally, and more and more they are wisely peddling safety.


At Home Abroad; The Divided Society
The logic of peace has never seemed more compelling in Israel than it does today.
The country needs massive foreign investment to provide jobs for Soviet Jews who want to emigrate, and that investment will not come unless there is stability.
And there is a real chance for a deal with the Palestinians, an interim arrangement that would ease the decades-old conflict.
Having missed so many opportunities in the past, the Palestinians are now eager to negotiate.


As Salvador Peace Begins, Rebels Give Warning
On the first day of the cease-fire officially ending the Salvadoran civil war, the leftist guerrilla front served notice today that while its differences with the political right have diminished they have not disappeared.
"Today, we stop being enemies and become political adversaries," said Joaquin Villalobos, the chief military strategist of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, shortly before he and nine other men were sworn in as members of the Peace Commission.


Smile When You Sing That, Pardner
FOR A COWBOY HAS TO SING
A Collection of Sixty Romantic Cowboy and Western Songs, Covering the Fifty-Year Golden Era of Popular Standards Between 1905 and 1957.
By Jim Bob Tinsley.
Illustrated. 314 pp.
Orlando: University of Central Florida Press.
WONDROUS TIMES ON THE FRONTIER
By Dee Brown. 324 pp. Little Rock, Ark.: August House Publishers. $23.95.
TALES FROM THE AMERICAN FRONTIER
By Richard Erdoes. Illustrated. 443 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $25.


Horning In


Tyson's Driver Says Woman Was Dazed
The chauffeur for Mike Tyson during his 36 hours here last summer said today that the woman who has accused Tyson of rape appeared frantic and disoriented when she returned to the limousine from the boxer's hotel room early last July 19.
During three hours of testimony, the chauffeur, Virginia Foster, described what she recalled about the 18-year-old woman when she joined Tyson in the limousine early that day and when she came out of the fighter's hotel just over an hour later.


Economic Watch; Why Mainstream Economists Expect a Recovery This Time
To meddle or not to meddle?
For President Bush and many in Congress, the question of speeding the economic recovery has become a question of electoral survival.
Hardly anyone who serves at the voters' pleasure, it seems, is ready to defend the patient approach.
But even as the juggernaut for economic stimulus gathers strength, the economics establishment, led by Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, is digging in.
Mainstream economists acknowledge that they were far off the mark in predicting a recovery last year.
And many say they may be wrong again in 1992.
"There's an above-average risk the consensus forecast is too optimistic," said Robert D. Reischauer, director of the Congressional Budget Office.


Miss Shapiro to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Shapiro of Melville, L.I., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Aviva Lynn Shapiro and Bruce Evan Pienkny, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Pienkny of Melville.
Miss Shapiro, 26 years old, is an artist in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and has a master's degree in fine arts from Columbia University.
Mr.
Pienkny, 26, heads B.E.P.
Enterprises, a sports memorabilia company.
He graduated from Brown University.


Corrections
An article on page 27 of the Arts and Leisure section today about Broadway show recordings misidentifies the orchestrator of "The Secret Garden." He is William D. Brohn.


Passer Leaves U.C.L.A.,But Receiver Will Stay
After completing 209 of 343 passes for 2,681 yards as a sophomore last season, U.C.L.A.'s TOMMY MADDOX had been expected to be one of the nation's top college quarterbacks next season.
Not anymore.
Maddox said he would enter the National Football League draft.
Whether he will make an immediate mark on the N.F.L. is debatable, however.
Despite a 60.9 percent completion rate and an average of 12.8 yards per completion, Maddox's 16 touchdown passes were offset by 16 interceptions.


Miss Gianone To Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Salvatore Gianone of Garden City South, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Christine Marie Gianone, to Louis Anthony Santelli, a son of Raynette Santelli and the late Louis Santelli of Sayville, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gianone, 30 years old, is a communications software manager at Columbia University Center for Computing Activities in New York.
She graduated from the State University of New York College at New Paltz and has a master's degree in elementary education from Columbia Teachers College.
Her father is a building contractor in Garden City South.


Should 'Peer Gynt' Also Be Denied?
To the Editor:
Adolph Hitler's favorite play was said to be Ibsen's "Peer Gynt." Dietrich Eckhart, who later became Hitler's mentor, translated "Peer Gynt" into German while befriending a war-wounded Hitler in 1922.
Eckhart took Hitler to see the play; Hitler was greatly impressed.
He identified with Peer: a loner, self-made and a destined leader.
Peer is asked in Act 4, Scene 1: "You must have a goal.  What is it?" Peer: "To become emperor." "Of what? Where?" "Of the whole world."


Theatrical vs. Practical
BLUE MOON WAS THE THEME OF THE SPRING '92 collection by Workers for Freedom, the London fashion designers.
And in case anyone attending the runway show was inclined to forget, the models had the theme painted on their faces.
Each brunette wore a huge, dark blue crescent that swooped over one eye, from brow to cheek.
Blondes got a big golden sun ringed with little flames, like a bright-colored monocle.
The rest of the makeup was pretty minimal -- just mascara and a trace of gray smudge on the other eye.
Does this mean you're supposed to circle an eye in blue or yellow each time you wear a billowy little number by Workers for Freedom?
That's rather literal, says one of the company's designers, Graham Fraser, who with his partner, Richard Nott, dreamed up the makeup for the collection.
The idea behind the elaborate face paint was to draw attention from the models to the fashions.
"The big star models are starting to detract from the clothing," Fraser says.
"We were thinking of obliterating the faces completely." But the solar system makeup wasn't
totally
symbolic.
"Body paint was big in the 60's, and it's fun for the beach or for clubs," Fraser says.
"With clothing costing so much money, it's a cheaper way of adorning yourself."


Karen Heather Sackler to Wed Robert Novick
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Sackler of East Brunswick, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Karen Heather Sackler, to Robert Jay Novick, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie Novick of Montville, N.J.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sackler, 25 years old, is the director of public relations and assistant director of community relations at the Jewish Federation of North Jersey in Wayne, N.J.
She is a graduate student in social work at Yeshiva University and a graduate of Rutgers University.


Reporter's Notebook; Not a Gorbachev Waltz, But a Yeltsin Quickstep
The President from Moscow went to Camp David.
He talked to President Bush about arms control, economic reform and world peace.
He received high-powered members of Congress at his embassy.
He roared through town in his Zil limousine surrounded by security agents in fur hats.
He pressed the flesh on a Washington street corner.
It was a familiar, almost predictable sequence of events.
But this was Boris N. Yeltsin, not Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and if it was East-West summitry, then it was in miniature.


Black Like Whom?
HIGH COTTON
By Darryl Pinckney. 309 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.


Paula L. Keller, Lawyer, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
David H. Keller of Atlanta have announced the engagement of their daughter Paula Lee Keller to Michael Robert Herman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Herman of East Meadow, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Keller, 32 years old, is a lawyer at the CIBA-GEIGY Corporation, the Swiss pharmaceutical manufacturer, in Summit, N.J.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received her law degree from Cornell University.
Her father retired as the chief of management, procurement divsion, at Fort MacPherson, an Army installation in Atlanta.


U.S. Advances in Cup Behind McEnroe's Fire
John McEnroe, who likes nothing better than making an entire nation his adversary, let Argentina be the enemy as he played patriot this sultry afternoon at the Mauna Lani Racquet Club.
Argentina lost the battle.
"Now we can go to the beach," he said.


OLYMPICS: Five days to Albertville; Sledding Controversy Leads to Compensation
Even as the United States bobsled team assembles tomorrow in Albertville, France, for the 1992 Winter Games, the group will still be feeling the effects of a controversy that has engulfed it since last summer.
Ray Pratt, the team's executive director, disclosed recently that the team would pay "out-of-pocket" expenses to Todd Snavely.


Department Stores' Fate; Bankruptcies Like Macy's Overshadowing Strong Consumer Loyalty, Experts Assert
When R. H. Macy &amp; Company filed for bankruptcy protection last week, it rekindled a debate: Is the department store as a species doomed to the fate of Tyrannosaurus rex?
Those eager to relegate department stores to a museum of retailing history can cite a long list of failed emporiums -- Bonwit Teller, B. Altman and Gimbel's, Garfinckel's in Washington and Frederick &amp; Nelson in Seattle, to name a few.


Bulls Show They Still Love L.A.
Michael Jordan sparked Chicago's comeback with 14 of his 33 points in the fourth quarter as the Bulls defeated the Los Angeles Lakers, 103-97, today in their first game at the Forum since winning the National Basketball Association championship.
The victory evened the Bulls' record at 2-2 on their 6-game road trip following Friday's victory at Dallas.
Chicago is 21-0 in games in which opponents score fewer than 100.


Mailer Visits C.I.A. and Finds He's in Friendly Territory. Really.
Like the narrator of "Harlot's Ghost" who devised convoluted schemes to avoid detection in his spy posts overseas, Norman Mailer quietly slipped in and out of the Central Intelligence Agency last week.
Although the veteran novelist spent seven years writing his 1,310-page book on the agency and its role in American life, the visit marked the first time he had set foot in its sprawling headquarters on the banks of the Potomac, invited as part of its guest speaker program.


Sports of The Times; Tim Hardaway's Sharp Blue Teeth
THE theme from "Jaws" -- with that sinister-sounding da-dumpt-da-dumpt-da-dumpt -- was played over the public-address system at Madison Square Garden yesterday afternoon at one point in the second half, and it was a mistake.
It scared the Knicks, or seemed to.
That and Tim Hardaway, of course, a swift, little, devastating shark.
The music, which was heard when the Knicks were behind the Golden State Warriors by a few points, was intended to increase the rate of bloodthirstiness among the members of the home team, but it was Hardaway, a 6-foot guard, who got the visceral message.
With a killer look that appeared in his eyes, he scored 16 of his 28 points in the third period, and helped to turn a 66-59 halftime lead for the Knicks into a 120-113 victory for the Warriors.


For Courier, If It's Monday, It's Almost Time to Be No. 1
It is well past 3 o'clock in the afternoon, but Jim Courier is yawning as if he'd been awake all night.
Actually, he has been up since early morning, but that isn't the problem.
It's the time change.
Finally, he glances at his watch and apologizes.
In Australia, it is already tomorrow morning.
Courier has been back just a few days, and there has been no time to relax, to adjust to a new time zone, to soak in his victory in the Australian Open.
A limo picked him up at his Palm Springs condo and whisked him off to an interview show.
There was a conference call with a dozen or so reporters, then lunch.
Johnny Carson also wanted him.


On the Downswing, Nets Try to Look Up
Bill Fitch, the Nets' coach, looked for a morsel of something positive and found it somewhere at the end of a long and laborious five-game losing streak.
It wasn't easy.
"They're young players," Fitch said late Saturday night at the Los Angeles Sports Arena.
"They'll get to a point where they'll start to win again. And while we were in search of a fire tonight, everybody watching on TV at home got to see just about everybody play."


Warren Panel Findings Should Stir Outrage; Intelligence Files
Yo the Editor:
"Get the Rest of the J.F.K. Story" (editorial, Jan. 16) suggests a partial disclosure of files from the John F. Kennedy assassination investigation.
I am afraid the exclusion of the most sensitive Central Intelligence Agency and other intelligence reports will only deepen the confusion.


A Meaningful Preseason? Read On.
The World League of American Football, whose player draft begins tomorrow in Dallas, prides itself upon its innovative ways.
But it may have gone too far in terms of semantics.
A new twist for the league's second season, which begins March 21, will be the use of an exhibition game as a part of the tie-breaker system at season's end.


Where the Bread Crumbs Go, the Seagulls Are Sure to Follow


Tokyo Stocks Up
Japanese stock prices were higher today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues advanced 116.54 points, or more than five-tenths of 1 percent, to close at 22,139.59.
On Friday, the index rose 465.38 points.


Companies Go for the Gold, Using Ambush Marketing
Unlike alpine skiing, speed skating and the biathlon, ambush marketing is not yet an Olympic event.
That could change after the 1992 Winter Games begin on Saturday.
Ambush marketing describes a spoilsport strategy by which an advertiser tries to disrupt the extensive and expensive plans of a competitor.
The goal is to convince consumers that the company springing the ambush is associated with an eagerly anticipated event, like the Olympics or the Super Bowl, for which a rival has paid a hefty fee for an official affiliation.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Purchasing Managers' Report . . .
Jan.
Construction Spending . . .
Dec.
Tuesday  Auto Sales . . .
Jan.
Wednesday  Productivity . . . 4th Qtr.
Thursday  Factory Orders . . .
Dec.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Consumer Credit . . .
Dec.
Unemployment . . .
Jan.


Parties in South Africa Said to Narrow Differences
The Government of President F. W. de Klerk has quietly accepted, although on something of its own terms, the need for a multiracial interim government to see South Africa through the transition to a post-apartheid democracy.
The white minority Government has long resisted calls for an interim administration, primarily from its foremost opponent, the African National Congress.
Last week, though, the congress's general secretary, Cyril Ramaphosa, said Mr. de Klerk was moving toward another basic demand, that an assembly be elected to draft a new constitution that will extend political rights to blacks.


Salvadoran President Promises to Rebuild
A day after a cease-fire took effect, ending this nation's civil war, President Alfredo Cristiani set out today to tell Salvadorans in rural areas that his Government would immediately begin programs to improve their lives.
"This beautiful day marks the beginning of the reconstruction of El Salvador," he told a crowd gathered in a school patio in this hardscrabble region 50 miles east of San Salvador.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Coltec Industries, Inc., New York, has filed for $200 million of senior notes due in 2000, and $250 million of senior subordinated notes due in 2002, to be sold through Morgan Stanley.
The offerings are in addition to a recent filing for $50 million in common stock.
The company makes products for the aerospace, automotive and other industries. *
Witco Corp., New York, says it plans to file for up to $100 million of debt securities, either notes or debentures, to be offered over a period of up to two years.
The company, which makes specialty chemical and petroleum products, has annual sales of more than $1.6 billion.


2 Children Are Slain And Woman Is Shot In Robbery Attempt
Two young girls were shot to death and a 38-year-old woman was critically injured when she was shot and then jumped from a third-floor attic window of a house in Queens as she tried to escape last night in what appeared to be an attempted robbery.
The two girls, ages 2 and 5, were shot once in the head, and the woman was shot in the head and arm, the police said.
It was not clear whether the woman and children were related.


Elizabeth Lapchick
Elizabeth Lapchick, the widow of the legendary New York basketball player and coach Joe Lapchick, died early yesterday morning at her home in Milton, Mass.
She was 87 years old and had been ill for a long time, her family said.
Mrs.
Lapchick was married for 41 years to Joe Lapchick, who played pro basketball for 20 years, including a stint with the original Celtics.
He coached the Knicks for 10 years and the St.
John's University team for 20 years.


Rival South African Groups Hold a Joint Rally for Peace
The country's two leading black organizations held their first joint peace rally today to mark an agreement ending factional fighting in a black township.
But at virtually the same time, eight blacks were killed in clashes only a few miles away.
About 1,000 supporters of the African National Congress and the Inkatha Freedom Party met on a field in Mpumalanga to celebrate an end to the fighting that had raged almost daily in the township since the mid-1980's.


Equity Offerings This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Advanced Magnetics Inc., 1.75 million shares. Paine Webber.
Capstead Mortgage Corp., two million shares. Paine Webber.
Countrywide Credit Industries, three million shares.  Merrill Lynch.


Death Toll in Turkish Avalanches Rises to 142


Brown Thrush, 80; Pressed Indian Rights
Princess Brown Thrush, a Matinnecock Indian who fought for the rights of her tribe, died on Jan. 20 at Booth Memorial Medical Center in Queens.
She was 80 years old and lived at the Matinnecock-Tackapoosha tribal longhouse in Flushing.
Princess Brown Thrush, whose Christian name was Lila E. Harding, died of cancer, said Chief Osceola Townsend, a cousin.


Xiamen Journal; Chinese Isle Bewitched (and Bothered) by Taiwan
In a tiny electronics shop in this coastal Chinese town, on the poor side of the thin stretch of water called the Taiwan Strait, the proprietor is exploiting the longing to be like the Wangs and the Chens across the waterway.
His lure is a video of a young woman singing into a microphone, her gown rippling as she dances, and it seems to work.
A crowd gathers inside the shop, eyes fixed on the singer, whose style and dress shows that she is from Taiwan.


New York's Haitians Share the Fear
In a smoky cafe in Brooklyn yesterday, Edner Desrosiers glanced over his shoulder, toward the Statue of Liberty which was visible four miles to the west in New York Harbor, and wondered what the grand symbol of freedom has come to mean.
A day after the United States Government resumed the forced return of Haitian exiles to their troubled country, Mr.
Desrosiers trembled with anger and despair for the people of Haiti.


So, Why Can't Strike the Gold Do Just That?
At least, he spared everybody an awkward scene in the winner's circle.
You know, one horse, three feuding owners, and who carries home the trophy?
Strike the Gold spared everybody the pangs of victory Saturday by running sixth in a field of eight as Sea Cadet won the $500,000 Donn Handicap, the opening event in this year's American Championship Racing Series.
But for the ninth time in a row since he won the Kentucky Derby last May 4, he reminded everybody of the slings and arrows of defeat.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  CONFUSING TIMES FOR U.S. MILITARY
The vision of a Soviet enemy that could point 90 or more divisions at Western Europe and still wage global war with the United States was implanted in generations of Americans in uniform.
Now it has evaporated, leaving the United States military without the old certainties about its role in the world.
A1  YELTSIN FAULTS DONORS
Bush Administration officials expressed confusion about some biting remarks that Mr.
Yeltsin made in Canada about the level of foreign support for Russia.
A3  A BRIEF 'MISTAKE,' FRANCE SAYS
A day after the departure of a radical Palestinian leader, the French Government struggled to limit the damage caused by admitting him for medical treatment.
A9  TENDER ISSUE IN THE BALKANS
The Yugoslav republic of Macedonia has stirred unease throughout a region of Greece by asking for recognition as an independent country.
A3  HAITIANS HEADED HOME
About 400 refugees were loaded onto two boats at an American naval base in Cuba so they could be sent back to Haiti.
Their forced repatriation was delayed for 24 hours.
A6  Haitians in New York lament the United States' decision.
A6  A CONCESSION IN SOUTH AFRICA
South Africa's Government has accepted, although on something of its own terms, the need for a multiracial interim administration on the road to a post-apartheid democracy.
A9  SIZING UP CHINA'S PREMIER
Businessmen and academic experts who met with China's Prime Minister in New York said they saw a new, reflective side to Li Peng.
But the gathering was dominated by concerns over human rights.
A2  Xiamen Journal: A Chinese town is turning into "a little Taipei." A4  Only minor damage in Japan's worst earthquake in six years.
A2  National A10-12, B7-9  RECESSION RESHAPING SCHOOLS
Colleges and universities are being forced to slash budgets, challenging some schools' commitment to excellence and in some cases altering the basic shape of the university.
Some see the current troubles as potholes in a long road of change.
A1  PAYING FOR HEALTH PLAN
President Bush's plan to help 90 million people buy health insurance would be financed by curbing programs like Medicare and Medicaid, Administration and Congressional officials said.
A1  AN ENDANGERED SPECIES?
When R. H. Macy &amp; Company filed for bankruptcy protection last week, it rekindled a debate: Is the department store as a species doomed to the fate of Tyrannosaurus rex?
Experts say no, noting that the the stores' share of the general merchandise market has declined much less than prominent bankruptcy filings would seem to indicate.
A1  TRIAL IN TAPED BEATING
Four Los Angeles police officers go on trial this week on charges stemming from the videotaped beating of a black motorist.
The cases renews the question whether beatings and racial prejudice are common behavior within the department.
A10  ART AND LIFE INTERSECT
Norman Mailer got a warm welcome at the C.I.A., an agency he glorified in his novel "Harlot's Ghost" and villified in earlier years.
A10  HILL INQUIRY GROWS IN SCOPE
An investigation of the disclosure of Prof.
Anita Hill's accusations against Clarence Thomas has developed into a potential test of broader issues.
B8  VIEW FROM THE SIDELINES
As the campaign season begins to unroll, Gary Hart, a former front-runner for the Democratic Presidential nomination, watches from a distance.
A12  Never far from former Gov.
Brown is his aide Jacques Barzaghi.
A12  JAWBONE CONFOUNDS EXPERTS
In a discovery that could upset ideas of prehuman migrations through the world, scientists have found a jawbone in the former Soviet republic of Georgia that suggests that some human ancestors may have left Africa several hundred thousand years earlier than now thought.
B7  Police killed a circus elephant that went on a rampage.
B8 Metropolitan Digest, B1 PRICE OF THE SENATE RACE
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's fund raising is a sign that the struggle to unseat him will be costly and acrimonious.
Four of the Democrats who have announced their candidacies say they have raised $7 million so far.
Mr.
D'Amato says he has $3.1 million cash on hand.
A1  NEWARK HOUSING TROUBLES
Ten months after Newark officials broke ground for a $110 million program to build 100 town houses for low-income people, the developer has not secured financing and work is behind schedule: another reminder of the housing authority's inability to shelter the poor.
A1  HIGH HOPES ON BROADWAY
New York's commercial theater season has disappointed producers and been plagued by a severe post-holiday slump.
But as the second half of the season begins, 22 new shows are lighting up marquees.
A1.
Business Digest, D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Tougher side of Los Angeles.
C11  The recession Off Broadway.
C11  Tenor says he was snubbed.
C11  Music: Critic's Notebook C11  Dance: In Review C14  Word and Image: "Unto the Sons," by Gay Talese.
C14  "The Broken Cord." C16  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials A14  Courage on mental health.
A14  New Jersey's welfare.
A14  Time's up for Joe Doherty.
A14  Letters A14  Leslie H. Gelb: End U.N. dipbaloney.
A15  William Safire: Cuomo vs.
Clinton.
A15  Daniel Patrick Moynihan: North Dakota, Math Country.
A15  William Greider: Survival of the fattest.
A15  Obituaries D10-11  Judge Irving R. Kaufman, of Federal appeals court D10  Mel Hein, the Iron Man of the football Giants D11  Carleton Shugg, an innovator in submarines D11  Kathrine Robinson Everett, long-practicing lawyer D11  Bert Parks, whose serenade helped crown 25 Miss Americas D11  Sports C1-9  Basketball: Knicks lose to Warriors.
C1  L.S.U. beats Kentucky.
C3  Nets look up while performance is down.
C4  Bulls win again in Los Angeles.
C4  Column: Berkow on Knicks.
C4  Anderson on Mel Hein.
C5  Hockey: Rangers return as road hogs.
C5  Tennis: Courier, at almost No. 1.
C1  Photo: The C.I.A. is visited by a recent spy novel's author.
A10. (George Tames for The New York Times)


Housing Authority Work Awarded to Disputed Firm
A Queens company that is banned from doing New York City school construction work because of suspected ties to organized crime is about to land $5.8 million in contracts with the city's Housing Authority.
Three public agencies have adopted different policies concerning the company, Hi-Tech Mechanical Inc., highlighting the contrasting standards used by municipal bodies to evaluate contractors and the breakdown in exchanging information about investigative findings among agencies.


Judge Irving Kaufman, of Rosenberg Spy Trial and Free-Press Rulings, Dies at 81
Judge Irving R. Kaufman, who gained national attention in 1951 as the judge who sentenced Julius and Ethel Rosenberg to the electric chair and who wrote landmark decisions in First Amendment, antitrust and civil rights cases for more than 30 years on the Federal bench, died on Saturday night in the Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Judge Kaufman died of pancreatic cancer, his family said.


D'AMATO CAMPAIGN SHOWING STRENGTH WITH GAIN IN GIFTS
A strong surge of fund raising by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato suggests that the struggle to unseat him, a prospect tempting enough to lure five Democrats into the field, may be costly, bitter and arduous.
A year ago the two-term Republican was scented by scandal and viewed as vulnerable.
But since the Senate Ethics Committee voted last summer not to censure him on allegations about conflicts of interest, Mr.
D'Amato has raised an additional $1 million.
He has raised nearly as much money as all his Democratic opponents combined, according to financial reports filed on Friday.


Mademoiselle Is Seeking a Fashionable New Look
After 57 years of being known for its short stories, Mademoiselle is giving up fiction for fashion.
Fiction does not bring in advertising, of course, and in these highly competitive times, wooing advertisers is the name of the game.
So, beginning with its April issue, Mademoiselle is turning itself into a fashion magazine for women in their 20's who are too old for Seventeen and too young -- or, too poor -- for Vogue.


Time's Up for Joe Doherty
After dodging deportation for a decade, Joseph Doherty has lost his final round in U.S. courts and must now leave, probably to serve his life sentence for murdering a British soldier.
His case and the law have taken many odd turns but the result, in a controversy marked by rough justice, is roughly just.
Mr.
Doherty, a member of the Irish Republican Army, has been portrayed as a romantic revolutionary.
New York City gave his name to a street corner near the Federal lockup where he was taken after he was found tending bar in Manhattan.
But he remains a fugitive from a murder verdict based on an open and shut case.
The Justice Department has been right to seek his deportation and reject his pleas for political asylum.


CHRONICLE
Another notable birthday this week is that of JAMES A. MICHENER, the author, who turns 85 today.
On Wednesday his publisher, Random House, will give a black tie dinner for 130 guests, including WALTER CRONKITE and STAN MUSIAL, at the Pierpont Morgan Library.
"I am amazed and delighted that I will see old friends and happy that Random House is taking the trouble to put this together," Mr.
Michener said.
Mr.
Michener, known for his comprehensive books on various parts of the world, among them Hawaii, the Middle East, Spain, Afghanistan, South Africa and Poland, is planning a trip to Antarctica later this month.
Does that mean a book on Antarctica is in the works?
"No," he said vehemently.
"I only write about places where I've been for a long time. I'm going there because it's the only place I haven't been and if I don't go now I will probably never make it. This trip will complete my obligation to see all the oceans of the world."


New Young Concert Artists
Three new memberships in Young Concert Artists have been announced by the director of the organization, Susan Wadsworth.
The new members are Kyoko Saito, a soprano; Christopheren Nomura, a baritone, and the St.
Lawrence String Quartet (Geoff Nuttall and Barry Shiffman, violinists; Lesley Robertson, violist, and Marina Hoover, cellist).
They will make their New York debuts next season at the 92d Street Y under the auspices of Young Concert Artists, a nonprofit organization that promotes the careers of young musicians.


Child-Support Collectors Fill Legal Gap
Michelle Glappa has made 10 trips to court in as many years in a largely unsuccessful effort to force her former husband to keep up support payments for their two children.
So when the first for-profit child-support collection agency in the state opened recently, Ms.
Glappa was ready to sign up.
"I'd have to hire private investigators to find him, wait for months to go to court to get an assignment of his wages, and he'd just quit his job and skip," said Ms.
Glappa, an accountant living in Princeton.


Sizing Up the Long-Bond Auction
After three months of guesswork in the credit markets over the size of the Treasury's next sale of 30-year bonds, the immediate question may be answered this week.
But the debate on the subject will no doubt continue among traders and Washington officials.
Recent comments from Washington indicate that on Wednesday, when the Treasury announces the size of its quarterly refunding auctions scheduled for next week, the amount of 30-year bonds will probably be reduced.


Kathrine Robinson Everett, 98; Lawyer Who Practiced 70 Years
Kathrine Robinson Everett, one of the nation's oldest and longest-practicing lawyers when she retired a year ago at the age of 97 after a 70-year career, died Tuesday at her home in Durham, N.C.
She was 98 years old.
Her family said she died of heart failure.


Ms. Einbinder Weds
Madelin F. Einbinder and John J. Foti Jr., assistant prosecutors for Ocean County, N.J., were married yesterday at the Manor in West Orange, N.J., by Judge Peter J. Giovine of Ocean County Superior Court.
Mrs.
Foti, 29 years old, is a supervising assistant prosecutor in the Toms River, N.J., prosecutor's office, where Mr.
Foti is a trial team leader.
She graduated from Smith College and has a law degree from Seton Hall University.
Her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Jason Einbinder, live in Lincroft, N.J.
Mr.
Foti, 42, graduated from Boston College and has a law degree from Fordham University.
His parents live in Fair Lawn, N.J.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Trapped in a Spotlight, Hillary Clinton Uses It
Hillary Clinton called it "an incredible week." Roller coasters are also incredible, and not always in a good way.
But Mrs.
Clinton, whose chance to go with her husband, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, to the White House has strayed perilously close to derailment since a supermarket tabloid published reports that Mr.
Clinton had cheated on her for 12 years, has decided that the harsh spotlight might yet be turned to her benefit.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A COSTLY SENATE RACE
Last year the scent of scandal surrounding Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, a Republican, lured four New York Democrats to run against him.
Since then he has raised another $1 million, a sign that the struggle to unseat him will be costly and bitter.
Four of the Democrats who have announced their candidacies say they have raised $7 million so far.
Mr.
D'Amato says he has $3.1 million cash on hand.
A1.
FROM SCHOOLS TO HOUSING
Banned from school construction work because of suspected ties to organized crime, Hi-Tech Mechanical Inc. of Queens is about to land $5.8 million in new contracts with the city's Housing Authority.
The director of Mayor David N. Dinkins's Office of Contracts says the city has no power to overrule contract awards by independent public agencies like the Housing Authority.
The School Construction Authority says Hi-Tech was the "alter ego" of Arc Plumbing and Heating, which employed John Gotti as a salesman until it went out of business in 1986.
B3.
LOOKING INTO WELFARE DEPENDENCY
Today, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's subcommittee on family policy will examine welfare rules imposed recently by New Jersey and other states trying to balance middle-class demands for fairness with the needs of the poor.
New figures raise questions about some proposed solutions.
Metro Matters, B3.
ACTING PRESIDENT FOR BROOKLYN COLLEGE
Dr.
James N. Loughran, a 51-year-old Jesuit priest and former president of Loyola Marymount University in Los Angeles, becomes the acting president of Brooklyn College today.
He is expected to serve only for the rest of the school year while a permanent replacement is sought.
B3.
THE YEAR OF THE MONKEY, EARLY
The Chinese New Year does not begin until midnight tonight, but it started yesterday for 100 children at the Henry Street Settlement.
Sue Chin, who was born in China and now lives in Chinatown, expects to keep her children home from school tomorrow for a family celebration combining the best of the old traditions, like watching the dragons and lions dance in the streets of Chinatown, with the best of the new -- a family screening of the animated Disney film "Beauty and the Beast." B3. 2 CHILDREN SLAIN IN QUEENS
Two young girls were shot to death and a 38-year-old woman was critically injured when she was shot and then jumped from a third-floor attic window of a house in Queens as she tried to escape last night in what appeared to be an attempted robbery.
B3.
REGION  NO HOUSING IN NEWARK
It has been 10 months since Newark officials broke ground for a $110 million construction program to build new 100 town houses for low-income people.
The developer never secured financing, construction is behind schedule and the groundbreaking has become another reminder of the Newark Housing Authority's inability to shelter the poor.
A1.
SALES TAX: 6 PERCENT, NOT 7?
Two weeks after taking control of the New Jersey Legislature, Republicans plan to propose a sales tax rollback, to 6 percent from 7 percent.
Their other big target is health benefits for public employees, which State Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco said might exceed $600 million in the next fiscal year.
B6.
ONE DRIVER, ARRESTED TWICE
A 43-year-old Long Island man was arrested twice during a 19-hour period on Saturday on charges of driving while intoxicated.
Clarence Scales, also known as Clarence Walker, was arrested the second time after a head-on collision that killed a 31-year-old woman.
The police said the accident occurred a block from where he had been arrested 12 hours before.
B6.
A STATE BIAS-CRIMES UNIT
New Jersey, which has pioneered efforts to combat hate crimes, will establish the nation's first state bias-crimes unit today.
B6.
Widows of police officers come together in grief. Nassau County Journal, B6.
The Traffic Map B4
Neediest Cases B2


Yeltsin Is Annoyed, and U.S. Is Puzzled
Bush Administration officials said today that the meeting between President Bush and the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, on Saturday had put ties between their nations "on a new plane" and had set the stage for a visit to Moscow this month by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.
At the same time, they expressed some confusion over biting remarks about foreign support for Russia that Mr.
Yeltsin made Saturday evening in Canada, only hours after completing talks with Mr.
Bush at Camp David.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
President Bush plans to finance his health insurance proposal, aimed at helping 90 million Americans buy coverage with new tax credits and tax deductions, mainly by slowing the growth of health programs like Medicare and Medicaid, Administration officials and members of Congress said.
The plan is to be introduced in a speech in Cleveland on Thursday.  [ Page A1. ]
Economists say that if the $50 billion in military spending cuts Bush proposed is used to increase growth, the short-term pain would be outweighed by long-term gain.  [ D3. ]


Dance in Review
Twyla Tharp and Dancers  City Center


Waiting for a Red Envelope To Greet Year of the Monkey
The Chinese New Year does not begin until midnight tonight, but do not try telling that to the 100 or so children representing a variety of cultures who gathered yesterday afternoon in a small theater on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.
For them, the festivities started a little early, as, among other things, they painted their faces with bright colors, pocketed small red envelopes filled with silver dollars and eagerly shook hands with a 10-foot-tall orange foam monkey, the symbol of the year at hand.


Angry Tenor Says He Was Snubbed by Olympics
When Luciano Pavarotti, Placido Domingo and Jose Carreras joined voices in Rome's open-air Caracalla Theater on the eve of the 1990 World Cup soccer final, another well-known tenor, Alfredo Kraus, sniffed at the publicity that described it as "the concert of the century."
"What concert?" he asked.
"What century? I don't think I offend anyone in saying that the concert was more of a show of easy music for an easy public, a festive public that goes to a show to enjoy itself and may even be eating a sandwich while doing so."


Dance in Review
Twyla Tharp and Dancers
City Center 131 West 55th Street Through Sunday


To Bundle Up or Not to Bundle Up, That Was the Question


Islanders Get Set for Road With Some Home Cooking
Perhaps the Islanders won't duplicate the Rangers' recent road trip from heaven, but they headed out of town tonight with optimism after a satisfying weekend at home.
A 6-3 victory over Calgary at the Coliseum gave them 3 of a possible 4 points this weekend and left them 12 points behind Pittsburgh in the chase for the fourth and final playoff berth in the Patrick Division.
Derek King, the team's leading goal-scorer, continued the best season of his five-year career by scoring the game-winner in the third period, breaking a 3-3 tie.


Woman Knows How to Pick as Fight
When JAMES TONEY, the International Boxing Federation middleweight champion, fights DAVE TIBERI Saturday in Atlantic City, you won't find JACKIE KELLEN in the audience.
Rather she will be in the champion's corner, perhaps whispering advice between rounds.
Kellen belongs there because she is Toney's manager.


Notes From Tyson Trial: Many Say It Ain't So
Mike Tyson walks through the lobby of the City-County Building each day as if he were the world heavyweight champion entering the ring, with people cheering, applauding and reaching out to touch him.
"We know you didn't do it!" they yell as he makes his way to the second-floor courtroom where he is on trial on charges of raping a woman last July, a trial that continues Monday.


Life Goes On for Slain Officer's Family


Recession Affecting Theaters Off Broadway
A new study of the recession's effects on theater Off Broadway and Off Off Broadway indicates that companies have been forced to cut back on productions, curtail audience-building educational programs, reduce staff and slash outreach programs in hospitals, community centers and homes for the elderly.
Nevertheless, while budgets have been cut and the number of productions is down, attendance and ticket sales have risen, according to experts on Off Broadway.
And a significant number of productions by Off Broadway companies in the last year have achieved major success with critics and audiences, underscoring the continuing strength of Off Broadway as a creative center of theater in New York City.


CHRONICLE
What better way for JEAN-PIERRE RAMPAL to celebrate his 70th birthday than to perform with his old friends, ISAAC STERN and MSTISLAV ROSTROPOVICH?
"For a musician, the normal way to celebrate a birthday is with a concert," the renowned flutist said recently, explaining why he would mark the occasion tonight rather than on his actual birth date, Jan. 7.
"I wanted to play a concert with my friends Stern and Rostropovich. We have never played together in New York before, but you can't make a coincidence with dates," he said noting that this was the closest date all three were available.
So this evening they will play Mozart, Haydn, Handel and other composers in a chamber music concert in Avery Fisher Hall.
Afterward there will be a party at the French consulate, where Mr.
Rampal will be toasted by 120 guests, including BENOIT D'ABOUVILLE, consul general of France, DEBORAH BORDA, managing director of the New York Philharmonic, JUDITH ARRON, executive director of Carnegie Hall, ANNIE COHEN-SOLAL, cultural counselor at the French consulate in New York, JACQUELINE KENNEDY ONASSIS and MAURICE TEMPELSMAN.
Mr.
Rostropovich will be among those to speak, but the other day he was still mulling over what to say.
"There are so many positive sides in his personality I don't know which side I will illuminate," he said.
"I have known him for 55 years, and each day, each hour, we become more and more close friends. He is like a brother."


Books of The Times; Growing Up Burdened By an Old World's Past
Unto the Sons  By Gay Talese  635 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Profit Shown By Dynamics
The General Dynamics Corporation says it earned $166 million in the fourth quarter, in contrast to a loss of $530 million a year earlier, when it took $567 million in restructuring charges.
Earnings in the quarter amounted to $3.95 a share.
Sales slipped 2.9 percent, to $2.33 billion, from $2.40 billion in the quarter in 1990.


Keeping the Olympics in Sharp Focus
It may be a little late but those Winter Olympic athletes who suspect something is wrong with their eyes can have their eyes examined at the Olympic Vision Center, which Bausch &amp; Lomb will open Saturday in Albertville, France.


A Jawbone Could Smite Ideas About Prehumans
In a discovery that could upset ideas of prehuman migrations through the world, scientists have found a jawbone in the former Soviet republic of Georgia suggesting that some human ancestors may have left Africa several hundred thousand years earlier than now thought.
The well-preserved jawbone, possibly as old as 1.6 million years, has been identified as the remains of Homo erectus, the species that immediately preceded Homo sapiens.
If the date is confirmed by further study, this would be the first firm evidence that human ancestors spread out of Africa earlier than one million years ago, which would raise perplexing questions about current theories of human origins.


Coming Back; Courage on Mental Health
The Harlem Valley Psychiatric Center's gloomy cellblocks loom up off Route 22, their ornate masonry and narrowly paneled windows suggesting a 1940's horror movie more than modern mental health practice.
The hospital is an embarrassing anachronism, kept alive by crude special-interest politics.
But now the extreme pressures of Albany's new austerity may finally succeed in closing it down, along with other mental hospitals around the state.
That's welcome news -- and it would be all the more welcome if accompanied by guarantees that the savings from such closures would be used to help the mentally ill who now clog city streets.


We Need to Increase, Not Decrease, Savings
To the Editor:
"Open Up the I.R.A.'s" by John D. Sicher (Op-Ed, Jan. 17), arguing that Americans should be allowed to tap into their individual retirement accounts, shows the same glaring myopia demonstrated by the debt architects of the 1980's.
The way out of this recession is not to consume money saved for retirement in the future; it is to invest in and build that future.


Warren Panel Findings Should Stir Outrage
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis's Jan. 9 column is only one in a series of attacks in The Times on me and the movie "J.F.K." and, in fact, on anything that questions the Warren Commission's findings on the assassination of President Kennedy.
New York Times writers have done no investigation of their own; why do they continue to defend tooth and nail the commission's findings more than a decade after the House Select Committee on Assassinations sharply criticized and documented the deficiencies in the commission's investigation?


Arrested 2d Time, Man Is Charged in Fatal Crash
A 43-year-old Long Island man was arrested twice during a 19-hour period on Saturday on charges of driving while intoxicated, the police said -- the second time after a head-on collision in which a 31-year-old woman was killed.
The suspect, Clarence Scales, also known as Clarence Walker, of West Babylon, was driving along Straight Path road in Wyandanch about 9:30 P.M. on Saturday when his car crossed the median and crashed into an oncoming car, said Officer Peter Kelly, a spokesman for the Suffolk County Police Department.
The driver of the second car, Judy Ann Lynaugh, also of West Babylon, was taken to Good Samaritan Hospital in West Islip, where she was pronounced dead a short time later.


Rangers Return as Road Hogs
After spending almost two weeks on the road and traveling back from Minnesota to New York in the early hours of the morning, Roger Neilson of the Rangers did what any reasonable coach would have done yesterday.
He got up early and went back to work before noon.
He viewed videotape and read scouting reports.
He answered the telephone in the team's headquarters.
Had the team practiced, he might have driven the Zamboni to resurface the ice.
When a team is as hot as the Rangers, work is play.
And who wants to stop?


Plans to Repatriate Haitians Are Delayed


HAITI GETS DELAY IN EXILES' RETURN
Plans to begin sending thousands of Haitian boat people home from the crowded refugee camps at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, were delayed for 24 hours today, in what diplomats and relief experts said was an effort to give the Haitian authorities more time to prepare for the refugees' return.
The delay meant that two boats carrying the first 400 returnees would not be able to dock until Monday.
The process began after unusual judicial and diplomatic maneuvers succeeded in ifting an injunction barring the repatriations.


Market Place; Insurance Stocks: No Quick Profits
WHILE the stock prices of property-and-casualty insurers rose sharply in the fourth quarter, most insurance analysts remain skeptical.
Some think insurers will benefit from lower interest rates, but others say that property-and-casualty insurers continue to be plagued by weak prices for policies.
While most property-and-casualty stocks should do well over the long haul, producing double-digit returns in each of the next two years, an investor who buys the stocks now on the hope of turning a quick trading profit risks losing money.


Anger, Assumptions and the Rush to Limit Welfare
"WHEN a lot of people are out of work," President Warren Harding opined in 1921, "unemployment results."
Not until a quarter-century later, though, did the Federal Government begin a meaningful measurement of joblessness.
Last week, more than a half-century after the Social Security Act was signed, the Senate passed Daniel Patrick Moynihan's bill to belatedly apply the same scrutiny to welfare dependency.


Colombia Rights Aide Dies in Wave of Killing
The secretary of an outspoken human rights advocate was shot and killed on Wednesday in the latest of about 40 slayings last month in a town north of Bogota where citizens have long been caught in conflicts involving rebels, the armed forces, right-wing paramilitary groups and drug traffickers.
Blanca Varelo de Duran was shot in the face by two men on a motorcycle a day after The New York Times published an article on its Op-Ed page by her boss, Jorge Gomez Lizarazo, the president of the Regional Committee for the Defense of Human Rights.
She was killed as she left the group's headquarters in Barrancabermeja, 150 miles north of Bogota.


Knick Defense Decides to Take Sunday Off
In their afternoon shootout with the Golden State Warriors yesterday, the Knicks could not keep pace.
It was the kind of open-court game the Warriors love, and exactly the kind of game New York wanted to avoid.
Tim Hardaway, the Warriors' extraordinary point guard, spun past defenders like a top with sneakers on.
Then, in the fourth quarter, the Warriors dissected the Knicks' defense with crisp passes and pinpoint shots.


While Fear of Big War Fades, Military Plans for Little Ones
On a bleak, cold hillside one January afternoon, a class of future Army tank commanders huddled on a set of bleachers as Col.
John Sylvester, one of the heroes of the Persian Gulf war, explained why the breakup of the Soviet Union would have no effect on their careers.
A towering Daniel Boone figure with muddy boots and a booming voice, Colonel Sylvester led the Tiger Brigade of the Second Armored Division of M1-A1 tanks against Kuwait International Airport a year ago.
Now, as warrior-teacher, he was telling these young captains and lieutenants that even with the cold war's end they might still find themselves in a war someday.


Brooklyn College Chooses Jesuit Priest As Acting President
Dr.
James N. Loughran, a 51-year-old Jesuit priest and former president of Loyola Marymount University in Los Angeles, will become the acting president of Brooklyn College today, temporarily replacing Dr.
Robert L. Hess, who died last month after 13 years as head of one of the flagship schools of the City University of New York.
Dr.
Loughran, who is vice president of the Association of Jesuit Colleges and Universities, was selected by City University's governing body, the 17-member Board of Higher Education, last Monday and is expected to serve only for the remainder of the school year, pending a search for a permanent replacement.


A Spirited Sweep for U.S. Team
He isn't a character out of Dickens, but he does seem to be the ghost of Davis Cup past, present and future.
And today John McEnroe, who was Saturday's hero, rested on the sideline of the Mauna Lani Racquet Club as his younger compatriots, Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi, wrapped up a 5-0 first-round sweep of Argentina at this tropical playground.
"I want to win the cup again as a player," said McEnroe, who led the United States team to titles in 1979, 1981 and 1982 and also wants to coach it in the not-so-distant future.


U.S. Trade Journals Go Abroad for New Growth
Following in the footsteps of American general-interest magazines, publishers of American trade and specialty journals are scrambling to expand abroad.
Driven by the recession at home and the perception of greater opportunities overseas, they are pursuing different strategies.
The Cahners Publishing Company, the industry leader in the United States and a unit of Reed International P.L.C. of Britain, hopes to make global publications out of about 20 of its American journals.
Terrence M. McDermott, president of Cahners, expects their circulation in Europe and Asia to exceed 550,000 within five years, up from about 200,000 now.
By comparison, the Cahners trade journals now have an American circulation of about four million.


Mr. Bush and New Jersey's Welfare
President Bush sounded alternately demagogic and enlightened when he commented on welfare reform in his State of the Union Message.
The demagogic Mr.
Bush first complained about welfare recipients who make "a life style" of the dole.
He ignored the fact that the vast majority of people stay on the rolls only briefly, to get through tough times like these.


CHRONICLE
The daughter of the talk-show host SALLY JESSY RAPHAEL was found dead early yesterday morning in her mother's bed-and-breakfast inn in Pennsylvania, just three weeks after Ms.
Raphael's son Jason (J.J.) Soderlund was seriously injured in an automobile crash.
Ms.
Raphael's daughter Allison Vladimir was found dead in bed at the Isaac Stover House in Tinicum Township, the Bucks County District Attorney, Alan Rubenstein, told The Associated Press.
The house facing the Delaware River is owned by Ms.
Raphael, the host of the syndicated show "Sally Jessy Raphael." Erwinna is about 10 miles north of the art colony of New Hope.
Ms.
Vladimir, 33 years old, of White Plains, was declared dead on arrival at Doylestown Hospital, Mr.
Rubenstein said.
State police in Dublin said they were investigating the death but gave no additional details yesterday morning.
Officials said there were no signs of foul play, nor did it seem likely that Ms.
Vladimir had overdosed on medication she took to relieve back pain.
Dr.
Thomas J. Rosko, the county coroner, said the autopsy did not show any apparent heart damage.
He said he would learn more from further toxicologic tests.
"Suicide is always a possibility in cases like this," Dr.
Rosko said.
"But I don't have any evidence of that. I would say it is likely to be due to natural causes."
Ms.
Vladimir was one of two daughters Ms.
Raphael had with her former husband, Andrew Vladimir, an advertising executive.
Ms.
Raphael is now married to Karl Soderlund, a former television producer.
A spokeswoman for Ms.
Raphael said that she was unavailable for comment but that a statement would be issued today.
On Jan. 11, Mr.
Soderlund, the youngest of Ms.
Raphael's eight children, was in a near-fatal car accident about 60 miles north of New York.
Mr.
Soderlund, 19, regained consciousness after six days and is still hospitalized with leg, rib and facial injuries.


INSIDE
Taped-Beating Trial to Start
The trial of four Los Angeles Police officers in the videotaped beating of a black motorist is expected to begin this week.
Page A10.
Irving Kaufman Dies at 81
The judge who sentenced the Rosenbergs and wrote landmark decisions on the First Amendment and civil rights, died in Manhattan.
Page D10.
Human Ancestor Adrift?
Scientists have found a jawbone that suggests that protohumans may have left Africa hundreds of thousands of years earlier than thought.
Page B7.
Credit-Card Change in N.Y.
Passage is expected of new state laws that would keep banking jobs in New York but would increase credit costs to late-paying consumers.
Page D1.
Author Meets Subject
Norman Mailer and the Central Intelligence Agency finally got a close look at each other.
Page A10.
Bert Parks, 77, Is Dead
Bert Parks, whose serenade told 25 Miss Americas they had really won, dies in California.
Page D11.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Sam Horn, first baseman, on a one-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Fired Mike Schuler, coach. Named Mack Calvin interim coach.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; Libel Threat Is Increasing Even for Small Publications
ABOUT three times each semester, student editors at The Daily Pennsylvanian, the 14,000-circulation newspaper of the University of Pennsylvania, call their libel lawyer about how to get something prickly into print without risking economic ruin in a libel suit.
For Lee Levine, the lawyer they call at Ross, Dixon &amp; Masback in Washington, the most galling aspect of counseling such clients is their tendency to view him with suspicion if not hostility.


Delays Paralyze Newark's Efforts to House Poor
In a ramshackle area of wood-frame houses in the Central Ward here, officials held a ground breaking last April that they hailed as the start of a new era for Newark's poorest residents.
But there was more to it: The 100 town houses were to be a new start for the Newark Housing Authority, which had become notorious for failing to build or maintain housing even when it had money to do both.
The ceremony would begin a $110 million construction program -- as ambitious as any in public housing -- that would replace 11 deteriorated high-rise buildings with scattered two- and three-story houses.


Essay; Cuomo Vs. Clinton
Just when Bill Clinton thought he was emerging from the mire of betray-for-pay journalism last week, Mario Cuomo let him have it -- chop, chop, chop -- right in the back of the neck.
It happened on CNN's "Larry King Live," and it was a masterly attempt to destroy a candidacy.
Forget the unrequited-love baloney from the woman giving "floozy" a bad name; in sound bites from Gennifer's Greatest Hits, she derogated Governor Cuomo, got a placating Governor Clinton to half-agree, and thereby breathed new life into the New Yorker's flirtation with the Democratic nomination.


The City Council May Be New, but the Old Politics Still Rule It
To the Editor:
Peter Vallone, Speaker of the New York City Council, recently provided a gross example of old-fashioned political power that would have brought a smile of recognition to the face of Boss William Marcy Tweed.
By bartering committee positions to those who voted his way, he let new City Council members know that the Council would be run like a newly created legislature in a third-world country.


30 Are Hurt as Strong Quake Shakes a Snowbound Tokyo
After the strongest earthquake in six years shook buildings and jolted residents awake in the early morning, the police in Tokyo reported today that only about 30 people had been injured and that the metropolitan area had suffered only minor damage.
Tokyo residents seemed more concerned today with digging out from another blast of nature, a storm that dumped nearly 7 inches of snow Friday night and Saturday, clogging roads, disrupting trains and air traffic and cutting off electricity briefly to 140,000 homes.


Bridge
It is widely believed that that a 4-4 trump fit is superior to 5-3 or other fits.
That is sometimes true, but in numerous hands it is not.
On some hands it can be a close decision, as on the diagramed deal.
It was played in an informal home team game, and reported by Steve DeVico of Manhattan.
After West had made a weak jump to three clubs, one would expect North to make a negative double.
He chose to blast directly to six diamonds, thus avoiding the shaky 4-4 spade fit.
The heart nine was led, and dummy's ten won when East clung to his king.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about demonstrators outside the Uni ted Nations referred incorrectly to Punjab state in India.
The term used, Khalistan, is a name that Sikh separatists would give to an independent Sikh homeland in the region if one were created.


Officers Go on Trial Today In Beating of Black Driver
Nearly a year after they were caught on videotape clubbing and kicking a black motorist, four white police officers go on trial this week in a case that renews the painful question whether beatings and racial prejudice are common behavior within the Los Angeles Police Department.
The videotape shocked national television audiences, raised a political storm here and led to demands for reforms in the Los Angeles Police Department and to an examination of police misconduct in other cities around the country.


Credit Card Legislation Up for Vote
New York legislators are expected today to approve changes in the state's credit card laws that would encourage New York banks to keep more jobs in the state but would raise the cost of credit cards to consumers who pay their bills late.
The legislation would eliminate the 10-day delay period before banks can charge a penalty fee on past-due card payments and would make it easier for New York banks to offer cards with a variable interest rate.


Battling Poverty's Ills Each Day, They Also Give to Neediest
Donors to the New York Times Neediest Cases Fund supply the ammunition needed by seven charities to battle poverty and illness.
But the nurses, teachers and social workers fighting that war have also sent donations, along with dispatches from the front lines describing the increasing needs of New York's poor, sick and disabled.
"In 17 years of working in public-funded employment and training projects, I have never witnessed such a severe need for basic social support, not to mention economic assistance," wrote Beverly O'Donnell of Brooklyn, who gave $50.


Plan Expected To Widen Sale Of City Bonds
When security guards assigned to the New York City Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, asked her last year how they could buy the city's bonds, it served as a reminder that the banks and Wall Street firms that sell the bonds were not reaching multitudes of small investors.
Today, after years of talk, the city is expected to announce a new program to sell tax-exempt bonds at prices as low as $1,200 for a $5,000 bond due in 20 years, far less than the $25,000 minimum purchase at most securities firms.
About $50 million of the city's $750 million bond sale in early March will be earmarked for small investors and sold through a special group of firms that have agreed not to charge fees to those buyers.


First State Unit for Bias Crimes Is Being Established in Trenton
New Jersey, which has pioneered efforts to combat hate crimes, will establish today the first state bias-crimes unit in the nation.
It will emphasize education: education of youths to prevent such crimes and education of the police in investigating them.
The new unit, called the Bias Crime and Community Relations Office will be part of the State Attorney General's office in Trenton and will focus on working with disaffected youngsters who commit many of the hate-inspired attacks and vandalism that can terrorize and anger entire communities.


RESULTS PLUS
SKIING  Victory for Norwegian  Didrik Marksten of Norway leaped into the pre-Olympic spotlight by winning yesterday's World Cup giant slalom, beating Alberto Tomba of Italy in St.
Gervais, France.
Marksten, 20 years old, whose previous best in a World Cup race was sixth, started 39th in the first run and finished third.
He was runner-up in the second run and wound up timed in 2 minutes 43.32 seconds.
Tomba, winner of two giant slaloms this season, led after the first run and finished in a time of 2:43.59.
It was the final World Cup event before the Winter Olympics in Albertville, France. (AP) A First for Austrian: Monika Maierhofer of Austria won her first World Cup slalom, finishing first in Grindelwald, Switzerland.
Maierhofer, 25, who finished second in eight slaloms since 1987, won the final women's race before the Olympics with a time of 1 minute 13.99 seconds for the two runs.
Pernilla Wiberg of Sweden, world champion in the giant slalom, was second in 1:14.46, and Annelise Coberger of New Zealand finished third in 1:14.48.
The top American was Eva Twardokens of Reno, who finished 13th in 1:16.49. (AP) N.H.L.
Flyers Beat Blues  Rod Brind'Amour collected a goal and an assist against his former team as the Flyers defeated the slumping St.
Louis Blues, 5-1, last night in Philadelphia.
The Flyers are 7-1-5 in their last 13 home games, while St.
Louis is 1-4-1 in its last six games.
Philadelphia took a 2-0 lead in the opening period on goals 49 seconds apart.
Dale Kushner scored at 11 minutes 26 seconds when he took a pass from Brind'Amour in the slot and slid the puck past goaltender Curtis Joseph.
Brind'Amour, acquired by the Flyers in a preseason trade, scored his team-leading 19th goal when he broke in on a 2-on-1 with Mark Pederson and scored.
Walker started the final round two strokes behind Coe and Pat Bradley, the co-leaders.
Coe knocked in 40- and 20-foot birdies on the 16th and 18th holes to force the playoff.
But once there, she had a bogey 5 on No. 18.
Walker shot a four-under-par 68 to finish at 279, nine-under for 72 holes.
Daniel shot 70 to finish a stroke behind Walker and Coe, who also carded 70. (AP) The Top Senior: Don Massengale rallied from six shots back with a six-under-par 65 to win the $500,000 Royal Caribbean Classic in Key Biscayne, Fla., Gary Player, who struggled to a final-round 72, finished one stroke back.
Massengale finished at eight-under 205 at the Links. (AP) TENNIS  Navratilova Still at 157  Martina Navratilova's bid for a record 158th tournament title was foiled yesterday in Tokyo by Gabriela Sabatini's stream of pinpoint service returns and passing shots.
In a repeat of last year's final of the Pan Pacific Open tournament, the top-seeded Sabatini beat No. 2 Navratilova, 6-2, 4-6, 6-2.
Sabatini improved her record against Navratilova to 4-14. (AP) YACHTING  France Upsets Italy  France's Ville de Paris held off a tenacious attack by Il Moro di Venezia yesterday and defeated the favored Italian yacht by 24 seconds in Race No. 7 of the America's Cup Challenger Selection Series.
Ville de Paris, skippered by Marc Pajot, powered into the lead after ducking behind Il Moro, skippered by San Francisco-born Paul Cayard, about halfway up the first leg of the eight-leg, 20.03-mile race course.
Il Moro clung to Ville de Paris, engaging the French in fierce tacking duels on each of the three windward legs, and closed the gap to just 5 seconds at the end of the third leg of the race, which lasted 2 hours 16 minutes 21 seconds.
Japan's Nippon downed Spain's Espana 92 by 4:34, completing the course in 2:33:50.
New Zealand and Sweden's Tre Kronor paired off in an unofficial race, with New Zealand winning by 9:57.
The two boats had been scheduled to race the Australian boats, but both Spirit of Australia and Challenge Australia withdrew to begin keel modifications in preparation for Round 2.
New Zealand and Tre Kronor each received a point for their default victories.
Nippon and New Zealand, with 6-1 records, have 6 points each and are tied for first place.
Ville de Paris (5-2) moved into a second-place tie with Il Moro di Venezia, followed by Spirit of Australia (3-4), Espana 92 (2-5) and Tre Kronor (1-6).
Challenge Australia is without a victory. (AP) AUTO RACING  Nissan Endures  An all-Japanese Nissan R91 prototype ran a virtually flawless race on the way to an overpowering record victory yesterday in the Rolex 24 endurance race at Daytona International Speedway in Florida.
The LeMans-style Nissan, co-driven by Masahiro Hasemi, Kazuyoshi Hoshino and Toshio Suzuki, beat the second-place Jaguar XJR-12 by nine laps on the 3.56-mile circuit.
The winning car, giving Nissan its first international 24-hour victory in its first attempt in America's most prestigious road race, covered 762 laps -- 2,712.72 miles -- and averaged 112.897 miles an hour.
The previous record on the current course was 761 laps, 2,709.16 miles and an average of 112.857 m.p.h., set in 1990 by a Jaguar prototype. (AP)


As Republic Flexes, Greeks Tense Up
In this thriving port normally brimming with confidence, Greeks are nervously talking about troubles brewing with their neighbors that could well tear open the oldest and perhaps most troublesome fault line running through the Balkans.
Greeks charge that during Communist rule, southern Yugoslavs usurped an ancient Greek name and rewrote history to suit their politics, and are now promoting nationalist fervor that could unsettle Greece, Albania and Bulgaria.


Republicans in Assembly Seek 6 Percent Sales Tax
Assembly Speaker Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian said today that Assembly Republicans would introduce legislation on Monday to roll back the 7 percent sales tax to 6 percent.
"We're going to drop the bill into the hopper to do that," Mr.
Haytaian said in a telephone interview from his house in Independence.


Premier of China Confers With U.S. Business Leaders
Prime Minister Li Peng of China met with an assortment of American business leaders and others in New York on Saturday, a day after he attended a meeting at the United Nations, and chipped away at the sizable differences of opinion that keep American-Chinese relations wedged apart.
Participants in the meeting said they had seen a new side of Mr.
Li, in what several described as his thoughtful and open-minded response to questions, that countered his reputation as an inflexible hard-liner.
But they added that the gathering was dominated by concerns over human rights, which is the issue, for Chinese leaders, that will not go away.


Aide Says Bush Used Gimmicks
Jack F. Kemp, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, Saturday praised parts of the economic recovery plan presented by President Bush in the State of the Union Message but said others amounted to "gimmicks."
"Its no secret that I've never liked tax credits," Mr.
Kemp said on the "Evans and Novak" interview program on the Cable News Network.
"Basically those are gimmicks."


Pebble Beach Victory A Record for O'Meara
Mark O'Meara won his record fourth A.T.&amp;T.
Pebble Beach National Pro-Am today with a long birdie putt on the 72d hole and a par-saving putt on the first hole of a sudden-death playoff.
O'Meara's victim was the first-round leader, Jeff Sluman, who got himself into the playoff by following the eventual victor's 35-footer on Pebble Beach's famous finishing hole with a tying 18-footer of his own.


Constitutional Test Is Seen In Inquiry on Leak to Press
The Senate's investigation into who leaked information about Prof.
Anita F. Hill's accusation of sexual harassment against Judge Clarence Thomas last fall began as an effort to placate infuriated Republicans, but it is quickly becoming a potential testing ground for serious constitutional issues.
In addition to the issue of whether the special counsel hired by the Senate may question journalists, the Senate may also face questions of whether members of interest groups will be compelled to answer questions about the unauthorized disclosure.


Hoping Freedom Will Ring, U.S. Relaxes Cuba Embargo
Making a rare exception to its economic blockade of the Communist Government of President Fidel Castro, the Bush Administration has granted permission to A.T.&amp;T. to expand telephone service between Cuba and the United States.
But Administration officials say that far from recasting their policy of isolating the Communist Government, they instead intend the move to help stir popular unrest by increasing exposure between Cubans and their more affluent relatives in the United States.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Almanac; Is There Life After New Hampshire?


People
*
Karen Amorelli, president of AC&amp;R Advertising Inc., New York, has resigned.
A successor has not been named.
Executive changes had been expected since October, when parent Saatchi &amp; Saatchi brought the agency under the umbrella of a sibling shop, Backer Spielvogel Bates.


Oarsmen Declare Their Own Cease-fire
When they came to Northeastern University in Boston they were three Yugoslavians.
"Our Yugos," said JACK GRINOLD, the assistant athletic director, about three fine oarsmen for the Huskies: BOJAN JEREMIC, IGOR LASIC and SASA RISTIC.
But civil war changed that.
They are now one Croatian (Lasic) and two Serbians (Jeremic and Ristic), respectively the stroke oar, the No. 7 and the No. 5 in the Northeastern eight, which might turn out to be one of college rowing's best crews this spring.


Even in the Dentists' Chairs, The Topic Is New Mortgages
Fran Doherty, a dental hygienist here, does not normally think much about interest rates.
But after a conversation a few weeks back with a patient who happens to be a mortgage broker, she started considering the windfall she would reap from refinancing her mortgage at a time when rates are the lowest they have been since the 1970's.
"My patient turned me on to it," Ms.
Doherty said.
"I want to get some work done on the house, and I thought, if I can refinance to get a lower rate and use the money to get this work done, it would be great."
Over the last month, millions of homeowners across the country have experienced a similar epiphany.
Suddenly, talk of refinancings, points and appraisals is everywhere, from offices to cocktail parties to supermarket checkout lines.
Busy Time for Lenders
The talk has been accompanied by a record wave of mortgage refinancings, as homeowners seek to trade their higher mortgage rates for loan rates near 8 1/2 percent, saving hundreds or thousands of dollars a month.
Nationally, according to a Mortgage Bankers Association of America survey of 20 large mortgage bankers, the number of refinancing applications has risen fivefold since a year ago and twelvefold since March 1990.
About 1.5 million households saved $3 billion in 1991 by refinancing mortgages.
About three million are expected to refinance this year and save $6 billion.
Since interest rates hit an 18-year low in early January, banks, savings and loans, mortgage banks and other lenders have been swamped with refinancing applications.
And as rates edged up in the last several weeks, the deluge accelerated, with homeowners rushing to lock in rates before they go higher.
"Right now the interest rates are so low, I don't think we're going to see this again for quite some time," said Mark Heydt, who is trying to refinance a mortgage on his second home in Amagansett, N.Y.
Lenders say they cannot answer all their telephone calls, much less process all the requests that are piling up, even though many are working 12-hour days and hiring temporary and permanent workers.
Many frustrated homeowners can confirm the delays.
"People are getting really frustrated," said Michael Petree, the chief financial officer of the Finance West Corporation, a mortgage broker in Los Angeles.
"By the time they've read the news and decided to get off the fence, they can get their application started if they are lucky enough to get through to a loan officer at all. Then the document requirements are very strict, and you've got to wait three to four weeks for an appraisal, and you've got to pay for that."
Other customers are hearing from their lenders -- but hearing bad news: tighter lending regulations make it difficult or impossible for them to qualify, or the declining value of their home requires them to put up more cash as equity if they want a loan at a lower rate.
Interest rates for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage fell during much of last year, and dipped in December to their recent lows of a bit above 8 percent after the Federal Reserve acted aggressively to push down rates to try to stimulate the economy.
The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation reported Friday that the average rate nationwide on a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage was 8.68 percent, up from 8.56 percent in the previous week's survey.
Yet even if rates are not quite the bargain they were a few weeks ago, they are still very enticing to homeowners paying mortgage interest of 10 percent or more.
"Activity seems to have hit its peak right about now, and it may go even higher in the next several weeks as more consumers notice that rates are moving up, and they act to get in before rates go even higher," said Richard W. Peach, the deputy chief economist at the Mortgage Bankers Association.
Substantial Sums at Stake
The refinancing activity generates considerable income for lenders in the short run, but reduces their interest income in the long run and potentially leaves lenders with large portfolios of fixed-rate loans that could turn unprofitable if interest rates move sharply higher and stay there.
For homeowners who can lock in rates significantly below their current mortgages, refinancing can be a substantial windfall, even after the advance payments involved.
Mr.
Peach said that last year the combination of refinancings and the reductions in the rates used to determine the monthly payments of homeowners with adjustable-rate mortgages saved homeowners $10 billion to $15 billion.
This year, that combination of factors will yield an additional $12 billion to $18 billion in savings, an amount that could be a powerful stimulus to consumer spending or to savings.
Tony Podesta, a lobbyist who lives in Washington, bought his home in the Woodley Park section in 1987 and has a $475,000 first mortgage at 10.625 percent and a $125,000 second mortgage at 10.5 percent.
By refinancing , he said, he should be able to wrap the two mortgages together and end up paying just under $5,000 a month, about the same that he is paying now on his first mortgage alone.
His savings: as much as $2,000 a month.
"I don't know what economic conditions will be in the coming year, and reducing my outflow by a couple of thousand dollars a month takes a weight off my heart," Mr.
Podesta said.
"But I'm not planning to renovate my house or buy a new car or a washing machine. My basic mood is that this may be a good time to save or invest rather than go out and consume." Getting Extra Money
Lynne Pampel of Kingston, N.Y., said she was paying 11.3 percent on her $69,000 mortgage but hoped to refinance at about 8.8 percent, saving $148 a month.
"The money I'm saving will help me live better and in a more comfortable style," said Ms.
Pampel, a teacher and single parent of two children.
"Right now I'm living in a hand-to-mouth situation. I have to watch every penny I spend. This will help me out a lot."
John Barrett of Rye Brook, N.Y., said he was refinancing his 10 percent mortgage at 8.25 percent, saving $70,000 over 30 years.
He plans to put the money he saves into a tax-free mutual fund for his 7-month-old son, Christopher.
Mr.
Heydt took out a $200,000 mortgage two years ago at 10.5 percent.
Now he hopes to refinance at 8.75 percent, saving as much as $300 a month over the next 15 years.
But five weeks after submitting his application, Mr.
Heydt is still waiting for his house to be appraised.
The surge in refinancing has been a welcome reversal for many in the real estate business.
Roger J. Park, an appraiser in Corona, Calif., said his business is up 30 percent since October, with 80 percent of the increase accounted for by refinancings.
"It has been ridiculously busy," Mr.
Park said.
"There are days when I feel like I'm the only appraiser in the world."
Lenders report that most borrowers who are refinancing want fixed-rate mortgages, although some are tempted by extremely low initial rates on adjustable loans.
The average rate on mortgages with rates that are adjusted once a year has been about 6 percent recently, according to the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
Of course, borrowers also have to take into account the fees and other costs of refinancing, which typically total 2 percent of the loan amount or more.
Many lenders also charge "points," which is interest paid in advance.
The points can be as much as 4 percent of the amount borrowed.
"There's a belief out there that the rate is 8 percent with no points, and the reality is higher than that," said Lynn Luce, manager of the Federal Way, Wash., branch office of Countrywide Credit, a mortgage broker.
"People are shocked that rates are up so much. By the time we figure out what their interest rate and payment actually is, about 50 percent of the people fall out."
For many people the process of refinancing is one of waiting as patiently as possible and hoping for the best.
Dr.
Gary Salenger, the dentist Ms.
Doherty works for, is pursuing a refinancing of his own.
He has a 15-year mortgage with a balance of $220,000 and an interest rate of 9.75 percent.
He wants to refinance $300,000 at 15 years, using the additional $80,000 to remodel his kitchen and pay off a car loan.
Dr.
Salenger spoke to his banker in December and was quoted a rate of 8.6 percent but has not heard from the bank since.
His home in Malibu, Calif., was appraised three weeks ago -- but he has not heard from the appraiser.
"I haven't done anything about it because we're not really ready to do the kitchen yet," Dr.
Salenger said.
"I'm assuming rates will stay fairly low for quite a while. If they started to go up a lot I probably wouldn't do it. I assume that if they went over 9 percent it probably wouldn't make sense anymore." DECIDING WHEN TO REFINANCE
When is it worthwhile to refinance?
In the past, when homes were generally increasing in value, the test was the "2-2-2" formula.
If borrowers had been in their home at least two years, intended to stay at least two more and refinanced at a rate at least two points lower than their current mortgage rate, refinancing made sense.
That can still be a starting point, but lenders and financial planners say homeowners should calculate how much they will pay in closing costs, fees and points (a point, 1 percent of the amount borrowed, is interest paid in advance).
Then they should calculate how much their monthly mortgage payments will drop after refinancing at a lower rate, and how long it will take before their monthly savings cover the refinancing costs.
Any bank can provide this information.
If a homeowner plans to stay in a home no more than five years and expects it to take three years to recoup the refinancing costs, refinancing might not make financial sense.
Homeowners should also shop carefully and in comparing mortgages should pay particular attention not to the first-year interest rate but to the A.P.R., or annual percentage rate.
The A.P.R. includes the points paid in advance.
Many newspapers print tables in their weekly real estate sections showing mortgages available from local lenders.
HSH Associates, (800) 873-2837, a consulting firm in Butler, N.J., surveys 2,000 lenders around the country and publishes the results.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Mel Hein Transcends All Eras
OVER the telephone three months ago, 82-year-old Mel Hein sounded strong and solid until he was asked about his health.
"I used to be 225 pounds," he said, his voice a little hollow, "but with this stomach cancer, I'm down to 130."


Easing of Trade Barriers Is Urged
Germany and the United States today called for drastic steps to insure a liberalization of world trade as the best means to guarantee growth and encourage market economies in the former Soviet Union.
At an annual gathering here of political and business leaders, known as the World Economic Forum, Economics Minister Jurgen Mollemann of Germany said a summit conference of the Group of Seven industrialized nations should be called next month or in April if the five-year-old world trade talks remain deadlocked.


The Talk of Hollywood; New Films Depicting A Tougher Los Angeles
Remember L.A.?
Woody Allen made fun of its quirkiness, its climate, its health-food fads, its waiters who introduce themselves and virtually inform you that they're your new best friend.
Bette Davis, as a Broadway star in "All About Eve," sneered at her boyfriend, a director, for leaving New York to make a little movie in, of all places, Los Angeles.
For decades, film makers served up Los Angeles with nothing less than condescension, while New York was a metaphor for the cultural upside -- and also the gritty downside -- of life.


Marketing Flu Relief: Old Remedies Repackaged
Drug marketers have found a new promise of comfort to woo millions of Americans suffering with drippy noses and aching bodies to drugstores this winter: "flu relief."
With heavy doses of television advertisements and coupons in Sunday papers, the nation's largest pharmaceutical companies are selling new medicines that they say are specifically designed to suppress flu symptoms.
The ads for these "flu formula" pills, liquids and powders all but guarantee that those afflicted with the virus will sleep snugly beneath down comforters or continue to punch the clock at their jobs.


Critic's Notebook; American Music of the 1980's: Creating in the Absence of Rules
As politicians will tell you, the more parties holding office the harder it is to get things done.
A century ago it was only Brahms against Wagner: the past updated versus the past exploded.
Before them, Bach and Handel, then Mozart and Haydn, had lived in successive one-party regimes.
Composers pursued personal agendas within accepted guidelines.
The rules were bent and broken but there to bend and break.
It was easy to be a bad composer in the Baroque and the Rococo.
Write sequential patterns using universal harmonic formulas and everybody understood.
Why else did the 18th century produce so many manuals on correct procedure?
Endless concerti grossi, serenades and suites -- as ingratiating as they are banal -- came out of this tight little culture, and what would our trips in elevators be without them?


Bacardi Imports Moves to Lintas
Bacardi Imports Inc. in Miami has moved its estimated $20 million account to Lintas New York from McCaffrey &amp; McCall Inc. after a lengthy review.
Lintas bested McCaffrey and two other New York agencies, Ammirati &amp; Puris and Grey Advertising Inc., in the final stages of the review, which began in September.
A print advertising campaign, carrying the theme "Just add Bacardi," will be introduced in May or June issues of national magazines, said F. Stone Roberts, Lintas's president and chief operating officer.


French Government Is Struggling To Limit Damage in Habash Case
Insisting that a "mistake" had been rectified, the French Government struggled today to limit the political damage caused by the crisis that erupted when a radical Palestinian leader was allowed into this country for medical treatment.
The Palestinian, George Habash, leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, was hurriedly flown from Paris to Tunis on Saturday, but French opposition parties continued to exploit the Government's embarrassment by demanding that Cabinet ministers in charge of major departments be dismissed.


Crash-Landing Zone; The Bankruptcy Court for Highfliers
It started out three years ago as the Eastern Airlines Room, a newly renovated area on the fifth floor of the United States Bankruptcy Court in the old Custom House at the southern tip of Manhattan.
With 300,000 creditors competing for pieces of the grounded airline, the collapse of Eastern generated so much paper it needed a room of its own.
But as big business debacles have multiplied in the last few years, the Eastern room has become what court employees now call the Megacase Room.
Reserved for about two dozen of the biggest business blowouts in New York, it is something like a wax museum for corporate nightmares.


Ex-Minister Killed, 6 Hurt in Brooklyn Fire
A retired minister was killed and six people were injured last night when a suspicious fire swept through a brownstone in Brooklyn, the police and fire officials said.
The fire broke out about 6 P.M. in a four-story brownstone at 317 MacDonough Street in Bedford-Stuyvesant and rapidly engulfed the top three floors, trapping three terrified residents on the third floor.


Parts Pact With Japan May Backfire
Since agreeing that Japanese auto makers would sharply increase their purchases of American auto parts, diplomats on both sides of the Pacific have only heightened the confusion over precisely what obligations the auto makers have undertaken.
But automotive executives, economists and other experts are certain of this: Unless American suppliers swiftly adjust to the vastly different priorities set by Japanese car companies, President Bush has shaken hands on an agreement that may hasten the decline of the American parts industry.
"The agreement is going to backfire on the Big Three and the parts manufacturers in a big and dramatic way," predicted Robert B. Reich, the Harvard economist.
He compared the latest measure with Japan's voluntary agreement in 1981 to limit the number of cars it shipped to the United States for a few years.


BUSH HEALTH PLAN WOULD BE FINANCED BY MEDICARE CURB
President Bush's proposal to help 90 million Americans buy health insurance with new tax credits and tax deductions would be financed mainly by curbing the growth of Government health programs like Medicare and Medicaid, Administration officials and members of Congress say.
In a speech on Thursday in Cleveland, Mr.
Bush intends to introduce the proposal, which is intended to help people who have no insurance and those who have difficulty paying for it.


Governments to Begin Talks On Uses of Radio Spectrum
Representatives from about 160 governments begin a monthlong meeting in Spain Monday in an attempt to reach an international agreement on how to make room for new technologies on the crowded radio spectrum.
At stake are radio frequencies for a broad family of new mobile communication services for individual consumers, from low-cost wireless telephones that can be used anywhere on the globe to laptop computers that can send and receive data using satellites.
Also at stake is "digital" radio broadcasting from satellites that promises sound as crisp and clean as that from a compact disk.


Widows of Slain Police Officers Cope With Loss
Twenty-one years ago, Miguel Sirvent, an off-duty rookie police officer, stopped by a hamburger stand in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
Waiting in the car, his bride of three months, Donna Sirvent, heard what she thought were firecrackers and looked through the plate-glass windows to see her husband's arms fly up in the air.
The sound was gunfire, and her husband had been killed. She became a widow at 18.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: From the Sidelines; Hart Says 1992 Race Lacks a Cause
The jagged peaks of the Rocky Mountains offer a dazzling view from the 45th-floor office.
The man behind the desk, an international corporate lawyer, has just returned from Russia, and will soon go back to begin a new project.
And he and his wife have built a new home in the foothills, a beautiful glass-and-log house on 100 acres of wilderness, where deer and elk prance by the living-room windows.
In most ways, it is a life that seems set in a storybook.
And yet, as this season's crop of Presidential candidates chase their ambitions through the snows of New Hampshire, the lawyer, Gary Hart, must ponder what might have been.


North Dakota, Math Country
In his State of the Union Message, the President reaffirmed his commitment to making our country "the world leader in education," adding that to do so, "We must revolutionize America's schools."
He didn't say how. But he asked for help.
And help is at hand!


West Must Help Democracy in Algeria
To the Editor:
Algeria was on the home stretch of a historic shift to the first multiparty democracy in the Arab world.
Now, it is without a president or parliament, ruled by a handful of unelected men (front page, Jan. 13).
No one should be fooled: President Chadli Benjedid was forced out, the electorate betrayed and democracy desecrated.
The Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights also condemned the High Security Council, saying the "brutal and unjustified interruption of the democratic process" was tantamount to a military coup.


Quotation of the Day
"A decade from now, we're going to look a lot like the way we look now. Maybe we'll be a bit leaner, maybe a little poorer, maybe the elbow patches on our tweed jackets will be a little more patched, but essentially we'll be what we are now." -- HERBERT A. SIMON, professor and trustee at Carnegie-Mellon, on the future of American universities.  [ B9:1 ]


Completion Set For Coke Sign
Passers-by in the Times Square area could be excused for thinking that scaffolding is a permanent part of Coca-Cola's spectacular new billboard there.
But the sign, which cost the soft-drink company more than $3 million, is expected to be fully operational in a couple of weeks, the Coca-Cola Company said.
Since the sign was unveiled during a live television commercial on New Year's Eve, workers have been tinkering with its most unusual feature, a fiber-optics display inside a 42-foot-high bottle of Coke.
When that feature works, a giant straw pops up and down as the fiber optics simulate a level of liquid inside the bottle that rises and falls, revealing the bottle's Coke-green color.


Bad Times Force Universities To Rethink What They Are
Tough economic times are forcing so many colleges and universities across the country to cut costs and adjust their ambitions that the shape of higher education may be significantly changed as the 21st century dawns.
In these days of uncertainty, Yale University is planning major cuts to close a projected gap in next year's budget; Columbia University is laying out a strategy to meet deficits that could reach $87 million in 1993, and Stanford University has imposed cuts of up to 13 percent on administrative and academic expenses to trim its budget $43 million over the next two years.
Challenge to Excellence
The cuts at most universities would be so severe that they would reach deep into classrooms and research laboratories, challenging the institutions' commitment to excellence, yet presenting both opportunities as well as obstacles.


Big East Teams Get Taste of Topsy-Turvy
As last weekend neared, this was the way things looked in the Big East Conference:
*Connecticut, the most prominent preseason power behind Seton Hall and St.
John's, looked in great shape with its 7-1 conference record and No. 6 national ranking.


Carleton Shugg, 92, an Innovator In Submarines for Four Decades
Carleton Shugg, an innovator in the early development of submarines in the 1920's who three decades later helped build the first modern nuclear-powered and missile-bearing submarines, died on Jan. 23 at his home in Mystic, Conn.
He was 92 years old.
He died of natural causes after a flu-like illness, his family said.


L.S.U. Overruns Kentucky By 74-53
Louisiana State more than matched Kentucky's outside shooting in the first half, then got the ball inside to Shaquille O'Neal in the second half and beat the Wildcats, 74-53, this afternoon.
O'Neal finished with 20 points, 20 rebounds and 6 blocked shots for L.S.U. (13-4 over all, 6-1 in the Southeastern Conference).
Jamal Mashburn led Kentucky (15-5, 5-3) with 20 points and 11 rebounds.


Israel Eases Army Gunfire Rules
The Israeli Army said today that to combat a wave of shootings of Jewish settlers in the West Bank, it was relaxing the rules under which soldiers are allowed to shoot in threatening situations.
Four settlers have been killed and several wounded in a series of shooting ambushes in the West Bank and Gaza Strip since late October.
The attacks, coinciding with the start of Middle East peace talks, are thought by the army to be the work of radical Palestinian groups opposed to the negotiations.


Foreign Affairs; End U.N. Dipbaloney
With forward-looking rhetoric, world leaders pledged Friday to strengthen the United Nations.
But they acted like egg-handlers when it came to practical moves to overhaul this ill-organized institution and grasp historic opportunity.
Behind the scenes and of immediate concern, President Bush is expected to announce the departure of chief U.N. envoy Thomas Pickering, arguably the best-ever senior U.S. representative to that body -- just when his services are most needed.


Economists Cite Benefits Of Arms Cuts
The military spending cuts that President Bush proposed last week would certainly hurt workers who make submarines in Connecticut and fighter aircraft in California.
But, economists say, if the $50 billion is used instead to increase growth by, say, increasing investment, the short-term pain would be outweighed by the long-term gain.
Lawrence R. Klein, an economist at the University of Pennsylvania and recipient of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science, says this new "peace dividend" can, if not frittered away, raise economic output in the long term in two ways.
One would be to move resources into the civilian sector, making it more competitive.
Another would be to reduce the Federal budget deficit, which would help push down interest rates and spur investment in the private sector.


Review/Television; A Father and His Son In 'The Broken Cord'
For the most part, television movies tend to be dominated by women, their various trials and tribulations painstakingly exploited to capture the kind of younger female audiences coveted by advertisers.
But in two of this week's better efforts, men take center stage.
One, tomorrow night's "Fugitive Among Us," on CBS at 9, is a fairly standard macho exercise exploring the symbiotic ties between a police detective and the escaped convicted rapist who becomes his prey.
The other, "The Broken Cord," tonight at 9 on ABC, actually manages to confront some of television's, and society's, more durable assumptions.


World Economies


Why Economy Isn't Like a Warm Current
To the Editor:
William Safire grasps the essential science in "The Current Event" (column, Jan. 16), on El Nino, the warm Pacific Ocean current, which is being blamed for floods in Texas.
El Nino is a natural rhythm of the climate system, and it is not a calamity for everyone.
In Florida and Georgia, for example, it reduces the likelihood of forest fires.


Mel Hein, Durable 2-Way Player For New York Giants, Dies at 82
Mel Hein, the great center-linebacker who was the iron man and captain of the Giants teams that won seven division titles and two league championships in the 1930's and 1940's, died Friday night at his home in San Clemente, Calif.
He was 82 years old and died of stomach cancer, his family said.
From the time the big all-American from Washington State stepped onto the field in a Giants uniform for the first time in 1931 until he retired at the end of the 1945 season, he was a legend to Giants players, coaches, fans and opponents.
Called the Greatest Center


U.S. Enforces Tuna Embargo
The United States Customs Service has begun to enforce an embargo on imports of yellowfin tuna from 20 countries where processors use fish caught by methods that harm dolphins, the agency has announced.
The action, taken Friday at the direction of the Justice Department and the National Marine Fisheries Service, complies with a Federal court order.
The United States District Court for the Northern District of California had ordered the Government to take actions to halt the importation of tuna that had been harvested by a method that did not protect dolphins.


Dance in Review
Dorothy Jungels Everett Dance Theater  Bessie Schonberg Theater


The Right Name and the Right Game
Bowling Green, Fla., population 2,500, proved to be the right spot to kick off National-Family-Learn-to-Bowl Week.
The National Bowling Council gave away custom-fitted bowling balls, one each, to 600 families who signed up for a festive day last Thursday that included bands, barbecue and strikes on a 35-foot lane set up on the village green.
The mayor, JACKIE GREEN, was one of the first-time bowlers.
"I never knew this could be so much fun," he said.


No Outcry Over Tokens
To the Editor:
When the New York City Transit Authority blithely announced Jan. 2 that after having spent $9 million on the purchase of new subway tokens, it wouldn't be using them for the foreseeable future after all (news article, Jan. 16), I waited to see just how great the public outcry against such blatant waste would be.


'The Residual Role for the Military'
"The opportunity for the Western democracies at present is to establish a vision of a new world order. It's thefirst opportunity of conceiving of such a vision and moving toward it since Roosevelt and Churchill put forth their vfision of a post-World War II world. They were looking to a world in which relations among nations were based on a rule of law and a form of collective security founded on the United Nations. That is possible now.
"I'm not so naive as to believe this post-cold-war world would be without conflict. There have been 125 wars leading to 40 million deaths, largely in the third world, after World War II and before the Gulf War. These were not a function of ideological differences between East and West. They were a function of the age-old causes of war -- boundary disputes, economic conflicts, ethnic tensions.


Signs of Hope for Broadway: 22 Marquees Light Up Again
The season of the darkened marquee is suddenly becoming the season of the booking bonanza.
In the next three months, 22 shows -- nearly as many as opened in the entire 1990-91 season -- will open on Broadway, and producers have been eagerly seeking theaters to accommodate this burst of activity.
The spring lineup is also unusual in that it will bring to Broadway the largest contingent of Hollywood stars to act on the New York stage in years.
Producers are counting on marquee names to attract investors -- and, they fervently hope, audiences -- to salvage a Broadway season that, until now, has been deeply disappointing to producers and plagued by a severe post-holiday audience slump that has been worsening by the week.
At the same time, Off Broadway theaters are cutting back on productions and other programs, a new study has found.  [ Page C11. ]


Fetus Found in Toilet In Manhattan Hotel
A Manhattan hotel employee found a fetus in the toilet of a guest bathroom yesterday morning, the police said.
Initial police reports said the fetus was in its fourth month.
The Medical Examiner's office will look into the case today, said a spokeswoman, Ellen Borakove.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Players; An Aide Helps Adjust the Focus on Brown
Anywhere Edmund G. Brown Jr. appears on the hustings, not far away is his political aide-de-camp, Jacques Barzaghi.
Mr.
Barzaghi has the shaven head and lean look of a Zen revolutionary.
His eyes are always riveted on Mr.
Brown.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Feb.:  MONDAY  General Motors Corp  Source Cap Inc  Xerox Corp  TUESDAY  Cipsco Inc  Emerson Elec Co  General Housewares Corp  Hershey Foods Corp  IES Inds Inc  Interstate Pwr Co  Kansas City Pwr &amp; Light  Learonal Inc  Monarch Mach Tool Co  WEDNESDAY  Airborne Freight  American Business Prods


Treasury Plans Offering of 52-Week Bills
Among the Treasury offerings due this week are the regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today, totaling about $20.8 billion, and an offering of 52-week bills on Thursday to replace $12.5 billion of maturing securities.
On Wednesday, the Federal National Mortgage Association, the Government-affiliated corporation known as Fannie Mae, will offer $500 million of 10-year debentures through its Washington office and a nationwide group of securities dealers.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Albertville 92; CBS Gambling Heavily On Success of Olympics
The world will begin watching the Olympics again this Saturday, but nowhere will the scrutiny be more intense than inside CBS.
CBS desperately needs its Winter Olympics coverage from Albertville, France, to be an unquestioned success -- which means it needs the Games to draw consistently good prime-time ratings for each of the 16 nights that they will fill three hours of network time.


Ms. Kaplan Weds
Alixanne Kaplan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Al Kaplan of Manhasset, L.I., was married yesterday in New York to Michael Anthony Yurch Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Yurch Sr. of Pearl River, N.Y.
The Rev.
James Covington, a Unitarian minister, performed the interdenominational ceremony at the Water Club.
Mrs.
Yurch, 34 years old, graduated from Drexel University.
She is a manager of the Hudson River Club in New York.
Mr.
Yurch, 40, graduated from the State University College at New Paltz, N.Y.
He is the executive vice president of Sherry-Lehmann Inc., a New York wine store.
The previous marriages of the couple ended in divorce.


BAR GROUP RENEWS FEUD WITH QUAYLE
The feud between Vice President Dan Quayle and the American Bar Association, prompted by Mr.
Quayle's assertion last year that lawyers were hampering the country's competitive position, flared anew over the weekend as the bar group gathered here for a meeting.
Both in an "open letter" to the Vice President read Saturday to presidents of state and local bar groups and at a press conference today, the association's president, Talbot S. D'Alemberte of Miami, maintained that the Vice President was seeking to make political hay by lawyer-bashing rather than addressing the serious problems of American justice.


Bobby Bonilla Puts His Bat to Work
Amid the kind of mayhem that can be created only by kids and public relations, Bobby Bonilla, the New York Mets' $29 million man, yesterday gave some of his windfall back to the Bronx schools that set him on his way.
Nearly lost in the considerable hoopla was that his largesse will extend even to his old high school, which he has ignored since its principal forced the resignation of his beloved former baseball coach.


Postal Worker Wounded
A postal worker, carrying $21,000 in cash, was shot and robbed in front of the Classons Point post office in the Bronx yesterday, the police said.
The postal worker had just walked out the front door of the building at 829 Soundview Avenue with a pouch containing the currency when someone approached him from behind, shot him and escaped with the bag, said a police spokesman, Andrew McInnis.
The worker, whose identity was not disclosed by the police, was wounded in the hip and listed in stable condition at Jacobi Hospital.


Why the Body May Waste the Calories From Alcohol
THE so-called Drinking Man's Diet, a treacherous scheme popular in the 1960's that suggested substituting alcohol for sugars and starches to shed unwanted pounds, was based on the puzzling observation that heavy drinkers and alcoholics often lose weight despite intakes of a thousand or more extra alcohol calories each day.
This observation baffled nutritionists, who long believed that every calorie that entered the stomach could eventually turn itself into fat.
Alcohol researchers, too, wondered how so many alcohol calories could be wasted by the metabolic system, which millions of Americans knew to be highly efficient at storing extra calories as fat.


Two Contestants Tell Of Tyson's Behavior
Mike Tyson's defense strategy crystallized today as his lawyers used two prosecution witnesses to describe a man so lewd during his meeting with contestants in the Miss Black America pageant that anyone who went out with him that week had to know he only had one thing on his mind: sex.
Through one of the two witnesses, the defense was able to make another point: When a woman objected to Tyson's conduct, he backed off.


Windows Bear Blame for Bird Carnage
To the Editor:
The widespread, persistent and increasing loss of wild birds (a high estimate of 976 million fatalities) from window collisions (not just at winter feeders, but through the year, particularly during migration) contrasts sharply with the relatively meager losses from such catastrophes as oil spills, pesticides and collisions with vehicles.
You did not go far enough in "Windows Near Bird Feeders Can Pose a Deadly Threat" (Science Times, Dec. 31).


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Penguins Tie Wings  Pittsburgh's new No. 1 line of Bryan Trottier, Mark Recchi and Kevin Stevens combined for four goals as the Penguins rallied twice to tie Detroit, 4-4, last night in Pittsburgh, extending a four-year unbeaten streak against the Red Wings.
Trottier, filling in for the injured Mario Lemieux, and Recchi scored twice apiece as the Penguins moved back into third place in the Patrick Division, one point ahead of New Jersey. (AP) North Stars 4, Maple Leafs 2: Brian Bellows broke a 2-2 second-period tie with his first goal in nine games as Minnesota ended Toronto's winning streak at four games.
Bellows got his 18th at 2 minutes 35 seconds of the middle period as the Stars won for just the second time in seven games.
Jim Johnson scored an empty-net goal to provide the final margin. (AP) HORSE RACING  Federal Funds Wins  Federal Funds, the odds-on favorite in the field of four horses 3 years old and up, pulled away in the final furlong yesterday to win the $31,000 Fenelon purse at Aqueduct.
Federal Funds, carrying 119 pounds and ridden by Jorge Velasquez, finished two lengths ahead of Local Problem, carrying 119 pounds and ridden by Chris Antley.
Few and Far, assigned 122 pounds and ridden by John Velazquez, was 15 lengths farther back.
Dr.
Booth trailed.
Federal Funds covered the mile and a sixteenth on the fast track in 1:462/5 to earn $18,600 for Alfred G. Vanderbilt.
Federal Funds paid $3.60 for $2 to win and $2.20 to place. (AP) TENNIS  Clavet Beats O'Brien  Sixth-seeded Francisco Clavet of Spain beat Alex O'Brien, Stanford's No. 1 player, 6-3, 5-7, 6-3, yesterday in the opening round of the Volvo San Francisco tournament. (AP) Probst Advances: Wiltrud Probst beat her fellow German, Silke Frankl, 6-4, 6-2, yesterday in the only first-round match at the Nokia tournament in Essen, Germany. (AP)


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.50
5.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.86
3.82
5.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.93
3.90
5.94
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.95
6.87
7.67
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.81
7.75
8.04
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.89
8.95
9.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.74
6.72
7.25
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Video; Michael Jackson's Costly New Promotional Clip
With trained animals, two dozen dancers, computerized metamorphoses (so startling in "Terminator 2" but already banal), fancy sets and shots from every angle, it looks as if the price of the nine-minute clip would equal a significant proportion of the $6 million Mr.
Singleton spent to make "Boyz N the Hood." Sony Music, Mr.
Jackson's recording company, would not release budget figures.


Business and Health; All Cost Controls Don't Save Money
ALTHOUGH it is widely accepted that employers can slow their spending on health care by using an approach called managed care, some executives have been surprised to find that they have been spending more than they saved on some more elaborate programs.
Some companies say the cost-control programs work for them.
Others, however, find that they probably do not need a full-blown system of managed care, which may include networks of doctors and hospitals that offer discounted fees, nurses and social workers who sit at telephones and computers reviewing each case, and extra hands to tend paper and electronic files.


New Drug Executive Adds Marketing Skills
Gregory B. Lawless, who recently left the Chiron Corporation as president and chief operating officer, was named president and chief executive of Cygnus Therapeutic Systems Inc.
Based in Redwood City, Calif., Cygnus develops and makes products used to deliver drugs from a skin patch to the blood stream.
Mr.
Lawless, 52 years old, succeeds Gary W. Clearly, Cygnus's founder, who continues as chairman.
Mr.
Clearly said that as Cygnus came closer to gaining approval from the Food and Drug Administration for its first product, a nicotine patch to help people give up smoking, it was time to bring on an executive with experience in marketing pharmaceuticals.
A patch containing Fentanyl, a pain reliever, is next in line for possible approval, perhaps in 1993, he said.


Europe's New Telescopes Rival U.S.'s
SEVEN thousand feet above the desert of northern Chile, stars and galaxies blaze like beacons in the clear night sky, drawing legions of astronomers to this great United States observatory.
But there is an uneasy feeling among many of the scientists here that the salad days of United States astronomy are drawing to a close and that new European supertelescopes are destined to leave American astronomy far behind.
Already the European Southern Observatory, visible from here on the distant ridge line at La Silla, is operating a ground telescope that astronomers regard as the finest in the world.


Robbers Ransack Queens House, Shoot 2 and Kill 2 Young Sisters
Two young sisters, ages 2 and 5, were gunned down in a quiet Queens neighborhood Sunday night, apparently by a band of robbers who ransacked the house for money and jewels, then shot them both in the head to guarantee their silence.
And yesterday, the authorities said they believed that the couple next door -- the children's baby sitter and her husband -- had participated in the crime.
The house at 99-09 211th Street was the fanciest on the block, its inhabitants a mystery in the Queens Village neighborhood.
Only the baby sitter and her husband knew the family behind the wrought-iron window gates and electronic alarms.
And they also knew that the husband was away in prison.


Corrections
A chart yesterday about the results of past New Hampshire Presidential primaries misidentified the 1984 winner.
It was Gary Hart.
His percentage of the vote was listed correctly as 37.3 percent.


Credit Card Bill Passed In Albany
The New York State Legislature passed banking legislation today that would save 1,400 jobs for Long Island but would raise credit card costs to millions of people across the country who pay their bills late.
The legislation allows banks in the state that issue credit cards to impose immediate $10 to $15 penalties for late payments, instead of requiring a 10-day waiting period.
That change should insure that the recently merged Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover will consolidate their credit card operations at a Manufacturers office in Hicksville, L.I.


Youngest Grandmaster Ever Is 15, Ferocious (and Female)
In the rarefied competition of world-class chess, where ego is king and the stress of international tournament and championship play is often crushing, the dominant players have always been men, usually men of some maturity.
Of the world's approximately 350 top-ranked grandmasters, only a few are women.
Moreover, it has long seemed unlikely that anyone would ever surpass the achievement of the great American chess prodigy Bobby Fischer, who joined the ranks of the grandmasters in 1958 at the age of 15.


Washington Journal; In a Museum, a Taste of Homelessness
Not far from where people confront the homeless on the street, the Smithsonian Institution is presenting a museum exhibition intended to explain homelessness.
To enter, all the museum visitor has to do is lie on a morgue drawer.


Patterns
Glimpsing the Peacock
How to explain the new interest in men's wear?
The fall men's showings last week seemed like a whole new ball game.


Quotation of the Day
"I'm personally not that happy with what they've been saying about our workers in Japan, but I do know that if America were to have some sort of protectionism against them, it would kill us." -- RON THORNBERRY, a Puget Sound longshoreman.  [ A16:1. ]


Judge Sets Up New Hurdles for U.S. Plutonium Dump
A Federal District judge in Washington has erected two major impediments to the Department of Energy's plan to open a repository for plutonium bomb wastes in New Mexico, ruling that the dump requires the approval of Congress and the State of New Mexico.
The department has been trying for years to get both Congress and New Mexico to approve the project, the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant, near Carlsbad, N.M.
A major issue has been New Mexico's request for money to improve the roads over which waste-laden trucks would travel to the plant, as well as training for hospital and emergency crews in radiation safety, and oversight by the the Environmental Protection Agency.
Estimates of these costs have run as high as $600 million.


Gas Explosion Causes Fire in Wallington Diner
Gas explosions this afternoon caused a diner here to burst into flames, injuring five firefighters slightly, fire officials said.
The fire, which started about 2:30 P.M., was fed by a crack in a gas main and continued to burn into the night.


Devils Playing Better Against Better Teams
The Devils are searching for an answer to this question: Why do they seem to fail against teams in the league's lower echelon after succeeding against what most people consider the league's elite.
Many of the players don't have an answer.
Two, Bruce Driver and Craig Billington, said the fault surely didn't lie with the coaches.


U.S. Assures Florio on Bid For Welfare
Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey and Assemblyman Wayne R. Bryant today received the first direct assurances from the Bush Administration that it would help clear away Federal obstacles to the state's controversial new welfare plan.
The assurances from President Bush and Budget Director Richard G. Darman during a White House meeting here make it likely that New Jersey's sweeping welfare revision, touted as an example for states across the country, will take effect as scheduled on July 1.


YUGOSLAVS WEIGH MILITARY ACTION
The Yugoslav authorities are considering police measures to overcome opposition to a United Nations peacekeeping plan by local Serbian leaders in rebel-held regions of Croatia, a Serbian member of the Federal Presidency said here today.
"In the event that there is resistance to the implementation of the plan that cannot be stifled by political means, we will break it with state measures," Borisav Jovic, the Serbian member of the Serbian-dominated Presidency, said in an interview.
"The Yugoslav state absolutely stands behind the U.N. plan. We guarantee the security and safety of the U.N. troops."


Wenzel Is Undergoing More Medical Tests
Rutgers Coach BOB WENZEL, who collapsed at home over the weekend, was undergoing medical tests yesterday at St.
Peter's Medical Center in New Brunswick, N.J.
A hospital spokeswoman, EILEEN LAWTON, said doctors had yet to determine what caused Wenzel, who was in stable condition, to black out Sunday.


BACKER OF TALKS WITH P.L.O. RETIRES
Ezer Weizman, the former Israeli Defense Minister and air force commander who became an ardent advocate of peace with the Arabs, announced his retirement from politics today, warning that the Government was leading the country toward war.
An architect of the 1978 Camp David peace accords with Egypt and an outspoken supporter of talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization, Mr.
Weizman said he was leaving public life because he could no longer influence national policy.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
LTV agreed to sell its aerospace and missiles divisions to a new company formed by Lockheed and Martin Marietta.  [ Page D1. ]  Pratt &amp; Whitney appears to be making a comeback, after losing much of the aircraft engine business to G.E.  [ D1. ]
Microsoft's chairman is dismissing the president he selected two years ago.
Michael R. Hallman will be replaced by a three-memberoffice of the president.  [ D1. ]
American Express plans to sell up to 45 percent of its Information Services Corporation in an initial public offering.  [ D1. ]
G.M. raised the dividend on its class E stock and declared a 2-for-1 split.  [ D2. ]  GM Hughes Electronics plans to use its flight-simulator technology to entertain the public.  [ D6. ]
RJR Nabisco had a fourth-quarter profit of $161 million and reported its first annual profit since a 1987 leveraged buyout.  [ D12. ]  Dow Corning's earnings fell 35.3 percent.  [ D12. ]
Capital Cities/ABC's net income fell 34.5 percent.  [ D21. ]  McGraw-Hill had lower earnings for the quarter and the year.  [ D21. ]
Bankers Trust has withdrawn from a tentative agreement under which it would have acquired Integrated Resources.  [ D4. ] The Economy
A White House effort to rally governors behind President Bush's economic plan degenerated into a confrontation.  [ A1. ]
U.S. purchasing managers said the overall economy expanded slowly last month, although business continued to deteriorate for manufacturers.  [ D1. ]  Construction spending declined 0.2 percent in December.
For the year, spending tumbled 9.3 percent.  [ D13. ]
The New York State Legislature passed banking legislation that would save 1,400 jobs for Long Island but would raise credit card costs for millions of people across the country. [ D3. ]
The Justice Department will increase the number of investigators assigned to the health-care industry.  [ A16. ] International
Japan's Prime Minister added his voice to those of Japanese politicians who have found fault with the way Americans work.
Kiichi Miyazawa said that America "may lack a work ethic," and that some of its economic ills resulted from too many college graduates' heading to Wall Street instead of "producing things of value."  [ A1. ]  When one part of the U.S. bashes Japan, the Pacific Northwest winces.
In the last month, the region has seen an outpouring of support for Japan unmatched in modern times.  [ A1. ]
German steel companies agreed to a 6.4 percent pay increase that is expected to set the pace for other wage negotiations.  [ D3. ]
Finnish frontier guards are ready to fend off Russian invaders.
But instead of guarding against tanks and troops, they are watching for smugglers, con men and weary refugees.  [ A7. ] Markets
Bond prices dropped and long-term interest rates rose again, amid market concern that the economy may be recovering.  [ D16. ]
Stocks edged up in trading marked by swift, if moderate, drops and rebounds.
The Dow industrials closed at 3,234.12, up 10.73.  [ D8. ]
The dollar fell against European currencies but rose against the yen.  [ D17. ]  Oat futures prices rose the limit.  [ D17. ] Today's Columns
A cloud behind the silver lining: Fewer companies are cutting or cancelling dividends, and more are raising dividends.
Yet, in the past, such good news has often been followed by falling stock prices.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D1. ]
Some executives have been surprised to find they have been spending more than they saved on elaborate programs to cut health care spending.
Milt Freudenheim: Business and Health.  [ D2. ]
Voters could register complaints about political ads under a program to be introduced today.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D21. ]


Classical Music in Review
Philharmonia Hungarica  Avery Fisher Hall


Accounts
*
John Nuveen &amp; Co., Chicago, to Cramer-Krasselt, Chicago, for a new account that the investment banking firm calls reinvestment marketing, which seeks to sell to existing Nuveen customers other Nuveen services.
Billings are expected to be $2 million to $3 million. *
Home Quarters Warehouse Inc., Virginia Beach, Va., to Saffer U.S.A., Toronto, after a review for the retail chain's account.
Neither billings nor the names of agencies under consideration were disclosed, but Earle Palmer Brown, Norfolk, Va., was the incumbent.


Vincent Facing a Week of Critical Decisions
The furies have continued without a let-up through Fay Vincent's tenure as the commissioner of major league baseball.
Debates have extended long after his decisions about whether to resume the 1989 World Series after an earthquake, whether to ban the Yankees' owner, George Steinbrenner, and what role to play in the 1990 player lockout.
But never before has Vincent faced a week like this one, in which he returns from a 10-day vacation to confront the dramas of the potential sale of the Seattle Mariners to Japanese interests, of the Yankees and Steinbrenner and Daniel McCarthy, and of baseball's never-ending economic angst.


CHRONICLE
To EUGENIA ZUKERMAN, the flutist and novelist, "Riverside Park is more my home than is my apartment." So it is no wonder that there is little she would not do to help the park.
Apparently some other musicians feel the same way, so next Monday a group of them who live on the West Side and who run, walk and play tennis in the park will give a benefit concert for the Riverside Park Fund in the Promenade Theater at Broadway and 76th Street.


Vikings Add Coach
A Washington Redskins assistant coach, JACK BURNS , was hired yesterday by the Vikings as their offensive coordinator, the Minnesota team announced yesterday.
Burns, 43, spent 14 years as a college coach and three years with the Tampa Bay Bandits of the United States Football League before joining the Redskins in 1989. (AP)


Sports of The Times; Tyson Is a Boxing Exception
IN a story in a recent USA Today about the Mike Tyson rape trial, it was stated, "A conviction would cap his stormy relationships with women, which have included a brief, turbulent marriage to actress Robin Givens, several accusations of sexual harassment and three lawsuits."
The next paragraph read, " 'Boxing does not get its enlistees from the debutante line at the local country club,' said the boxing historian, Bert Sugar, editor and publisher of Boxing Illustrated."


Colony Site Yields Relics Of Science
ARCHEOLOGISTS say they have discovered America's first science center on Roanoke Island, N.C., site of the legendary "lost colony" that disappeared without a trace in the late 1500's.
Excavations have turned up fragments of glass, crucibles, ointment pots and pieces of a distilling apparatus used in metallurgy.
The thin shards of glass, possibly used in apothecary work, are the earliest examples of English glass ever found in America.


Dow Gains 10.73, to 3,234.12, In Uneven Trading Session
Stocks edged up yesterday in trading that was marked by swift, if moderate, drops and rebounds.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 10.73 points at 3,234.12.
After a selloff, the Dow crested near 3,240 in the early afternoon and rode several dips and jumps.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was average, at 185.3 million shares, down from 197.6 million on Friday.
Gaining stocks led losing ones, 923 to 820.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Buchanan's Run Exposes Fissures in the Right
Whatever the outcome of the fight over the Republican nomination, Patrick J. Buchanan is exposing fault lines in the conservative movement at a time when the twin epoxies that bound conservatives -- Ronald Reagan and international communism -- have melted away.
As he campaigns in New Hampshire, Mr.
Buchanan, a former White House speechwriter who is at times to the right of the two Presidents he served, has made clear that his goal is not only to unhorse President Bush as the titular head of the Republican Party, but also to change the direction of the conservative movement.


Excedrin Spot Is Not By Agency of Record
DDB Needham Worldwide's hold on its estimated $35 million Excedrin account has become more tenuous with the disclosure that a television commercial for a new version of the pain reliever has been produced by another agency.
Susan Spedalle, a spokeswoman for Bristol-Myers Squibb, the maker of Excedrin, said yesterday that the spot had been created by Bozell Inc. in New York to introduce Excedrin IB, a variety with the pain reliever ibuprofen as an ingredient.
She added that DDB Needham's New York office remained the agency of record for the Excedrin line.


American Express Plan To Get Cash
Hoping to build up its financial cushion, the American Express Company announced yesterday that it planned to sell to the public a minority stake in its profitable information-services company.
American Express said it would sell up to 45 percent of its Information Services Corporation in an initial public offering.
The company did not say how much the offering would raise, although analysts estimated it could be up to $800 million.


Plenty of Snow, but Problems on the Ice


Topics of The Times; Wronging Rights
Electing an Iranian diplomat, Cyrus Nasseri, to serve as vice president of the United Nations Human Rights Commission is like choosing a leader of the Medellin cartel to help control narcotics.
Thirteen years after Ayatollah Khomeini ousted the Shah, Iran remains gripped by a revolutionary reign of terror.
Citizens still face arbitrary arrest, torture and public execution.
The ruling mullahs relentlessly persecute members of the Bahai faith and keep a tight muzzle on independent political expression.


Topics of The Times; Whatever, Spring Is Here
Sunday, on Groundhog Day, Pennsylvania's Punxsutawney Phil appeared and decreed six more weeks of winter.
Staten Island Chuck was a no-show, signaling only two more weeks.
Meanwhile New York City's Korean markets are a riot of tulips, hole-in-a-corner florists a riot of hyacinths.
The household that doesn't sport an amaryllis is the household that doesn't know that half the boroughs' supermarkets have been selling them boxed and ready to sprout.
And last month's paperwhites are only now giving up the ghost.
So what does it matter if warm weather is just around the corner or off in the middle distance?
Anyone who has a bulb has spring.


An Introduction to the Joys of Biblio-Browsing
Exploring the shelves of a library with her fingers the other day, Karen Eisenstadt, who is blind, found a book in Braille that she had not known existed and that may help her in her work in an unemployment office.
The book was on a shelf of the new Andrew Heiskell Library for the Blind and Physically Handicapped at 40 West 20th Street, and Ms.
Eisenstadt was surprised not only at her find but also at the very act of discovery -- for she had never browsed before.
Accustomed since childhood to the help of librarians, she had not experienced serendipity.


Long-Term Rates Move Higher
Bond prices dropped and long-term interest rates moved higher again yesterday, as worries among market participants mounted that the economy may be on the verge of recovery even as evidence suggesting otherwise continued to mount.
The latest piece of discouraging news on the state of the economy was provided by the nation's purchasing managers, whose monthly survey showed that conditions in the manufacturing sector remained at recession-like levels in January.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Four A's Effort Takes Aim At Negative Campaign Ads
SEEKING to exorcise the specter of Willie Horton from the 1992 Presidential campaign, the trade association representing American advertising agencies plans to announce a program today urging voters to register complaints about unfair and misleading political advertising.
The American Association of Advertising Agencies will join with the League of Women Voters to describe details of the program at a news conference this morning at the Grand Hyatt New York hotel in Manhattan.
Also participating in the program, to be called Project Run Fair, is the Markle Foundation, which finances projects for election reform.


The Route Is the Same; Only the Pace Has Changed


Standing in Line
A new computer software system invented by a scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology promises to help reduce the time Americans wait in lines at post offices, banks and supermarkets, or in waiting for a response to 911 emergency telephone calls.
Dr.
Richard C. Larson, a professor of computer science at M.I.T., said his system, which has been licensed by the university for commercial application, is already on trial at two post offices in North Carolina, with the object of reducing customer waiting time to less than five minutes, a goal set by Postmaster General Anthony M. Frank for all post offices.


First Boats of Refugees Land in Haiti
Looking nervous and confused after a sea voyage prolonged by bureaucratic delays, 381 Haitian refugees arrived here today aboard two Coast Guard cutters, forcibly returned from the United States military base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
Arriving at this city's grimy docks at 9 A.M., the first of the white ships, the Steadfast, immediately began discharging its passengers.
Coast Guard officials said they hoped to establish a routine that would allow the rapid return of most of the 12,000 Haitians at Guantanamo, where many have lived in tents for over two months.


Corrections
Two front-page picture captions on Saturday about the summit meeting at the United Nations misidentified two men in some copies.
The man between President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin was Yuli M. Vorontsov, the Russian delegate to the United Nations.
The man with Prime Minister Li Peng of China was Foreign Minister Qian Qichen.


Noriega Defense Says He Was Faithful U.S. Ally in Drug War
Lawyers for Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega told jurors today that the former Panamanian leader had been a dependable American ally, friend and informer whose aid to the United States in its war against drugs and subversion in the Western Hemisphere won the praise of American officials.
The narrowly focused initial statement opened the defense case in the trial of the deposed Panamanian leader after an unusual six-and-a-half-week delay.


A Military Tool Is Moving to Arcades
In the days of yore, nations may have beaten their swords into plowshares when war gave way to peace.
But in the aftermath of the cold war, what do you do with exotic semiconductor-crammed military equipment that is not particularly adaptable to tilling fields?
America's GM Hughes Electronics Corporation has come up with one answer: transferring its flight-simulator technology from training pilots to entertaining the public.


It Wasn't All Champagne and Roses on Road for This Black Tie Affair
HE was bred in Ireland, bought for $125,000 by an automobile dealer outside Chicago and trained by a jeweler from Arlington Heights, Ill.
When he was 3 years old, he was considered a sprinter and never ran in the Kentucky Derby or the other distance classics.
Instead, he ran in the Breeders' Cup Sprint at 72 to 1, and finished ninth.
The next year, he tried it again at 53 to 1, and ran third.
When he was 5 last year, he won one race in the first half of the year.


Haitians Arrive in Land They Fled


The Ideological War Over Health Care; Conservatives Ignore History
The response of conservatives to rising health care costs and the unraveling of private insurance has been a triumph of ideology over experience.
President Bush's new proposals for tax credits still ask Americans to fend for themselves in a health insurance market with staggering administrative inefficiencies and little capacity to bring costs under control.


Secrets Of Stellar Evolution Revealed
SCIENTISTS studying data collected for almost 400 years have confirmed a widely held theory of stellar evolution.
The data relate to the brightness of the star P Cygni in the constellation Cygnus, or the Swan.
P Cygni, visible in the summer and fall, was first described when it suddenly increased in brightness in the 17th century.
In the study, reported in the current issue of the journal Nature, two astronomers analyzed records of the star and found that its light changed in a pattern conforming to theories of astronomy.


Critic's Notebook; Was Schubert Gay? If He Was, So What? Debate Turns Testy
By the end of the all-day symposium on Schubert at the 92d Street Y on Sunday, the audience was getting feisty.
The last two hours of discussion on "Schubert the Man: Myth vs.  Reality," were concerned with Schubert's possible homosexuality.
The historical evidence was made available throughout the weeklong Schubertiade festival in a carefully argued 1989 paper by Maynard Solomon (published in the journal 19th-Century Music).
The second movement of the "Unfinished" Symphony had been analyzed to show its possible homosexual character by the feminist musicologist Susan McClary.
And the "marginalization" of Schubert in 1820's Viennese society had been debated by the panel.
So by the evening's end, comments were getting more heated.
One frustrated listener asserted that "heterosexuals are more repressed than homosexuals." Another, speaking with irony, asked whether the fact that Schubert was a "short, fat man" had affected the way he wrote music.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  MORE CRITICISM MADE IN JAPAN
Japan's Prime Minister, adding his voice to a chorus of critics, said the U.S.
"may lack a work ethic." His ministers scrambled to explain away his remarks.
A1  WHERE JAPAN IS A FRIEND
When Japan is portrayed as an economic enemy, people in the Northwest, where Japan is a valued customer, wince.
A1  C.I.A.
COMING IN FROM THE COLD
The Central Intelligence Agency is shedding its trenchcoat in the post-cold-war thaw.
While covert operations will not disappear with Communism, the code word today is "openness." A1  The U.S.I.A. does not see itself as an anachronism.
A8  BUTTER, NOT GUNS, IN FINLAND
Finland has always carefully guarded its frontier with Russia, but today the fears are economic and the defense is aid across the border.
A7  THREATS IN YUGOSLAVIA
Serbs in Croatia are warned that force may be used to break their resistance to a U.N. peace plan.
A7  FIRST HAITIANS DISEMBARK
Some Haitian refugees being returned from Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, say they might have fled for economic reasons, but their fear at home is of violent retribution.
A3  A FAREWELL AND A WARNING
Ezer Weizman, former Israeli Defense Minister and advocate of peace with the Arabs, retired from politics, warning that the country was headed toward war.
A9  MILESTONE FOR A MONARCH
Queen Elizabeth's progeny may continue to make a splash, but the 40th anniversary of her accession to the throne will be marked with no more than a royal ripple.
A4  17 Vietnamese boat people die in violence at a Hong Kong camp.
A3  Rescuers search for survivors of an avalanche in Turkey.
A7  Argentina opens its secret files on Nazi war criminals.
A9  National A10-16  BUDGET BATTLE TURNS HOT
President Bush and a group of Democratic governors squared off over the budget, underscoring fears that the states might end up having to pay for efforts in Washington to save money.
A1  OBSTACLES FOR NUCLEAR DUMP
A Federal judge ruled that the Energy Department could not open a $1 billion nuclear waste repository in New Mexico without first gaining the approval of both Congress and the state.
A10  NORIEGA TRIAL RESUMES
The trial of General Noriega resumed after an unusual delay of six and a half weeks, with the defense opening its case, shifting to a more narrowly focused strategy.
A10  SHAKING UP THE RIGHT
Patrick Buchanan's campaign is becoming the focal point of an ideological fracturing among conservatives, and the candidate says he is out to change the direction of the movement.
A14  A SPRINT FOR HOPEFULS
Political Week: The Democratic candidates in the New Hampshire campaign are preparing for the "winnowing" phase.
A14  CAMPAIGN FOR NONCANDIDATE
Backers of Governor Cuomo began a write-in campaign in New Hampshire, where they hope he will receive 20,000 votes in the Democratic primary.
A14  FOCUS ON HEALTH FRAUD
The Justice Department said it was increasing the number of investigators assigned to investigate fraud in the health care industry.
A16  A judge restored benefits for mentally incompetent veterans.
A16  A museum exhibit attempts to explain homelessness.
A10  Metropolitan Digest, B1 2 CHILDREN ARE GUNNED DOWN
Two girls, ages 2 and 5, were killed at their home in Queens, apparently by robbers who shot them to guarantee their silence.
Authorities said they believed the children knew two participants in the crime -- the couple next door.
A1  BREAKING A CHESS BARRIER
A Hungarian girl has earned the rank of grandmaster at 15 years, 5 months -- one month younger than the American chess prodigy, Bobby Fischer, who at age 15 joined the ranks of grandmasters in 1958.
Judit Polgar broke the record at a tournament in Budapest in December.
A1  Neediest Cases B2  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-10  New clues in the puzzle of Neanderthals and European ancestry.
C1  Many former Soviet scientists make homes but not careers in Israel.
C1  Advance European telescopes gaining on American efforts.
C1  Why alcohol calories turn into poisons rather than fat.
C3  Unexpectedly large threat to ozone in Northern Hemisphere.
C4  Ocean current fluctuations tied to timing of ice ages.
C2  Personal Computers C5  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Was Schubert gay?
The debate remains testy.
C11  Dance: Lausanne competition.
C11  Word and Image: Michael Jackson's new video.
C11  Rather and the assassination.
C11  Is P.C. really P.C.?
C15  Fashion Page A19  Obituaries A18  Edwin C. Whitehead, financed biomedical research  Bert Parks, whose serenade helped crown 25 Miss Americas  Dr.
James C. Cain, specialist in internal medicine  Sports B6-13  Baseball: Sensitive issues awaiting Vincent.
B7  Basketball: Syracuse beats UConn.
B7  Wake Forest upsets Tulane.
B9  Boxing: Tyson's defense takes shape.
B8  Columns: Berkow on Tyson B7  TV Sports B8  Hockey: Devils play better against better teams.
B9  Olympics: Ruling on H.I.V.
B7  Meet the informer.
B8  Sports People B13  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  Humanity for Haitians.
World-class flop in Seville.
Urban violence in film.
Topics: Wronging rights.
Letters A20  Russell Baker: The road to coma.
A21  A. M. Rosenthal: Prisoners of China.
A21  Steven Emerson: Fighting terrorism, the wrong way.
A21  Paul Starr: The ideological war over health care.
A21  Bruce C. Vladeck: Health care's clash of political values.
A21


Corrections
An article yesterday about plans to return refugees to Haiti was omitted from some copies, and a companion article, about the reaction of Haitians in New York, was duplicated.
Readers wishing copies of the omitted article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Argentina Will Open Files on Nazi War Criminals
President Carlos Saul Menem signed an executive decree today that for the first time opens Argentina's secret Government files on Nazi war criminals who fled to this country as Nazi Germany was collapsing.
"We are taking this step to make this country and its affairs as open as possible," President Menem told a gathering of Cabinet members, foreign ambassadors and Jewish groups.
"Argentina has been hiding a truth for 40 years that the whole world wants to see. This is a debt Argentina is paying to the world."


Babies Learn Sounds of Language by 6 Months
BABIES learn the basic sounds of their native language by the age of 6 months, long before they utter their first words, and earlier than researchers had thought, a new study suggests.
The findings indicate that recognition of these sounds is the first step in the comprehension of spoken language.
As a result, the researchers suggest, babies whose hearing is damaged by chronic ear infections may have lifelong language problems, and the way parents speak to their infants exerts important influences on language learning.


Market Place; Dividend News Gets Better; Often Bad News for Stocks
Notwithstanding highly publicized actions by Bethlehem Steel and Westinghouse, the number of companies providing bad dividend news to shareholders is rapidly falling, an indication that the worst of the recession may be over.
At the same time, the number of companies announcing higher dividends is on the rise.
Oddly, in the past, such increases in good news have often been followed by bad news on stock prices.


For That Coming Shortage of Professors
To the Editor:
If the universities were smart and creative, they would not have to suffer the dearth of researchers and professors foreseen in "Shortage of Professors Envisioned" (Education page, Jan. 22).
In the 1960's and 70's, graduate schools produced far more Ph.D.'s than the academic job market could absorb.
The once would-be professors are now mature and experienced, not all academically rusty and ignorant of scholarship in their disciplines.
Thousands would welcome a chance to teach and do research.
They would vitalize academic departments and help train new graduate students.
Over 20 years or so, they would gradually retire, freeing places for younger scholars and teachers.


Let Indians Decide for Themselves on Reservation Gambling
To the Editor:
"Redskins' Revenge" by William Safire (column, Jan. 6), on Indian gaming, is a short-sighted attack on members of an oppressed, diverse group working to improve their social and financial standing.
In stating that gambling is an assault on the traditions of aboriginal Americans, Mr.
Safire displays poor knowledge of, for instance, the Santee Sioux.
Father Louis Hennepin, one of the first whites to experience Sioux culture firsthand, in 1679, recorded their love of games and gambling.
Outside restriction of such activity, if anything, demeans their culture and debases their collective pride.


WordStar To Meet Windows
A FAMILIAR name in the writing game, WordStar, has finally come to Windows, and it is definitely worth a second look if you are not already committed to WordPerfect, Word, Ami Pro or one of the other word-processing programs.
Even if you are committed, word-processing programs that run under Windows 3.0 work more alike than they did under plain DOS, making it much easier for an old report writer, novelist or epic poet to learn new tricks.
When saving a document with one program required pressing the control key and K and S, it took a strong incentive to switch to a program that saved with F10 and Y. With Windows, you can learn the keystroke commands if you wish, and you probably will for the common functions, but there is always the menu bar at the top of the screen as a crutch to help you invoke seldom-used or forgotten facilities.


Two Contestants Tell Of Tyson's Behavior
Mike Tyson's defense strategy crystallized today as his lawyers used two prosecution witnesses to describe a man so lewd during his meeting with contestants in the Miss Black America pageant that anyone who went out with him that week had to know he only had one thing on his mind: sex.
Through one of the two witnesses, the defense was able to make another point: When a woman objected to Tyson's conduct, he backed off.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  IN COLD BLOOD IN QUEENS
Two young girls, ages 2 and 5, were gunned down in a quiet Queens neighborhood Sunday night, apparently by a band of robbers who ransacked the house for money and jewels, then shot them both in the head to guarantee their silence.
And yesterday, the authorities said they believed that the couple next door -- the children's baby sitter and her husband -- had participated in the crime.
A1.
THE REFLECTIONS OF MR.
GOTTI
John Gotti, confidently urging his co-defendant not to be bitter about their racketeering case, declared that "we're going to beat this." In an impromptu conversation while waiting for jury selection to resume in Federal Court in Brooklyn, the accused mob chieftain mused about a series of subjects, from the Mike Tyson rape trial to the waistlines of his own lawyers (compared to those of the prosecutors).
B3.
WHAT WILL THEY THINK OF NEXT?
It's not HBO, and maybe cable viewers won't love it the way they love their MTV.
Crosswalks, New York City's new municipal cable network, is the place to dial for "Reducing Your Garbage" or "Early Warning Signs of TB" or "How to Polish Your Resume." B3.
ONE ISLAND, INDIVISIBLE
The Federal Government wants to take a piece of Ellis Island from New York and give it to New Jersey, at least for the duration of a lawsuit brought by a former Government employee.
But an appeals court has refused to cooperate.
B3.
Lawyers give opening statements in second St.
John's trial.
B3.
A new library for the handicapped.
B3.
REGION  ASSURANCES ON WELFARE PLAN
Governor Florio received the first direct assurances from the Bush Administration that it would help clear away Federal obstacles to New Jersey's controversial new welfare plan.
B4.
THE MORE THINGS CHANGE . . .
Despite a bipartisan agreement to keep the 205th Legislature from turning into what legislative leaders call a "bill factory," New Jersey lawmakers have pre-filed the traditional glut of bills, from an act to outlaw surrogate parenting for money to one that would designate as the state song a five-stanza ditty that praises New Jersey's farmland, flowers and highways.
B4.
AN EMPTY ROOM WITH A VIEW
The most obvious symbol of what the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey calls its new leaner image sits high above New York Harbor, on the 44th floor of the World Trade Center.
Until Dec. 20, it was a plush executive dining room.
Now it is an empty room.
B5.
INTERACTIVE TELEVISION
For more than 20 minutes, 18 second-graders at the 13th Street School in Newark donned earphones, stared at television screens and answered questions posed by colorful puppets by pressing buttons on a remote-control unit.
The pupils were demonstrating a new individualized television teaching program that its developers say is the first of its kind in the nation.
B5.
Nassau legislators agree on something.
B5.
Gas explosions cause fire in Wallington, N.J., diner.
B5.
Neediest Cases B2  Our Towns B5


An Unusable Windfall: Israel's Soviet Scientists
TWO years after the first wave of highly educated, and often remarkably talented, Soviet immigrants arrived in Israel, thousands of research scientists, engineers, doctors and technicians remain without jobs or the hope of ever working here in their professions.
With the help of the Government and their fellow Israelis, most now have homes, few are hungry, and many have even found sporadic employment.
But the nearly 400,000 immigrants who have arrived here since 1989 have more than doubled the nation's already plentiful supply of scientists, severely straining its tiny university and research establishment.


Ozone-Harming Agents Reach a Record
Record levels of chemicals that destroy the earth's protective ozone layer have been measured above the Northern Hemisphere, a NASA-led team of scientists reported today.
They said their preliminary findings raised the possibility of an ozone hole's developing this winter over populated parts of the United States, Canada and Europe, exposing people and plant life to higher levels of harmful ultraviolet radiation from the sun.


Woman Found Slain In Her Harlem Home
An 87-year-old woman, her throat slashed and her body punctured by numerous stab wounds, was found dead yesterday in her Harlem apartment, the police said.
The victim, Bessie King, lived in a first-floor apartment in a five-story building at 285 West 150th Street, between Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard and Frederick Douglass Boulevard.
Neighbors and the police described the block as one in which several killings had occurred in the last year, but neighbors said that Miss King often kept the door to her apartment unlocked.


Ocean Currents Tied To Timing of Ice Ages
SCIENTISTS have uncovered strong evidence supporting a theory that sudden and dramatic shifts in big ocean currents play a critical role in the waxing and waning of ice ages.
The timing of ice ages, experts on the subject generally agree, is controlled by periodic changes in the tilt, rotation and orbit of the earth.
These changes alter the angles at which sunlight strikes the planet.
This, in turn, alters the intensity of the seasons at northern latitudes where ice-age glaciers form.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American International Group, New York, named Petros K. Sabatacakis senior vice president for financial services. *
Archer Daniels Midland Co., Decatur, Ill., named Howard G. Buffett corporate vice president and assistant to the chairman, succeeding the late Richard E. Burket.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Amrep Corp., New York, a real estate company, aquired an environmental consulting firm headed by Harvey W. Schultz, a former New York City environmental protection commissioner.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Checkpoint Systems Inc., Thorofare, N.J., an electronic surveillance concern, said an order to install its systems in 200 K Mart Corp. stores had been placed on hold because of an unexpected change in the position of director of loss prevention at K Mart.


Bridge
Good defenders base their actions on the expectation that the declarer is bidding and playing in normal fashion.
But against some highly imaginative performers all such bets are off, and the opponents must be prepared for anything.
Consider the diagramed deal from a game at New York's famed Cavendish Club, now defunct.
One might expect East-West to reach two hearts, and for South to balance with two spades, pushing his opponents to three hearts.
But South chose to show his emaciated spade suit immediately, with the effect shown: East-West eventually tried three hearts, which would have failed, but North persevered to three spades.


A.T.&amp; T. Group To Lay Sea Cable
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company will lead a consortium to lay an undersea cable between Puerto Rico and St.
Thomas, in the Virgin Islands, that will result in a sixfold increase in the number of telephone calls that can be received in the region.
The cable, costing about $17 million, will be able to carry 225,000 simultaneous phone conversations.
The new 112-mile fiber-optic cable is expected to be ready in the fall.
It will also have links to larger Latin American fiber-optic cables set to be in service in 1994.
The consortium is made up of A.T.&amp; T., Cable and Wireless of Britain, Telefonica Larga Distancia of Puerto Rico, and U S Sprint.


U.S. Court Rules Ellis Island (The Dry Part) Is New York's
The Federal Government wants to take a piece of Ellis Island from New York and give it to New Jersey.
But an appeals court yesterday rejected the idea, at least in regard to any land above sea level.
The Government's objective was not to favor one state over another or to redraw the 1834 boundary lines that separate New York from New Jersey or to change the compact that granted New York jurisdiction over Ellis Island.


Capital Cities Says Profits Fell by 34.5%
Citing a weak advertising market, Capital Cities/ABC said yesterday that its net income dropped 34.5 percent in its fourth quarter from a year earlier.
Operating income for the quarter, before taking into account a special charge, fell 14.6 percent, and revenues were essentially flat.
The company said its net income dropped to $103.2 million, or $6.17 a share, from $157.5 million, or $9.34 a share, a year earlier.
Operating income fell to $134.4 million, from $157.4 million, disregarding an extraordinary charge of $31.2 million, or $1.86 a share, for the redemption of $500 million of debentures.


Baseball Takes Cue From N.B.A.
Major league baseball officials said today that they used the N.B.A.'s McDonald's Open basketball tournament as a model in planning baseball's first European venture in 68 years.


Curbing Urban Violence in Films
In the language of urban America, the word "juice" refers to influence that's often won through violence or intimidation.
The guy with the most juice is the guy who's most likely to have gunned down a rival in the street.
"Juice" is also the name of a movie that opened to shootouts, knifings and fights in a half-dozen cities.
The danger is sufficiently great that Paramount Pictures underwrites extra security for movie houses where "Juice" is shown.


Syracuse Edges By In Final :03
For the second time in three days, the Syracuse basketball team came out on top after trailing a Big East opponent early on.
And for the second time in three days, Connecticut suffered a heartbreaking loss.
But unlike on Saturday night, when Seton Hall disintegrated down the stretch, the Orangemen tonight had to snatch their 84-83 victory out of the Huskies' jaws, as Mike Hopkins came off the bench to hit a tie-breaking free throw with 3 seconds to play.


Lockheed Up In Quarter
The Lockheed Corporation reported today that its net income rose slightly in the fourth quarter, but the military contractor said earnings fell more than 8 percent for all of 1991.
Quarterly earnings climbed to $103 million, or $1.63 a share, from $99 million, or $1.57 a share, in the 1990 period.
But revenue slipped 7 percent, to $2.76 billion, from $2.97 billion.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Write-In Campaigners Hope Pen Is Mightier Than Cuomo's Word
Backers of Mario M. Cuomo launched a modest but professionally managed write-in campaign today that they hope will win the New York Governor at least 20,000 votes in this state's Democratic Presidential primary on Feb. 18.
From a small second-floor office on Main Street here, the campaign is mailing write-in instructions to every Democratic household in the state and preparing radio and television commercials to be broadcast next week.
A half-page advertisement Tuesday in The Union-Leader, the Manchester newspaper, will urge, "Don't waste your vote on a second choice."


South Africa Must Mine Its Human Resources; Operation Hunger
To the Editor:
"Poverty Engulfs Lives of Millions of Blacks in Rural South Africa" (front page, Jan. 12) mentions the feeding scheme conducted by Operation Hunger.
It is a model rescue scheme, giving implements to those willing to grow their own food and teaching villagers how to do so.
Drilling wells, as you report, is another aspect of the organization's work.
It also encourages and markets rural crafts, for those able to create them.
I understand that Operation Hunger was started years ago by a suburban housewife in Johannesburg, concerned about unfed schoolchildren in the area, and has grown into a countrywide organization that today feeds more than one million people a day, every day.
ZELDA STREET  Bay Harbor Island, Fla., Jan. 15, 1992


Classical Music in Review
Milwaukee Symphony Carnegie Hall


Bills Staff Is Revised
Buffalo Bills Coach MARV LEVY continued the rebuilding of his coaching staff yesterday, naming DAN SEKANOVICH as defensive line coach and JIM SHOFNER quarterbacks coach.
The 58-year-old Sekanovich, who spent the last six years in the same position with the Miami Dolphins, replaces CHUCK DICKERSON, who was dismissed last Tuesday after making comments the previous week that the Redskins said helped motivate them to a 37-24 victory over the Bills in the Super Bowl.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with Ken Oberkfell, infielder, on a minor league contract.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Keith Miller, infielder-outfielder, on a one-year contract.
Agreed to terms with Curt Young, pitcher, on a minor league contract.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Agreed to terms with Walt Weiss, infielder, on a one-year contract.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Jim Acker, pitcher, on a minor league contract.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Agreed to terms with Jerome Walton, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Bob Geren, catcher, and Tim Pugh, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Agreed to terms with Stan Javier, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Agreed to terms with Bob Patterson, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Agreed to terms with Darrin Jackson, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Agreed to terms with Kirt Manwaring, catcher, on a one-year contract.
New York-Penn League  UTICA BLUE SOX -- Named Fred Kendall manager, Bill Ballou and Charlie Culberson coaches and Rick Ray trainer.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NBA -- Suspended Sidney Green, San Antonio forward, for one game and fined him $10,000 for flagrantly fouling Minnesota forward Gerald Glass in a game last Friday.
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Placed Fat Lever, guard, on the injured list.
Signed Brian Howard, forward, to a 10-day contract.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Signed Jaren Jackson, guard, to a second 10-day contract.
Continental Basketball Association  GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Traded Treg Lee, forward, to the Fort Wayne Fury for an undisclosed amount of cash.
Placed Mark Stevenson, guard, on the suspended-reserve list.
Football  National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Named Dan Sekanovich defensive line coach and Jim Shofner quarterbacks coach.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Named Jack Burns offensive coordinator.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Reggie Clark, linebacker.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Named Jim Mora defensive backs coach.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Named Pat Hodgson tight ends coach.
World League of American Football  SACRAMENTO SURGE -- Traded Curtis Wilson, center, and a first-round draft pick to the Ohio Glory for its first-round selection.
College
BALL STATE -- Named Bob Bartolomeo inside linebackers coach.
IOWA -- Extended the contract of Hayden Fry, head football coach, through the 1997 season.


18 Vietnamese Die in Violence at Refugee Camp
Eighteen Vietnamese boat people were killed and 128 were injured in a detention center in Hong Kong Monday night when rioters set fire to a hut during a clash that began over hot water, the authorities said.
The fire was set by Vietnamese who stuffed burning blankets through a Quonset hut window, said Hong Kong's Secretary for Security, Alistair Asprey.


Classical Music in Review
Choros Aristos  Merkin Concert Hall


Dreyfus Forms Basis Of a New Agency
Two former senior executives of Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver, an agency that closed late last year, have opened their own shop with a former client as their initial account.
At the new agency, Paster Russo Inc., Ken Paster is president and Nat Russo is chairman and creative director.
The New York shop's first account, billing $8 million to $10 million, is the Dreyfus Corporation, for which they had been creating advertising on a freelance basis.
Mr.
Russo said he and Mr.
Paster were talking to four or five former colleagues about joining the agency.


Sports of The Times; Tyson Is a Boxing Exception
IN a story in a recent USA Today about the Mike Tyson rape trial, it was stated, "A conviction would cap his stormy relationships with women, which have included a brief, turbulent marriage to actress Robin Givens, several accusations of sexual harassment and three lawsuits."
The next paragraph read, " 'Boxing does not get its enlistees from the debutante line at the local country club,' said the boxing historian, Bert Sugar, editor and publisher of Boxing Illustrated."


Athletes With H.I.V. Ruled Eligible for Games
The International Olympic Committee moved to quell one controversy by ruling that athletes with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, are eligible to compete and opened another by again suggesting the use of blood tests to detect banned substances.
At past Olympics, urinalysis has been used to check for the presence of drugs and other banned substances.
I.O.C. officials previously had said they were working on a procedure for blood testing and had indicated that if approved, such new tests would begin at the Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain.
No Formal Stand
The issue is a sensitive one, with a number of athletes having stated their opposition to the methodology.
Blood testing is considered more accurate than urinalysis.


American Voice of Cold War Survives, but in Different Key
Born 50 years ago during World War II and reforged as an instrument of the cold war, the United States Information Agency is arguing that even in a world without superpower conflict, its mission remains as important as ever.
The agency's budget has grown even as the Soviet-American struggle waned.
The Bush Administration's proposed 1993 budget calls for a further increase of 4 percent, to more than $1.1 billion.


Frances Tang, 53; Was Philanthropist and Preservationist
Frances Young Tang, a philanthropist in the field of education and a preservationist specializing in landmark buildings, died on Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 53 years old and also had homes in Oyster Bay, L.I., and Vail, Colo.
She died of cancer, said her husband, Oscar L. Tang.


Moving to Cut Sales Tax, Trenton Republicans Seek Other Money
As expected, the Republicans introduced legislation today to roll the 7 percent sales tax back to 6 percent, but they refused to say how they would replace the estimated $608 million in revenue that would be lost.
The long-promised legislation had 54 Republican co-sponsors, enough to pass it with three votes to spare and without a single Democratic vote.


On My Mind; Prisoners Of China
President Bush knows the names of almost all of Communist China's leaders, an achievement that he takes as testimony to his expertise on China.
But does he also know the names of Chinese political prisoners who have their handcuffed hands ratcheted tight behind their backs, deliberately so tight that they cannot clean themselves after they have used the toilet bucket in their cells?


Last Defendant Goes to Trial In St. John's Sex-Assault Case
Demonstrators chanted outside the courthouse and prosecution and defense lawyers painted sharply divergent pictures of the defendant and his accuser as the second and final trial opened yesterday in the St.
John's University sexual-assault case.
A 22-year-old former St.
John's student, Michael Calandrillo, is charged with sodomy and other crimes because, prosecutors say, he forced a woman, who was also a student then, to perform oral sex on him while setting the stage for his friends to abuse her in a similar manner.


World-Class Flop in Seville
Promoting exports and creating jobs are major goals of the Bush Administration.
So is standing toe-to-toe with Japan in competition for markets.
These purposes are likely to be undermined by the American pavilion at Expo '92, the world's fair in Seville marking the 500th anniversary of the first Columbian voyage.
Come April, visitors will find that the U.S. pavilion consists of two hand-me-down geodesic domes.
A restaurant featuring American food is operated by a Canadian company.


Ending the Unemployment Blues With Donations
Many people have made gifts to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund to celebrate birthdays, holidays and wedding anniversaries, but this year several donors marked the end of long periods of unemployment.
"A year ago I was out of work and crying all the time," began an anonymous letter with a $25 donation.
"Christmas was horrible. I was actually out of work for 18 months and just began a wonderful job in November. Of course I am in debt, but I am grateful and I want to share my new found relief with others."


Bankers Trust Quits Deal With Integrated
Bankers Trust, the New York bank holding company, said yesterday that it had withdrawn from a tentative agreement under which it was to have acquired Integrated Resources Inc., a bankrupt syndicator of real estate partnerships.
Cancellation of the $565 million offer ends a year of negotiations between Bankers Trust and Integrated Resources' senior creditor committees.


People
*
David G. Wilkins, chief operating officer of Doe-Anderson Advertising Agency Inc., Louisville, Ky., has been named president, succeeding Robert S. Allison, who remains chairman and chief executive.


'Who Are Our Enemies?'
"The United States has been lefrt in a role of extraordinary responsibility. Our principal international obligation is to continue to give leadership. We're trying even though some of our tools are not as strong as they used to be, particularly the economic one. There is some damage to our image today, in part because we radiate the image of 'Consume now' don't worry too much about the future.' That isn't consistent with the image of a good, conscientious leader.
"I do not think our needs abroad and our needs at home are in conflict. If we were to decide to do nothing about the world situation and attended only to our domestic situation, our domestic situation would go to pieces, too.


New Magazine Spurns Gloom
As the nation's economic woes linger, more marketers are pegging their advertising to financial and recession themes.
In at least one instance, the potentially dolorous message is being leavened with humor.
Worth, a personal-finance magazine being introduced this week, is running a series of humorous television and radio commercials in large markets around the country.
One spoofs consumers who think the best way to cope with economic dislocations is to clip cents-off coupons.
Another mocks an old-fashioned financial expert who mouths platitudes like "Real estate is always your best investment."


By Design; From the Shoes Up
As the shoe turns, so does the silhouette.
That's one reason eyes were riveted on what the models wore on their feet as the spring couture fashions paraded down the runways of Paris last week.
Mostly, it was sandal-style shoes with platform soles.
The heft of sole varied from designer to designer.
Claude Montana's were a mere half-inch deep.
Lacroix's were a bit thicker, while Karl Lagerfeld's for Chanel went from those an inch deep to sandals perilously towering on cork soles.
When shoes get that clunky, the shapes above them become softer and narrower.


Irvin's Style Draws Attention
Michael Irvin did more than cap a spectacular season with his gripping play Sunday in the Pro Bowl in Honolulu, where the National Conference beat the American Conference, 21-15.
The Dallas Cowboy also caused National Football League coaches and scouts to open their eyes on the idea that bigger as well as faster may be the definitive trend among wide receivers in the 1990's.
The late 1980's featured the emergence in the N.F.L. of the run-and-shoot offense, with its numerous smaller, Smurf-like receivers.
Most teams, whether or not they featured the run and shoot, featured a quick small receiver who could more readily find soft spots in a zone defense or a smaller guy who could stretch defenses deep, taking advantage of the non-contact rule, which states that a defensive back can not make contact on a receiver 5 yards past the line of scrimmage.
The smaller, shiftier receiver did a better job, some coaches said, of not getting jammed at the line.


Two Contestants Tell Of Tyson's Behavior
Mike Tyson's defense strategy crystallized today as his lawyers used two prosecution witnesses to describe a man so lewd during his meeting with contestants in the Miss Black America pageant that anyone who went out with him that week had to know he only had one thing on his mind: sex.
Through one of the two witnesses, the defense was able to make another point: When a woman objected to Tyson's conduct, he backed off.


Mentally Incompetent Veterans Regain U.S. Aid in Court Ruling
The elimination of Federal income benefits to 13,500 veterans who are considered mentally incompetent was overturned yesterday by a Federal district judge on the ground that the cuts violated their rights of equal protection.
The judge, Shirley Wohl Kram of Federal District Court in Manhattan, issued an injunction that bars further withholding of the benefits that were eliminated as part of the cuts enacted in the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.


Barkley Speaks Out
The 76ers' forward, CHARLES BARKLEY, said yesterday that the National Basketball Association All-Star Game should not be an opportunity for MAGIC JOHNSON to return to the game.
"I have thought about picking up the phone, calling Magic and telling him maybe he shouldn't play in the All-Star Game," Barkley told reporters after practice in Philadelphia yesterday.
"It's his decision, but the All-Star Game is a reward for players who've had a great first half of the season."


Books of The Times; Can Politically Correct Ever Be Incorrect?
Debating P.C.
The Controversy Over Political Correctness on College Campuses  Edited by Paul Berman  338 pages.
Laurel/Dell. $8, paper.


Four days to Albertville; With Sun and Dryness, The Heat Is on New Track
A forecast of cloudy weather was good news today for officials here at the bobsled and luge track that will be used in the Winter Olympics, which start Saturday.
Low humidity has made the 1,500-meter run brittle.
It cracked on Saturday, opening up a fist-size hole at one point in the frozen layer.


Finns Worried About Russian Border
Here on the brittle edge of the old Soviet empire, Finnish frontier guards are keeping an uneasy vigil this winter for another kind of Russian advance: Instead of tanks and troops, they are watching for smugglers, con men and weary refugees, fleeing toward their prosperous Nordic neighbor in search of food and economic advantage.
With the economic situation in Russia in tatters and with fears of possible unrest in areas close to Finland, the Finnish Government not only moved last month to slightly increase funds for its Frontier Guard, but it has also joined the Red Cross and other private relief agencies in sending shipments of milk and critical foods to areas just across the border.


Wave of Japan-Bashing Stings Pacific Northwest
When American automobile workers were seen on television last month bashing in the hood of a Japanese car, Ron Thornberry, a longshoreman on Puget Sound, did not like what he saw.
As a dock worker at a port where the Japanese are the No. 1 customer, Mr.
Thornberry fears that one international insult too many could escalate into a lost job for him and his union brothers.
And when Japanese investors came forth two weeks ago with an offer to buy the Seattle Mariners as a way to keep the baseball team from leaving town, they were hailed here as civic heroes.
As a delegation led by Gov.
Booth Gardner of Washington got set to plead their case with Fay Vincent, the baseball commissioner, on Tuesday in New York, there were fears that the deal would be a casualty of the latest round of cross-Pacific insults.


Just Call Him the Informer
If one of CBS's chief goals for its Winter Olympics telecast from Albertville, France, is to personalize athletes known by few viewers in the United States, then Draggan Mihailovich may be the network's indispensable man.
"When I was hired," said Mike Pearl, the coordinating producer for CBS's Olympics coverage, "I told Neal Pilson that if you let me hire only one person, it has to be Draggan."


Whereabouts Of Gun Made Focus of Trial
The trial of a white Teaneck police officer accused of shooting a black teen-ager resumed this morning with the state police replacing sheriff's officers in handling security outside the courtroom and prosecutors raising questions about the crude handgun the police say they found in the teen-ager's pocket after his death.
After concluding its cross-examination of the defendant, 31-year-old Officer Gary Spath, the prosecution attempted to determine who had possession of the handgun in the week after the shooting and how one of the eight .22-caliber cartridges the police say they found in the gun developed a nick on its rim, as if it had been struck by a firing pin.


Corrections
An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day on Saturday misstated the location and business of the Alpine Group Inc.
Alpine is based in New York and makes electronic information display products.


Foster's Final Hurdle Is a Gold Medal
Greg Foster is a three-time world champion in the 110-meter hurdles and has won just about every title in track and field.
On Friday night at the Snickers Millrose Games in Madison Square Garden, the 33-year-old Foster will begin his quest for the one honor that has eluded him -- an Olympic gold medal.
"My goal is to win one race this year, in Barcelona," said Foster, referring to this summer's Olympic Games.


Michael Jackson and Pepsi in New Deal
Hot on the heels of the premiere of his latest video, "Remember the Time," Michael Jackson yesterday announced a new deal with Pepsi-Cola International, a world tour this year and the establishment of a Heal the World foundation to help underprivileged children around the world.
After descending the opulent staircase at Radio City Music Hall to the accompaniment of his song "Black or White," Mr.
Jackson joined Pepsi-Cola in announcing the international deal, which the company said was the largest ever between a corporation and a music entertainer.


Microsoft President Is Dismissed
William H. Gates, the chairman of the Microsoft Corporation and the world's wealthiest computer programmer, said yesterday that he was dismissing Michael R. Hallman, the president he selected two years ago.
Mr.
Gates, a brilliant and demanding boss known for bombarding employees with electronic mail at all hours of the night, bluntly said that Mr.
Hallman just did not measure up.
"He was doing a lot of the parts of the job well," Mr.
Gates said in a telephone interview yesterday.
"But as we were thinking through new strategy, I wasn't satisfied that he was the right person for the job."


Can Couture Turn Heads If It Keeps Looking Back?
The haute couture sees itself as the fashion leader of the Western world, and in some ways it is the tops.
Clothes painstakingly made by hand from the finest fabrics are indeed a joy to look at and to wear.
Still, the styles presented last week as the spring and summer openings concluded were mostly tributes to the past.
The only designer who looked to the future was Claude Montana, who parted from his post at the house of Lanvin immediately after his show last Tuesday.
In his two years at Lanvin, he had won wide critical acclaim as the only convincing futurist in the couture.
But he had failed to attract a significant number of clients.
What the Customers Want
The truth is, there are not enough women willing and able to spend at least $10,000 for a dress to support a venture into the 21st century.
Most of those women prefer clothes that express a traditional approach to femininity: defined waistlines, rounded hips, some cleavage and even fluffy petticoats.


C.I.A. Casting About for New Missions
Standing in a nondescript conference room in a convention hotel in East Brunswick, N.J., James T. Fitzgerald does what he has been doing for the last 25 years: pitching the Central Intelligence Agency to aspiring recruits.
"It's not like the James Bond movies," he explains to 28 men and a woman, college graduates invited to the orientation on the basis of their resumes.
"The more you learn about the C.I.A., the more you read about it, the more unromantic it becomes."


Youth Killed After Vandalism
A man fired into a group of youths, killing a 15-year-old boy, after they had used a slingshot to break a window of his house, the authorities said.
The man, Adrian Crump, 36, was ordered held without bond on a charge of first-degree murder.
Mr.
Crump fired as the four youths fled in a car after breaking the window early Saturday, the police said.
Daniel W. Adams died at the scene; the other boys were not hurt.


Japan Premier Joins Critics Of Americans' Work Habits
Just back from a quick visit to the United States, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa added his voice today to those of other Japanese political leaders who have found fault recently with the way Americans perform in the workplace.
He said that America "may lack a work ethic," and that some of the country's economic ills came about because too many American college graduates headed to Wall Street in the 1980's rather than "producing things of value."


F.B.I. Turns to Health Industry Fraud
With losses from health-care fraud estimated in the billions of dollars, the Justice Department announced today that it would increase the number of investigators assigned to the health-care industry and set up special prosecution units in a dozen cities.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation will reassign 50 agents from counterespionage and counterterrorism activities to augment the nearly 100 agents currently assigned to health-care fraud.
The newly reassigned agents will be sent to the 12 cities where the new units are being established.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in some copies on Saturday about a suit filed in Federal Court in Manhattan on behalf of people with speech and hearing disabilities misstated the occupation of the plaintiff, Michael Chatoff.
He is a lawyer.


CHRONICLE
TWEED ROOSEVELT, a great-grandson of Theodore Roosevelt, will spend his 50th birthday following in the footsteps -- or more precisely, the river currents -- of his famous forebear: rafting down the treacherous 1,000-mile Rio Roosevelt in Brazil.
In 1914, Roosevelt and Col.
Candido Rondon of the Brazilian Army navigated the river, then called the Rio da Duvida -- the River of Doubt -- in the heart of the Brazilian rain forest.
Roosevelt was 56 years old at the time.
The trip, the first ever recorded, was believed to have shortened his life and prevented him from running for the Presidency in 1920.


U.S. Assures Florio on Bid For Welfare
Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey and Assemblyman Wayne R. Bryant today received the first direct assurances from the Bush Administration that it would help clear away Federal obstacles to the state's controversial new welfare plan.
The assurances from President Bush and Budget Director Richard G. Darman during a White House meeting here make it likely that New Jersey's sweeping welfare revision, touted as an example for states across the country, will take effect as scheduled on July 1.


Port Authority Cuts Back On Free-Spending Ways
The most obvious symbol of what the Port Authority calls its new leaner image sits high above New York Harbor, on the 44th floor of the World Trade Center.
It is an empty room.


Beyond Diskettes for Data Backup
THE most common strategy for backing up a hard disk drive is to copy files onto a series of diskettes.
Well, not quite.
"The most common strategy is to not back up at all," noted James Porter, who analyzes the hard disk drive industry for Disk/Trend Inc. of Mountain View, Calif., a market research concern.
But "for those who are prudent about the way they approach life," Mr.
Porter said, diskettes are indeed the most popular backup medium.
Almost every personal computer comes with at least one diskette drive.
Diskettes are relatively cheap, and they can be locked in a desk drawer or stowed in a briefcase.


RJR Reports Profits for Quarter and Year
The RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation said yesterday that it earned $161 million, or 14 cents a share, for the fourth quarter of 1991, compared with a loss of $13 million for the comparable period in 1990.
It also reported a profit for 1991, its first full-year profit since the company was acquired in a leveraged buyout in 1987.
For the year, the company earned $368 million, or 22 cents a share, compared with a $429 million loss in 1990.
That difference was largely the result of lower interest payments.
It paid $2.1 billion in interest in 1991, compared with $3 billion a year earlier.


Review/Jazz; Violin and Viola Try Learning to Loosen Up
New jazz compositions for large ensemble are such a dicey commercial proposition that the best way to get them played may be to form a group for that purpose.
Borderline, an 11-member band directed by Paul Nash, is one such customized band, with an unusual lineup including violin and viola along with saxophones, brass and a rhythm section; Mr.
Nash plays seven-stringed guitars, acoustic and electric.
In its first set last Tuesday night at Sweet Basil, Borderline performed pieces by Mr.
Nash; by Jack Walrath, its trumpeter; by Neal Kirkwood, its pianist, and by Chuck Clark, its tenor saxophonist.
Borderline sounded best when it played fixed arrangements.
The group cackled through Mr.
Nash's "Graduation March of the Crash Test Dummies," a mock processional, and Mr.
Clark's "At the Time I Didn't Know What It Was," which evolved from horn chorales to a skewed tango; both pieces evoked Carla Bley's parodic side.
Mr.
Walrath's "Depressions of Eastern Europe" was a suitelike piece akin to compositions by Charles Mingus, whose mid-1970's quintet included Mr.
Walrath.
It turned a Slavic-sounding violin melody into a torchy Gershwinesque theme, the basis for raucous, plunger-muted solos by Mr.
Walrath and by David Taylor on trombone.


Careers; Insecurities In the Ranks Of Managers
THESE days middle managers with jobs worry about how secure their positions are.
Those without jobs wonder not only how long they must search for new ones but also how much security they will have once they find a new one.
Jerome M. Rosow, who heads the Work In America Institute Inc., a research organization, based in Scarsdale, N.Y., thinks such managers may not have to worry much in the future.
He says the pendulum that has swung away from job security for middle managers will swing back again.


South Africa Must Mine Its Human Resources
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 7 report that only 39.2 percent of black South African high school students passed their senior year matriculation exam did not surprise me.
I work with South Africans and have seen how 45 years of apartheid education policies have deprived this "Lost Generation" of adequate education and, for many, of hope.
Nevertheless, there is reason for hope.
President F. W. de Klerk and like-minded South African leaders are struggling to put aside apartheid and bring blacks into the political and economic mainstream.
However, if a democratic South Africa is to work, it needs to view the empowerment of blacks not as charity or even the righting of past wrongs, but as taking advantage of the enormous resources, resourcefulness and talent to be found among black youths who are being lost to society.


South Africa Must Mine Its Human Resources; Keep Up the Pressure
To the Editor:
"South Africa's Trek to Democracy" (editorial, Jan. 5) asserts that "the decisive change occurred in the minds of an Afrikaner ruling elite." You also state that "the era of white rule has now ended in South Africa."
Whatever may have changed in their minds, the Afrikaner elite retains its rule.
Thus, you must be premature in announcing the end of the era of white rule.


London Journal; On the Queen's 40th, Much To-Do Down the Line
In the midst of one of the periodic outcries over the behavior of some of the more junior members of the royal family, Queen Elizabeth II will observe the 40th anniversary of her accession to the throne on Thursday.
Since it is also the anniversary of the death of her father, King George VI, there will be no celebration on the day -- only a BBC television documentary, "Elizabeth R," which its producers say is intended to show how serious and hard working the Queen really is.


Legislative Logjam Loosened By Nassau County Supervisors
After a month of partisan wrangling, the Nassau County Board of Supervisors managed to reach agreement today on the first order of business of the year: a routine measure authorizing the county to issue paychecks to its employees.
The agreement, worked out in a two-hour closed-door meeting this afternoon, was the first shadow of compromise in a textbook case of a Legislature adrift, one in which neither the upstart Democrats, nor the long-reigning Republicans have a working majority.


LTV to Sell 2 Divisions To Venture
The LTV Corporation said today that it had agreed to sell its historic, and profitable, aerospace and missile businesses to a new company formed by the Lockheed Corporation and the Martin Marietta Corporation.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed, but analysts estimated the price at about $350 million in cash.
Most of the money will be used by the company, which has been in bankruptcy for more than five years, to meet its pension obligations.


Carthon's Surprise Was No Big Secret
The Plan B strategy that the Giants revealed over the weekend could indicate a "changing of the guard" at fullback, Coach Ray Handley suggested yesterday.
To the surprise of virtually no one except Maurice Carthon, the workaday fullback was left unprotected when the Giants filed their Plan B list of 37 players to the league last Saturday.
But Carthon apparently is surprised, and hurt.


French 16-Year-Old Wins Swiss Ballet Prize
The Prix de Lausanne ballet competition, which specializes in bringing aspiring young dancers to international attention before they begin their professional careers, celebrated its 20th anniversary over the weekend with a gala studded with past winners.
The idea that talent will out is not foreign to ballet, but a boost along the way helps.
Predicated upon this principle, the Prix de Lausanne offers scholarships to prestigious ballet schools rather than emphasizing Olympic-style medals for young professionals as other major competitions do.


Pay-Per-View Draws Top Bouts, Not Ratings
Boxing has slowly evolved to near-dinosaur status on network or local television; only seven fights were on ABC and CBS last year.
Boxing has become such a rarity that one's pugilistic jollies can only be sated by watching a hockey game or the real-people spectacle "Grudge Match."
Boxing, of course, abounds on cable: on ESPN, the MSG Network and the USA Network -- nurturer of elderly overweights George Foreman and Larry Holmes.


Villagers in Turkey Search for Survivors Buried in Avalanche
Three days after an avalanche obliterated a third of this remote mountain hamlet and killed scores of people, small clusters of soldiers and villagers spread out across an icy hillside today and shoveled wearily through the rubble, some with their bare hands, as hopes faded of finding any more survivors.
The avalanche, which officials at the scene said killed at least 50 people and left 30 missing among the 370 residents, buried a small military outpost and 13 of the 40 homes.


Boston University To Play Harvard in Beanpot Final
Jackie Parker, the Boston University coach, has an appreciation for the Beanpot Tournament, the Boston Garden's annual midwinter salute to college hockey.
He should, because he has been involved in 25 of the 40 tournaments as either a Terrier player or coach.
Of tonight's opening game, one matching his Boston University team and Northeastern, Parker said: "It was a typical Beanpot game. You get control and then you wait for something bad to happen."


2 Reporters Face Subpoenas in Thomas Case
The two reporters who disclosed Prof.
Anita Hill's complaints of sexual harassment against Clarence Thomas were notified today that they would be subpoenaed to appear before a special Senate counsel investigating who may have disclosed the information.
The reports of the accusations prompted an extraordinary new round of Senate confirmation hearings for Mr.
Thomas, who eventually won approval to serve on Supreme Court.


Signings Galore
In Los Angeles, outfielder STAN JAVIER avoided an arbitration hearing with the Dodgers yesterday by agreeing to a one-year contract worth $750,000.
Javier, 27, played in 121 games last season and hit .205 with no homers, 11 runs batted in and 7 stolen bases.
He earned $650,000.
In arbitration, Javier had been offered $675,000 and had asked for $825,000.
In Oakland, Calif., shortstop WALT WEISS and the Athletics agreed to a $760,000, one-year contract, a cut of $20,000 for the player.


Trial in Videotaped Beating Begins


Steelers Hire Hodgson
PAT HODGSON, the Giants' receivers coach for nine years beginning in 1980, was hired yesterday as the Pittsburgh Steelers' tight-ends coach.


Reporter's Notebook; Rather Pulls CBS News Back to the Assassination
The CBS News program "48 Hours" had several reasons for breaking with its usual format to examine, as it will tomorrow night, what Dan Rather calls the "mangrove swamp" of questions that still surround the assassination of John F. Kennedy.
Certainly the fascination with Oliver Stone's movie "J. F. K." was the major reason.
That fascination led to another New York Times/CBS News survey on the assassination.
It revealed what Andrew Heyward, the executive producer of "48 Hours," called startling results: Of those polled, 77 percent said they believed that people besides Lee Harvey Oswald were involved in the killing.
And 75 percent said there was an official cover-up in the case.


Sports of The Times; Tyson Is a Boxing Exception
IN a story in a recent USA Today about the Mike Tyson rape trial, it was stated, "A conviction would cap his stormy relationships with women, which have included a brief, turbulent marriage to actress Robin Givens, several accusations of sexual harassment and three lawsuits."
The next paragraph read, " 'Boxing does not get its enlistees from the debutante line at the local country club,' said the boxing historian, Bert Sugar, editor and publisher of Boxing Illustrated."


Chess
Judit Polgar, the 15-year-old chess phenomenon from Budapest, became the youngest grandmaster ever by winning the Super Championship of Hungary in December with a 6-3 score in an all-grandmaster field.


Classical Music in Review
Emerson String Quartet  Theater at St. Clement's Church


Quick! Can You Name 3 New Jersey Inventors?
ALL right, let's get one thing straight right from the top: New Jersey is a swell place to live and work.
Many parts are turnpike-free and beautiful.
New Jersey has art and music, dancing and charity, hard-working families, great bakeries, wonderful colleges, self-sacrificing parents, efficient refineries, superb school wrestlers, friendly crossing guards, flag factories, sandy beaches, cranberries, tidy lawns, smoke detectors and enough handicap parking for a state twice its size.
New Jersey also has one truck per resident, two too many New York football teams, traffic lights where rust cripples cars before the green comes, a sufficient supply of roadside art galleries featuring velvet Elvises and an inferiority complex inferior to none.


Gotti Trades Some Views On Trial, Tapes and Tyson
John Gotti, confidently urging his co-defendant not to be bitter about their racketeering case, declared yesterday that "we're going to beat this."
In an impromptu conversation while waiting for jury selection to resume in the Federal Courthouse in Brooklyn, Mr.
Gotti's tone was casual and lighthearted as he spoke to his co-defendant, Frank Locascio.
He mused about a series of subjects, from the Mike Tyson rape trial to the waistlines of his own lawyers (compared to those of the prosecutors).


Humanity for Haitians
Under ordinary circumstances, the United States cannot admit every Haitian who arrives on these shores seeking a better life.
But today's circumstances are not ordinary.
The U.S. cannot decently force terrified asylum-seekers to return to the hell their homeland has become.
Since the Supreme Court lifted a restraining order on Friday, the Bush Administration has seemed intent on shipping Haitian would-be refugees home.
Congress needs to retrieve America's reputation for compassion by quickly approving emergency legislation.


Rabies Shots Paid By Humane Society
The Connecticut Humane Society is offering pet owners as much as $85 to protect their cats and dogs from rabies in an effort to stem the spread of the disease from wild animals to pets.
The society plans to distribute about $26,000 in more than 300 grants of $85 each.
Owners may use the money to have a pet neutered while also having it vaccinated against rabies.


Observer; The Road To Coma
This is to thank Mr.
S.
K. of West 92d Street for adding to my collection of well-meaning useless advice.
He sends a cutting from The New York Times of Jan. 4 headlined "How to Check Insurer Health," which includes some of the most useless well- meaning advice I've received all week.
How could I have missed this gem in my own newspaper?
Easily.
It was embedded in an article about the increasing tendency of America's health insurers to take the money and run, and I quit reading health-insurance stories several years ago.
News in this department is always the same: situation hopeless and getting worse, no relief in sight.
Shunning stories like this keeps Old Man Gloom away from the door.


Edwin C. Whitehead, 72, Dies; Financed Biomedical Research
Edwin C. Whitehead, an industrialist who was a major supporter of biomedical research, collapsed and died on Sunday while playing squash at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 72 years old and also had homes in Manhattan and in Vail, Colo.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Legislators Break Promise And Propose Glut of Bills
Despite a bipartisan agreement to keep the 205th Legislature from turning into what legislative leaders call a "bill factory," the 40 members of the Senate and the 80 Assembly members have already filed the traditional glut of bills.
They range from an act to outlaw surrogate parenting for money to one that would designate as the state song a five-stanza ditty that praises New Jersey's farmland, flowers and highways.


South Africa Must Mine Its Human Resources; To Start Building Now
To the Editor:
In "South Africa's Trek to Democracy" (editorial, Jan. 5), on Codesa, South Africa's recently convened interracial constitutional convention, you conclude that "as Codesa moves forward, Americans can finally turn to ways of helping instead of punishing South Africa."
The day after President Bush lifted the bulk of United States sanctions against South Africa, I booked a ticket to Johannesburg.
After hearing so much, I had to see it for myself.


Municipal Cable Debut: Don't Expect Much Glitz
So it's not HBO, and maybe cable viewers won't love it the way they love their MTV.
"Crosswalks," New York City's new municipal cable network, has the video verite look of C-Span and its "talking heads," which are not to be confused with a rock band.
But what the talking heads on "Crosswalks" will be talking about may seem less compelling to some viewers than the lawmakers on C-Span.
"Crosswalks" is the network for "Reducing Your Garbage" or "Early Warning Signs of TB" or "How to Polish Your Resume."


Q&amp;A
Birds of Hawaii
Q.
How did birds get to Hawaii before people?
A.
Part of the answer is that they can fly long distances, said Dr.
H.
Douglas Pratt, a staff research associate at the Museum of Natural Science at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge.
Dr.
Pratt, the author of "A Field Guide to the Birds of Hawaii and the Tropical Pacific" (Princeton), said that people are surprised that birds can fly as far as they can.
For instance, some fly nonstop from Alaska to Hawaii on their migratory path, he said.
"These are only tourists, with winter homes there," he said, but added that it was "perfectly reasonable to suspect that other birds could have reached the Hawaiian Islands that way."


Pratt &amp; Whitney's Comeback Bid
After losing much of the aircraft engine business to General Electric during the 1980's, Pratt &amp; Whitney appears to be making a comeback.
Lackadaisical customer service, with erratic parts supplies, are only bad memories.
Now, a leaner company has a head start in the contest to supply a new generation of wide-body aircraft with the most powerful airline engines ever built.


Banking Troubleshooter Gets a Healthy Change
Lawrence K. Fish, who presided over the death throes of the Bank of New England, is back in banking, this time as head of the Citizens Financial Group of Providence, R.I., one of the region's strongest banking companies.
"It will be quite a change," Mr.
Fish said, noting that the old Bank of New England had "single troubled credits that were larger than all the bad loans at Citizens." Mr.
Fish, 47, came to the Bank of New England in early 1990 as part of a rescue mission after losses on commercial real estate had brought the bank to its knees.


Standing in Line
A new computer software system invented by a scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology promises to help reduce the time Americans wait in lines at post offices, banks and supermarkets, or in waiting for a response to 911 emergency telephone calls.
Dr.
Richard C. Larson, a professor of computer science at M.I.T., said his system, which has been licensed by the university for commercial application, is already on trial at two post offices in North Carolina, with the object of reducing customer waiting time to less than five minutes, a goal set by Postmaster General Anthony M. Frank for all post offices.


Second Graders Take to Interactive TV Teaching
For more than 20 minutes today, 18 second graders at the 13th Street School donned earphones, stared at television screens and answered questions posed by colorful puppets by pressing buttons on a remote-control unit.
The pupils were completely absorbed in their interplay with the images on the screen, drawing words of praise from the images for correct answers and added instructions for wrong ones.


Review/Television; On the Abortion Issue, Principles and Tactics
With the abortion controversy heating up again, not that it has cooled much in recent years, tonight's Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism seminar pokes into the flames.
Anti-abortionists and pro-choicers go at it with conviction and passion at 10 P.M. on Channels 13 and 49.
The conflict turns out to be no more susceptible of compromise in the studio than it is on the streets.
"Life and Choice After Roe v. Wade" begins with a hypothetical situation concocted by the evening's bustling moderator, Prof.
Charles R. Nesson of the Harvard Law School: the Supreme Court of the imaginary country of Westphalia has overturned its own version of Roe v.
Wade.
What now?
Moving briskly from one to another of the 17 panelists, often plopping himself down on the table within inches of the person being provoked, Professor Nesson probes principles and tactics.


S.&amp; P. Cuts Rating On Utility's Debt
Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities, which serves those two New York counties northwest of Manhattan, has lost its AA- debt rating.
Standard &amp; Poor's cut the rating on the senior secured debt yesterday to A+.
It also cut the power company's preferred stock rating to A from A+.
About $435 million of debt and preferred stock is affected.


INSIDE
Noriega Trial Resumes
The drug trafficking trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega resumed, with the defense beginning its case with a shift in strategy.
Page A10.
Finland's New Fortifications
Finland is using an unorthodox defense policy to protect its borders with a changing Russia.
Page A7.
Obstacle for Atomic Waste
A Federal judge ruled the Energy Department could not open a nuclear waste dump without the approval of New Mexico and Congress.
Page A10.
New Fears on Ozone Hole
NASA data suggest a hole in the ozone layer could develop this winter over the United States, Canada and Europe.
Science Times, page C4.
For Schools, Funds Batted In
Bobby Bonilla, the Mets' new star, is to donate $500 to a Bronx school fund for each run he drives in.
Page B1.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Campaign's New Phase: Impress Voters, or Die
The Democrats are entering the Hobbesian phase of the New Hampshire primary campaign: It will be nasty, brutish and short.
Then New Hampshire's voters begin their "winnowing" -- a bucolic word that fails to capture the rough process of deciding which campaigns will die here and which will roll on to warmer climes.
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts enters this phase in the happy position of doing better than expected.
He has stubbornly held on to second place in the New Hampshire polls, behind Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, and has made subtle political capital out of the obvious fact that with his mumbling, professorial presentation he will never be a slick media candidate.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about a hydroelectric project in Quebec misstated the New York Power Authority's position on a contract to buy electricity from the project's developer.
The authority chairman, Richard M. Flynn, indicated that his agency might not sign the contract by Nov. 30, as earlier agreed; he did not say definitely that it would not.


Female Adders Play Around; Biologists Offer an Excuse
FEMALE adders that mate with many partners have considerably more surviving babies than do female snakes that settle for one or two paramours, scientists have discovered.
The finding is the first hard evidence that lustiness can give a female a genetic advantage in the reproductive sweepstakes.
Biologists have long known that male animals can benefit from licentiousness: the more widely they spread their seed, the greater their potential number of offspring.
But female carnality has been less easy to explain.
After all, a female can only be inseminated once during a breeding season, and a single ejaculate holds more than enough semen to fertilize her eggs.
Why, then, should she go to the risk and bother of cavorting with multiple partners?
Competing Sperm


Neanderthals: Dead End or Ancestor?
EVER since Neanderthals were discovered nearly a century and a half ago, they have been seen as something less than fully human.
Their bones suggest that they were beetle-browed, squat, thick-boned, heavily muscled and incredibly strong, with short forearms and shinbones, a face pulled so far forward that the chin disappears, a side-to-side gait and a grip that might break a person's fingers.
But anthropologists now believe that Neanderthals closely approached the earliest modern humans in intellect and level of culture, and in some regions may even have equaled them.
Were Neanderthals our ancestors or an evolutionary dead end?


BUSH CONFRONTED BY SOME GOVERNORS ON ECONOMIC PLAN
A White House effort to rally the nation's governors behind President Bush's economic plan degenerated into a tense confrontation today between Mr.
Bush and several Democratic governors who believe that the states will pay for Washington's efforts to cut the budget in an election year.
The exchange, in a meeting between Mr.
Bush and the bipartisan National Governors' Association, was touched off not only by campaign politics, but also by differences between the parties over economic policy and grievances by both Democratic and Republican governors who are concerned about the states' increasing burdens.


James C. Cain, 78, Physician to President Johnson
Dr.
James C. Cain, a specialist in internal medicine at the Mayo Clinic for 30 years and the longtime personal physician to President Lyndon B. Johnson and his family, died on Saturday at his home in Rochester, Minn.
He was 78 years old.
Dr. Cain died of cancer, said Hoyt J. Finnamore, a spokesman for the Mayo Clinic.


Miami Women Flourish in Big East
Breaking into the Big East Conference has been a largely sobering experience for the University of Miami men's basketball team.
When the Hurricanes upset St.
John's recently in their only conference victory, the team reacted as if a national holiday should be declared.
Meanwhile, quietly, Miami's women's team is treating the Big East more like the Big Feast.
The Hurricanes are 10-0 in the conference and 18-1 over all.
Moreover, Miami is ranked ninth in The Associated Press poll and has the nation's longest winning streak (18 games) since losing its season opener in overtime at Florida State.


Foul Line Is Hurting Knicks' Bottom Line
Even though statistics don't lie, you can lie with statistics.
Or be fooled by them, anyway.
There is, for example, a rule of thumb in basketball, among other rules of thumb, that you must hit your foul shots to win.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices fell in Tokyo this morning.
At midday, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 181.48 points, or more than eight-tenths of 1 percent, to 21,958.11.
On Monday, the index gained 116.54 points.


Undercover Officers Kill a Drug Suspect
A drug suspect was shot and fatally wounded by undercover New York City police officers yesterday when he became suspicious during a phony drug transaction the officers had set up and drew his pistol, the police said.
Two of the three undercover officers involved in the deal drew their revolvers and shot the man, who died last evening at Peninsula Hospital in Queens.


Corrections
An entry in the Finance Briefs listing of Business Day yesterday misstated the amount of new common stock to be sold by Coltec Industries.
It is $500 million.


Europe to Give Further Aid To Five Yugoslav Republics
The 12 foreign ministers of the European Community, ending a two-day meeting here, said today that they would offer further economic help to five of the six Yugoslav republics, excluding only Serbia.
The community regards Serbia as the aggressor in the civil war.
The ministers postponed consideration of recognition for Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia.


Albany Sells Bonds, but at a Higher Interest Rate
New York State sold $85 million worth of general-obligation bonds today, a move that will cost taxpayers an extra $1.5 million to $2 million in interest costs because of the state's recently lowered bond rating.
It is impossible to calculate what the lowered bond rating will ultimately cost taxpayers, officials say, when all the state's bonds for this quarter are sold.
But they estimated that once the state sells an anticipated $3 billion in various types of bonds in the first quarter of 1992, taxpayers can expect to pay tens of millions dollars more than they would have before the ratings were lowered.
Rebuke Over Budget
In January, in a severe rebuke to the state for the way it runs its budget, Standard &amp; Poor's announced that it was lowering its rating on New York's general-obligation bonds from A to A-, the state's lowest level ever and the second lowest in the country, higher only than that of Massachusetts.


Dr. Gloria Friedman, 61, Expert on Mother-Daughter Relationship
Dr.
Gloria Friedman Franklin, a psychoanalyst and faculty member of the William Alanson White Institute of Psychiatry, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 61 years old.
She died of breast cancer, said her husband, Dr. Girard Franklin, also a psychoanalyst.


U.N. Study Assails the Way B.C.C.I. Was Shut by Western Central Banks
The swift seizure and shutdown of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International last year by Western central bankers has undermined trade from several third world countries and increased the risk that depositors will suffer large losses, according to a United Nations research group.
The group, the United Nations Center on Transnational Corporations, was highly critical of the country-by-country settlements pursued by some Western nations.


Seattle Group Displays Major Show of Support
The Governor of the state of Washington and the Mayor of Seattle met with major league baseball officials yesterday to try to persuade them that there is sufficient business and community support to keep the struggling Mariners in the city.
To that end, the Seattle contingent promised to supply major league baseball with details of a three-year, $39 million advertising and ticket-sale revenue package today.


World League Kicks Off Its Talent Hunt for 1992
The vaguely familiar names, like Babe Laufenberg and Roger Vick, mingled with the lesser-known names, like David Senczyszyn and Richard Chapura, on the chart that the New York/New Jersey Knights set up in their Giants Stadium offices here today to monitor the World League of American Football draft.
After the first eight rounds of the draft today, Reggie Williams, the Knights' general manager, and Darrell (Mouse) Davis, the coach, were pleased with their picks.
The team's primary aim is to shore up its porous offensive line, which gave up a W.L.A.F.-leading 68 sacks last year.


Dinkins Is Planning Trip to Puerto Rico
With his support among Hispanic New Yorkers sagging, Mayor David N. Dinkins is planning to travel to Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic this spring if his busy schedule allows it, his aides said.
The trip would be a "working vacation" devoted to forging "linkages that ought to exist between these two islands and New York," the Mayor's spokesman, Leland T. Jones, said.


GTE's Operating Earnings Rise
The GTE Corporation, the nation's second-largest telecommunications company, said yesterday that its fourth-quarter operating earnings rose more than 10 percent, to $481 million, or 53 cents a share, from $435 million, or 48 cents a share, a year earlier.
The results were within analysts' expectations, a surprise in itself.
"This is the first time in nearly three years that I haven't had to revise earnings downward for GTE and the 'Baby Bells,' " said Gregory R. Sawers, a telecommunications analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company.
"That may be an indication the economy is bottoming out."


Metropolitan Diary
THE PLACE: Prince Street in SoHo.
The time: A Sunday morning after a light overnight snowfall.


Gambino Gained 'Mob Tax' With Fear, Prosecutor Says
A group headed by Thomas Gambino simply used fear conjured by the Gambino name to extort a "mob tax" on every garment delivery in New York City, the prosecution told jurors yesterday.
"They didn't have to go in with their guns drawn," Assistant District Attorney Eliot Spitzer said.


Reviews/Music; Stage-Diving to Mozart From Scatterbrain
It has fast funk riffs in the bass, squealing heavy-metal lead guitar, rapped verses and sung choruses.
It also has a look -- heavy metal's long hair plus the shorts and hand-me-down clothes of hardcore -- and a general attitude of fun-loving skepticism.
All that's missing for one of rock's newest subgenres is a name: funk-and-roll, punk-funk, metal-hip-hop, funkcore and funk-metal are all possibilities.
Labeled or not, the music has enlisted audiences out for a hyperactive good time, like the inexhaustible stage-divers who turned out on Friday night to see Scatterbrain at the Marquee.
Scatterbrain didn't invent the music, which arose in the 1980's with the Red Hot Chili Peppers, Fishbone, Living Colour, the Royal Crescent Mob and various rappers, all looking back to Funkadelic, Jimi Hendrix and Led Zeppelin.
Within the style, Scatterbrain leans more toward rock than funk; Tommy Christ, its singer and lyricist, emerged from the hardcore band Ludichrist.
With dozens of bands rushing in to the new market niche, Scatterbrain is one of the best: snappy and rambunctious and droll.


Plan to Share Sites Seems a Long Stretch
To help offset the surging cost of staging the Olympics, future Games may be held in several regions of a country or in even more than one country, the president of the International Olympic Committee said today.
But one city would continue to have overall responsibility for an Olympics, said Juan Antonio Samaranch, in a speech at the opening ceremony of the committee's 98th session.


Judge Dismisses 3 From Panel of Potential Jurors in Gotti Trial
Jury selection for John Gotti's racketeering trial suffered a setback yesterday when the judge dismissed three people who had previously been approved as potential jurors.
The dismissals came a day after Mr.
Gotti's lawyer, Albert J. Krieger, asked the judge to question them privately to determine if they had read news articles over the weekend reporting that the prosecution plans to present evidence that Mr.
Gotti authorized six murders in addition to the five murders already charged in the indictment.
The charges portray Mr.
Gotti as the boss of the Gambino crime family.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 27 about Peggy Connolly, press secretary for the Presidential campaign of Paul E. Tsongas and former spokeswoman for the Democratic National Campaign Committee, misstated her age.
She is 34.


G.O.P. PROPOSES CURB ON LAWSUITS
The Bush Administration and Congressional Republicans proposed legislation today to change the rules of litigation in Federal courts, continuing a campaign that has positioned Vice President Dan Quayle as a scourge of the legal profession.
The main proposals of the legislation, which is intended to reduce the number of frivolous or otherwise unnecessary lawsuits and to speed the civil-trial process, are carefully limited in scope.


INSIDE
Attica Trial Jury Gives Mixed Verdict
A Federal jury found a former Attica deputy warden liable on two civil claims of having overseen brutal reprisals against inmates.
But it rejected claims that the former Corrections Commissioner, Russell G. Oswald, failed to provide adequate medical care to inmates.
Page B1.
Venezuela Repulses Coup
Soldiers repulsed an attack by rebel troops and tanks on the presidential palace.
A leading paper said 70 were killed and 300 arrested.
Page A10.
U.S. to Ease Haiti Embargo
The Bush Administration said it would modify its embargo against Haiti's Government to ease the plight of workers made jobless.
Page A8.
Whistle-Blower's Fate
The Government found that a technician at a nuclear plant was told to sit in a room filled with toxic chemicals and do useless work.
Page A16.
Sumo Movie Canceled
Sony Pictures canceled the filming of "Hell Camp," a comedy about Americans in Japan, after the Sumo Association refused to cooperate.
Page C15.


Defining the New Plowshares Those Old Swords Will Make
On a narrow street near art galleries and boutiques, next door to an acupuncturist who trades in Chinese herbs, is an encouraging sign of how the nation's scientific best and brightest might redirect themselves now that the cold war is over.
It is the Prediction Company, a private spinoff of the Los Alamos laboratory, the birthplace of the atomic bomb high in the mountains near here.
Computers and young men with ponytails dot the office.
Company scientists, once on the Federal payroll, are now private entrepreneurs using world-class skills in chaos theory to predict the rise and fall of stocks and bonds.
Some Win, Some Hunker Down
"We have something that wins," J. Doyne Farmer, 39 years old, a company founder and theoretical physicist, said with an easy smile, his computer screen alive with numbers.


Ruffle Here, Flourish There As Fashion Honors Its Own
IN an evening that had some of the pomp of the Academy Awards but lacked the polish, the Council of Fashion Designers of America held its 11th annual awards ceremony and dinner Monday night at Lincoln Center.
Among the winners were Isaac Mizrahi, as designer of the year; Karl Lagerfeld, the Chanel designer, for his accessories, and Ralph Lauren, who received the council's lifetime achievement award.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; After Bad Start, Bush Seems To Have Steadied Support
President Bush's political standing in New Hampshire has finally begun to stabilize, Republican leaders here say, but some of them describe the electoral situation as highly volatile and suggest that he could still be seriously damaged by Patrick J. Buchanan's insurgent candidacy in the state's Presidential primary two weeks from today.
Former State Attorney General Tom Rath, who is considered one of New Hampshire's ablest Republican strategists, said that "the bleeding has been stopped" after a dangerously slow start by Mr.
Bush.
But he warned, "The electorate is not as settled as it should be at this stage from the President's point of view."


Girl, 6, Is Shot in Harlem
A 6-year-old girl, walking with her mother on Frederick Douglass Boulevard in Harlem last night, was shot in the hip with a pellet gun, the police said.
A police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Edelle James, said the police did not know whether the shot was fired at random or whether the gunman was trying to hurt the girl or her mother, who were walking north along the boulevard between 153d and 154th Streets about 8:15 P.M.
The girl, whose name was not released by the police, was reported in good condition at Harlem Hospital, a hospital spokesman said.


Warning Shots From Caracas
Democratic government in Venezuela survived a disturbingly close call yesterday.
The clatter of rebel artillery fire against government buildings was bad enough.
More frightening was the indifference of many civilians.
Within hours, most military units had loyally moved to defend constitutional authority.
But civilians have been slower to rally behind the embattled rule of President Carlos Andres Perez.


Brown to Clippers?
LARRY BROWN, who parted ways with the San Antonio Spurs recently, will be named head coach of the Los Angeles Clippers tomorrow, a San Antonio television station reported last night.
KSAT-TV reported that a "reliable source on the West Coast" had provided the information that Brown would succeed MIKE SCHULER, who was dismissed Sunday after the Clippers had lost 10 of 15 games.


Lawyers Block Attempt to Open Disciplinary Files
The American Bar Association's governing body voted resoundingly today to keep most formal complaints against lawyers secret.
A proposed model rule that would have opened up disciplinary procedures from the moment a complaint was filed was twice watered down, to the point where files would become available only after an investigation revealed preliminary indications of wrongdoing.


Black Hole Theory Faces Challenge
To the Editor:
No one has ever explained the jets seen emerging from many galaxies in any way other than as a result of a black hole.
If you have jets, you have to have a black hole.
Dr.
F.
Duccio Macchetto of the Space Telescope Science Institute so explained current theory in a Jan. 17 report that astronomers believe they are near proof of the black hole theory.
Dr.
Macchetto assures me this is not his view.


MITTERRAND PLANS PARLIAMENT VOTE
Angered by continuing protests over a radical Palestinian leader's visit to France last week, President Francois Mitterrand tonight dismissed calls for the resignation of two top Cabinet ministers and defied the opposition to try to defeat the Government in Parliament.
In an interview with two French television channels, Mr.
Mitterrand reiterated that he had not been consulted before the Palestinian leader, George Habash, the head of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, was allowed into France for medical treatment.
Mr.
Mitterrand said several senior officials had been dismissed for their "error of judgment."


CHRONICLE
How do you attract new young audiences to classical music concerts?
Some people are betting that DUDLEY MOORE, the film star who happens to hold degrees in music and composition from Oxford, will be a major draw.
J. &amp; F. Martell, the Cognac producers, will sponsor a series of concerts at which Mr.
Moore will be the piano soloist.
The first concert will be with the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra on Feb. 23; later performances are scheduled with the Seattle Symphony, the Minnesota Orchestra.


Mobil Names Official To Deal With Russia
The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it had established a high-level unit headed by John J. O'Connor, an executive with broad experience in the oil giant's international operations, to negotiate deals directly with officials in Russia and other nations that are making overtures to the global oil industry.
"We want to make sure that we're aware of what's happening and have the opportunity to participate if it seems desirable," said Allen E. Murray, Mobil chairman and chief executive.
The chances for big oil discoveries and production in the former Soviet Union, he said, are "extremely large."


Earle Palmer Brown Gets Lottery Again
For the second time in nine months, Earle Palmer Brown in Tampa has been awarded the Florida Lottery's $27.5 million account.
The agency had won the account from Bozell Inc. in Tampa after a review last May, a decision immediately protested by Bozell and other agencies that participated in the review.
State officials rescinded the choice and asked lottery officials to try again.
More protests delayed the final selection until Monday.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  IRAQ REJECTS U.N. PLAN
Iraq rejects the United Nations plan for monitoring its arms industry and abruptly ends talks with the U.N. about selling oil to pay for imports of food and medicine for Kurds in northern Iraq.
A1  ATOMIC SCIENTISTS' NEW ROLE
With the cold war over, scientists at the Prediction Company, a privatespinoff of the Los Alamos laboratory, are using their skills in physics and mathematics to work out new theories for business, technology and even saving the environment.
A1  LOST CITY IN THE SANDS
Guided by ancient maps and surveys from space, archeologists and explorers discover a lost city deep in the sands of Arabia.
They are sure it was the hub of the ancient frankincense trade.
A1  The mood is gloomy in Cambodia after Prince Sihanouk's return.
A3  Rivalries among Vietnamese refugees in Hong Kong spur violence.A3  LOAN GUARANTEES FOR ISRAEL
The Bush Administration tells Israel it will consider $10 billion in loanguarantees if new housing starts are halted in the occupied territories.
A1  VENEZUELAN COUP IS REPULSED
Loyal Venezuelan soldiers respulse an attack by rebel troops and raids on the presidential palace.
A leading newspaper says 70 people were killed and 300 rebels arrested.
A10  FOCUSING HAITI SANCTIONS
The Bush Administration said it would modify its embargo against Haiti's Government to ease its impact on workers.
A8  A GERMAN SPY INQUIRY
A popular leader in eastern Germany is caught in a crossfire of controversy over collaboration with the old Communist secret police.
A5  A STADIUM CRUMBLES
The crumbling of a wall at Montreal's Olypic stadium is seen as a symbol of the city's economic and social problems.
A4  Barriers crumble as U.S.
Embassy begins to hire Russians again.
A6  National A16-21  CONGRESS VOTES AID TO JOBLESS
Both houses approved a 13-week extension of unemployment benefits for two million people, a measure that President Bush has promised to sign quickly.
A1  Connecticut is struggling with rising unemployment.
A18  IT'S TOUGH BEING EVERYMAN
As in campaigns past, the President is having trouble presenting himself to the electorate as a man in touch with middle-class life.
Never was that more evident than yesterday in Florida, where Mr.
Bush confronted the modern supermarket.
A1  The President appears to be gaining in New Hampshire.
A20  One constant in New Hampshire: many are still undecided.
A20  Governor Clinton's important financial alliance.
A20  ONE FIGHT ON THOMAS GOES ON
In a floor speech that underscored the lingering rancor over the handling of the Clarence Thomas nomination, the Senate majority leader blamed the President for delays and contentiousness in the confirmation process generally.
A19  WHISTLE-BLOWER'S PUNISHMENT
The Labor Department upheld the claim of a technician at a Government nuclear laboratory who said that after he complained about safety problems, plant managers retaliatd by ordering him to sit in a room filled with toxic and radioactive chemicals and do useless work.
The finding runs counter to the assertion of Energy Secretary Watkins that workers at the nation's nuclear weapons complex are free to voice safety concerns.
A16  STEAM APLENTY, BUT NOT MONEY
Scranton Journal: Even as construction proceeds at America's newest national park, a memorial to steam-powered transportation, it is an open question whether a lack of financing will leave the place virtually bare of anything to see.
A16  ACTION ON PROSTATE DRUG
A drug to shrink an enlarged prostate gland moves nearer to approval by the Food and Drug Administration.
A17  LETTERS TO NORIEGA
A former head of the Drug Enforcement Administration acknowledged sending Gen.
Noriega letters of praise in 1987.
A16  A judge overturned Dallas's ban on homosexual police officers.
A17  Education Page B7  Kentucky tests the teeth in its new education law.
A chance taken on a migrant worker brings a college a $10 million gift.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 DINKINS PLAYS PEACEMAKER
Mayor Dinkins moved to calm the feud between members of his own administration and a mayoral commission on the homeless, which has called for sweeping changes in the city's shelter system.
A1  Neediest Cases B6  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-10  Vietnamese chef spreads the word about a vivid cuisine.
C1  Restaurant family thrives.
C1  Fashion awards dinner.
C1  Saint Laurent's 30 years C8  Wine Talk C10  Health Page C12  Personal Health: Not having friends can be hazardous to health.
Cancer specialists debate timing of breast cancer surgery.
Arts/Entertainment C14-22  Hollywood bows to sumos and drops a film in Japan.
C15  Film: "Mississippi Masala." C15  Music: City Opera season.
C14  Rampal birthday concert.
C15  Word and Image: Book Notes C15  "The Sheriff of Nottingham," a novel by Richard Kluger.
C20  Obituaries D23  Francis Birch, a geophysicist.
Gloria F. Franklin, a psychoanalyst.
Sports B8-14  Baseball: Seattle group meets with Vincent.
B14  Basketball: Knicks rout Heat.
B9  Criticism won't stop Johnson's All-Star quest.
B11  Boxing: Accuser's mother testifies in Tyson trial.
B14  Column: Vecsey on U.S. basketball team.
B9  Hockey: Devils beat the Flyers.
B13  Olympics: Snow falls, problems begin.
B9  Racial controversy in Spain.
B12  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  An unpresidential primary.
The ozone hole and Mr.
Bush.
Warning shots from Caracas.
Letters A22  Anna Quindlen: Evan's two moms.
A23  Roger Morris: Toward a policy that's no longer foreign.
A23  Ruth W. Messinger: Andy Stein's money machine.
A23


Cancer Surgeons Debate Timing of Breast Operations
PROVOCATIVE new research suggesting that the timing of breast cancer surgery in the menstrual cycle can dramatically affect its success has ignited a fierce debate among cancer specialists.
Recent studies have found that pre-menopausal women newly diagnosed with breast cancer survive far longer when the operation to remove the tumor is performed during the second half of their monthly cycle.


For People Who Have Fair Skins, Suntans May Raise Gallstone Risks
FAIR-SKINNED people who sunbathe a lot may have a significantly greater chance of developing gallstones than people who shy away from the burning rays, a new study suggests.
The study was done by Dr.
Stan Pavel, a biochemist and dermatologist at University Hospital Leiden in the Netherlands.
Dr.
Pavel compared 206 whites of all skin types, examining their attitudes toward sunbathing and the incidence of gallstones among them.


Theater in Review
Anima Mundi  Village Theater Company 133 West 22d Street Manhattan Through Feb. 23  By Don Nigro; directed by Henry Fonte; assistant director, Gigi Rivkin; set by Mr.
Fonte; sound by Jim Harrington; stage manager, Lisa Jean Lewis; technical director, Zeke Zaccaro; lighting by Craig Little; costumes by Marjorie Fennan.
Presented by the Village Theater Company.
WITH: Michelle Berke, Michael Curran, Susan Farwell, Marjorie Feenan, Christie Harrington, Randy Kelly, Terrence Martin, Julia McLaughlin, David McConnell, Howard Thoresen, Patrick Turner, Patrick White and Zeke Zaccaro.


Montreal Journal; The Proud City of 'Great Events' Has a Great Fall
When a 55-ton chunk of concrete fell from the outer wall of the Olympic Stadium here last summer, the immediate casualty was the rest of the home season for the Montreal Expos, the city's baseball team.
But because the stadium is a landmark, the crumbling of its wall was taken by many here as a symbol of the economic and social problems that have gnawed away at the city's self-confidence.
Stylish and innovative, the stadium seemed like an ideal talisman for French-speaking Canada when it was commissioned for the 1976 Summer Olympic Games.
But because the structure and its retractable roof were plagued with technical problems, it ended up costing the province of Quebec more than $2 billion, some of it still being paid off by Montrealers with a special property tax.


'We Have to Do It With Manufacturing'
"I think the U.S. has every reason to be extremely proud of what it's accomplished over the last 50 years. We've done tremendous things for the world. Now we have to think about ourselves a little, but not step totally away from the world issues. The unfortunate thing is that as we've been altruistic, other economic regions, particularly Europe and the Pacific rim, have been able to focus their energies on economic competitiveness, so we find ourselves disadvantaged.
"The little corner of the world that I'm interested in changing is manufacturing capability. The United States has lost its ability to manufacture competitive products today. It's particularly true when we're talking of high-volume, low-cost manufacturing, the kind of thing that has made TV's and VCR's so popular today.


60-Minute Gourmet
MANY home cooks have the mistaken perception that to cook foreign cuisines -- in this case Moroccan -- one needs special knowledge and equipment.
But one can dip into the flavors of another cuisine simply by knowing the appropriate seasonings and how to blend them.
Usually nothing more exotic than a saute pan or a steamer is needed.
In the case of Moroccan food, which is well known in France, the major flavor sensations come from cumin, turmeric, sometimes coriander, ginger and cinnamon.
Applying these judiciously to chicken, fish or red meat can give them a startling new dimension.
In this recipe, I use four tuna steaks that weigh about 6 ounces each.
Tuna and salmon, two species with a relatively high oil content, seem to work particularly well with these vibrant flavors.
More subtle fish like sole and flounder might be overpowered.


Real Estate; Despite Slump in Atlanta, Mall Plans Are Under Way
THE construction of a big new shopping mall and the expansion or renovation of five others are among the few bright spots in Atlanta's slumping retail construction market.
The Homart Development Company and the JMB Retail Properties Company have begun construction of North Point Mall, a 1.3-million-square-foot center in suburban Atlanta.
The project, which is expected to be completed in mid-1993, will be anchored by Rich's, Sears and J. C. Penney.


Albany Is Ordered to Pay Doctors for Elderly Poor
A Federal appeals court panel ruled yesterday that New York State must pick up the difference between what doctors and hospitals charge for treating elderly poor patients and what Medicare pays out in reimbursements.
The state stopped reimbursing doctors and hospitals for such costs with Medicaid money in 1987, saving $45 million that year and more each year since.
But in ruling on a case brought by New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation and the New York State Medical Society, the panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan said the state's action was "at odds with the clear intent" of Federal laws setting up Medicare.


Aid Is Good, but Job Would Be Better
To people who have been out of work a long time, Congress's approval of 13 more weeks of unemployment benefits today was good news, but not nearly as good as a job.
"I think it's a good idea; it's needed," Ray Bradley, a computer salesman from Fairfield, said as he left the State Employment Security Division office here, where he had come to straighten out his eligibility for an initial 20 weeks of emergency benefits that Congress approved in November.


U.S. Embassy in Moscow Tries to End Its Isolation
The United States Embassy, the buttoned-down security compound denounced by its own employees as a bastion of the cold war, is quietly easing its stringent rules against socializing beyond its walls and is once again hiring Russians for menial work.
Fourteen of the 15 republics of the former Soviet Union have just been downgraded from "critical" security risks to "high," meaning diplomats can travel to them alone, without chaperones.
The regulations for the continuing exception -- Russia -- are likely to be liberalized in the next few weeks.


Theater in Review
Julie Halston's Lifetime of Comedy  Actors' Playhouse 100 Seventh Avenue South, at Bleecker Street Manhattan Written and performed by Julie Halston; directed by Kenneth Elliott; scenery by B. T. Whitehill; lighting by Vivien Leone; production stage manager, Allison Sommers; associate producers, Dea Lawrence and Carmel Gunther; company manager, Alan D. Perry.


British Deal Upheld
The European Court of Justice today quashed a European Commission order that British Aerospace P.L.C. repay to Britain $:44.4 million, about $80 million, that it received as enhancements to the deal in which it bought the Rover auto operations in 1988.
The court ruled that the commission, the executive body of the European Commission, had not followed correct procedures in an inquiry it conducted before it declared the enhancements to be illegal state aid in June 1990.
The commission ordered the repayment last June after inquiries prompted by a political scandal that erupted in Britain when it was discovered that British Aerospace had received $:39 million more in state aid than the Government had at first acknowledged.


U.S. Plans to Sharpen Focus Of Its Sanctions Against Haiti
The Bush Administration said today that it would modify its embargo against Haiti's military Government to punish anti-democratic forces and ease the plight of workers who lost jobs because of the ban on trade.
As the State Department announced that the Administration would be "fine tuning" its economic sanctions, efforts in Congress to grant "temporary protected status" to more than 10,000 Haitian exiles in custody at the United States Navy base at Guantanamo, Cuba, were running into serious problems in both the House and the Senate.
This status would freeze the return of refugees until the end of the Haitian crisis.


Key Congressmen Vow To Act Soon on Taxes
Both the House and Senate tax-writing committees will vote this month on President Bush's tax and growth program and on competing Democratic proposals, their chairmen said today.
Votes in both houses are expected before the March 20 deadline set by Mr.
Bush last month.
Dan Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat who heads the House Ways and Means Committee, said his panel would act by the end of next week.
And Lloyd Bentsen, the Texas Democrat who heads the Senate Finance Committee, said in a brief interview that he expected his group to act during the week of Feb. 24.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Forget Beats Mansdorf


Unrelenting Knicks Roll to Largest Victory of Season
Whoever went to the Knicks' game last night looking for suspense should have gone to a movie instead.
New York began to dominate the Miami Heat in the second quarter and never let up.
How one-sided was it?
The Knicks led by 19 points at halftime.
They led by 31 points in the fourth quarter.
During one stretch, Miami went 7 minutes 55 seconds without a field goal.
Even the foul troubles of Charles Oakley, Mark Jackson and Xavier McDaniel did nothing to deter the Knicks.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 31
Jan. 24
Feb. 1
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
6.9
6.6
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.8
2.8
Gasoline stocks
230.0
228.9
224.7
Distillate stocks
128.0
133.6
110.7
Crude imports, daily
5.2
5.7
6.6
Product imports, daily
2.2
1.1
1.6
Crude stocks
334.3
338.8
328.0
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
80.0
81.1
82.7
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Fitch Gets a Reminder of the Old Word 'Stale'
The Nets, who went on the road a week and a half ago with a five-game winning streak and came off it with a five-game losing streak, held their first team practice today since returning from the West Coast on Sunday.
Although Coach Bill Fitch had no excuses for his team's turnaround, he had a basic explanation: "We were just not playing good."
"In the old days, they used to call it getting stale," added Fitch, who watched as most of the positives of a 12-3 stretch before the trip went up in smoke with losses in Philadelphia, Sacramento, Phoenix, Portland and Los Angeles against the Clippers.
"At one point during the streak, we were picking each other up, we had good interaction, good vibes."


Scranton Journal; Much Steaming Over 'Steamtown'
As workers prepare the foundation for one railroad museum and erect the structural steel skeleton for a second museum here in the newest national park, the superintendent walks around the construction site, shaking his head and worrying.
"It's a dilemma," said Dr.
John A. Latschar, the superintendent of Steamtown National Historic Site, a memorial to steam-powered transportation in downtown Scranton's long-abandoned railroad yard.


Small Rise In Profits At Pepsico
Pepsico Inc. said yesterday that its net income rose 2 percent in the fourth quarter of 1991 and was flat for year.
It said, however, that without money set aside for layoffs and other expenses, annual profits would have grown 10 percent.
The results included restructuring charges taken in 1991 as Pepsico laid off workers and closed plants to cut costs.


SPORTS PEOPLE: BASEBALL;
RON GANT, a major force behind the Atlanta Braves' rise from worst to first in the National League last season, gained a reward for his contribution yesterday.
Gant, who led the Braves with 32 home runs and 105 r.b.i., more than doubled his salary, accepting $2.65 million for 1992.
The figure, arrived at by negotiation, is $25,000 above the midway point between the outfielder's $3.1 million arbitration request and the team's $2.15 million offer.
He earned $1.3 million last year.


Telephone Service Study
The nation's local and long-distance telephone companies have different standards for what they consider acceptable reliability, which may have made their networks less dependable as the companies strive to cut costs, a new Congressional report says.
The report, by the House Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Finance, was released today.
The panel surveyed local and long-distance companies around the nation, finding wide variations in standards for responsiveness to customers and response times during an outage.


Dow Surges 38.69 in Hopes of Lower Rates
Fueled by renewed hopes of lower interest rates and a firm bond market, stocks rose yesterday in active trading, with the Dow Jones industrial average and some other indexes hitting record levels.
By gaining 38.69, to close at 3,272.81, the Dow inched 0.67 point past the record it set on Jan. 28.
Investor sentiment was divided between those encouraged by the Congressional testimony of Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, and those focusing on economic uncertainty.
The mixed feelings led to choppy trading, with the strength in bonds the decisive upward force.


Jury Renders Mixed Verdict In Attica Case
More than 20 years after the bloody Attica prison insurrection, a jury in a civil suit today rendered a mixed verdict as to whether New York State officials were responsible for the bloodshed that left 43 dead and more than 90 injured after the state police retook the prison.
After almost three months of emotionally charged testimony in Federal court and four tumultuous weeks of deliberations, the nine-member jury found Attica's former deputy warden, Karl Pfeil, liable on two claims of having overseen brutal reprisals against inmates.
But jurors rejected inmates' claims that the former Correction Commissioner, Russell G. Oswald, specifically failed to provide adequate medical care to the inmates after the uprising had been quelled.


The Ozone Hole Over Mr. Bush's Head
The life-protecting ozone layer may now be thinning above President Bush's summer home in Kennebunkport, Me., as well as other parts of the Northern Hemisphere.
That gives Mr.
Bush a compelling personal reason to regain the initiative on an issue of global importance.
Two weeks ago, detectors aboard a converted spy plane flying over New England and eastern Canada recorded the highest level of chlorine monoxide, an ozone-destroying chemical, ever measured anywhere around the globe.
The level was half again as large as the amount recorded over Antarctica, the site of the infamous ozone hole discovered in October 1985.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the State Department's annual human rights report referred incorrectly to the former Soviet republic of Georgia.
It is not a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States.


Review/Music; Stern and Rostropovich Play For Rampal Birthday Celebration
Chamber music is only incidentally a public art.
It need not involve a podium, a stage or an audience.
It is an art of friendship and conversation.
It was in celebration of that spirit that three of the most acclaimed virtuosos playing today -- Jean-Pierre Rampal, Isaac Stern and Mstislav Rostropovich -- joined forces with their flute, violin and cello in Avery Fisher Hall on Monday night.
The occasion was thoroughly private: the musicians have been friends for more than 30 years.
They have been one another's ardent admirers -- "I never heard such cello playing" (Rampal on Rostropovich); "Like having a glass of Champagne in the sunlight of a beautiful spring day" (Stern on Rampal) -- and they have established a tradition of joint performances and celebrations of their friendship.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Jan. 10 about Advanced Micro Devices Inc. omitted attribution for a statement that the company's 386 microprocessor was catching on with virtually all personal computer companies.
The statement should have been attributed to Advanced Micro Devices.
On Thursday, W. J. Sanders 3d, the company's chairman, said at a news conference that while I.B.M. and Compaq, two leading makers of personal computers, had been designing machines to use Advanced Micro's 386 chip, neither company had yet ordered it.


Greenspan Doesn't Bar Rate Cuts
In unusually direct language, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, said today that the central bank had not ruled out further interest rate cuts as insurance to push the economy out of its doldrums.
In testifying before the House Budget Committee, Mr.
Greenspan, the nation's most influential economic policy maker, seemed to aim his remarks at the nation's financial markets, which had tumbled last week after he testified before the Senate Banking Committee.


IRAQIS DEFYING U.N. ON ARMS INDUSTRY AND OIL SALE TERMS
Iraq has rejected a United Nations plan for monitoring of its armaments industry and has broken off talks about selling oil to pay for imports of vitally needed food and medicine and for compensation of victims of the invasion of Kuwait.
These two moves, coming on top of the tight economic blockade that President Saddam Hussein has imposed on the Kurdish region of Iraq since last October, has propelled him into a potential confrontation with the Security Council, diplomats and officials here said today.


ABOUT NEW YORK
The actor's life has been good to Fyvush Finkel.
No, his name is not as recognizable as Kevin Costner's.
But with a face that is a comic statement by itself, he has patched together a career and supported a wife and two sons, and he did it mostly on the strength of the schmaltzy routines and shopworn jokes of the Yiddish theater, particularly its little known offshoot of vaudeville.


Books of The Times; A Revisionist's Revision: Take One Legend, Politicize to Taste
The Sheriff of Nottingham  By Richard Kluger 485 pages. Viking. $23.
Historical revisionism is very much in fashion in books about presidents, prime ministers and generals; reputations rise and fall with greater frequency in recent biographical second looks.
But what do you call a revision of a legend that may not have been true in the first place?


3 Officers Promoted In Xerox Revamping
The Xerox Corporation announced a restructuring of its document processing operations yesterday, creating a corporate office to oversee the new organization and promoting several executives to fill the office.
Paul A. Allaire, the chairman, said the company's copying and printing operations would be organized into nine operating divisions, each with its own president and profit and loss responsibility.
The company's financial services operations were not affected by the move.


Court Orders Dinkins to Obey Recycling Law
A New York State Supreme Court judge ruled yesterday that the Dinkins administration has violated the city's mandatory recycling law by failing to collect the required amount of paper, glass, metal and plastic.
The city's recycling effort has fallen sharply behind targets mandated in a 1989 law because of severe budget problems that have frozen expansion of the program for the past two years.
Under the law, the city's Sanitation Department is required to recycle 2,100 tons of its 17,000 tons of daily residential trash by April.
But city officials have said that they would be lucky to reach 1,000 tons a day this year.
New Law Considered
The ruling is a victory for environmentalists, who said yesterday that the decision will force the city to move ahead faster on recycling.
They intend to ask the judge to set a new deadline for the city to comply with the law.
But the City Council leadership said yesterday that the 1989 goals are unachievable and that it is considering legislation to scale back the targets.
And aides to Mayor Dinkins said they are working with the City Council to amend the law.


Granada TV Departure
Granada Television Ltd., the independent television company in northwest England, said its chairman, David Plowright, had resigned, effective Feb. 29.
He will be replaced by Andrew Quinn, 54, managing director of Granada Television.
The resignation, announced on Monday, was said to have resulted from a disagreement with the board of Granada Group P.L.C., Grenada Television's parent.


East Meets West, Dollars Apart
The new East met the old West here this week, but there was scant indication of a meeting of the minds.
While Russian ministers and economists pleaded for billions of dollars in Western support to stabilize the ruble and the reform movement, the voices of Western industry and officialdom huffed about recession, rising labor costs and other distractions from salvaging the former Soviet republics.


Eating Well
WATCH the bouncing cake: that's the slogan I adopted after my kitchen was filled with an assortment of rubbery fat-free cakes that ranged from the barely edible to the unspeakable.
Then Harold McGee interceded.
Mr.
McGee is a food sleuth, chemist and scientist and an answerer of unanswerable questions, as well as the author of "On Food and Cooking" (Scribner's, 1984).


Uniform Testing in 3 Grades To Be Sought in New Jersey
An eight-month study by a panel of educators will recommend to the New Jersey Board of Education on Wednesday the uniform testing of fourth-, eighth- and eleventh-grade students in science, civics, geography and history, as well as the core skills of reading, writing and mathematics.
The testing is aimed at establishing a statewide educational assessment and monitoring system.
This recommendation is among scores of objectives to be presented to the board by a 17-member Task Force on Educational Assessment and Monitoring appointed by Education Commissioner John Ellis.
Under a law passed last year, the authorities are required to devise a uniform system for evaluating performance in New Jersey schools.


Bank Fund Yields Mixed
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit were mixed for the week ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor.
"Major money center banks outside New York apparently believe that short-term certificate of deposit yields have touched bottom," Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor, said yesterday.
"By contrast, the Big Apple institutions are still reducing their yields slightly. In any case, rates definitely are leveling off nationwide, with the prospect of investors seeing only modest changes over the next several weeks. After that, the direction will be dictated by economic conditions."


Wine Talk
ZINFANDEL: "A boring, third-class grape which no amount of husbandry in the vineyard or cellar will disguise," tasting like a melange of "molten rubber, strawberry jam and seawater."
And you thought only the Japanese were down on us.


A Field of Dreams Blooms In Heart of Asphalt Jungle
Forget basketball.
The new city game is baseball, and if that suggests asphalt infields or manhole covers for bases, take another look at what has blossomed at 100th Street and First Avenue.
Those are two (count 'em) bona fide baseball diamonds, one a regulation Little League field and the other of big league dimensions, and yes, that is real grass in the outfields and hard-packed infield sand.


Criticism Won't Stop Johnson's All-Star Bid
Magic Johnson will not let criticism change his decision to play in Sunday's All-Star game, his agent said yesterday.
Johnson retired from the Los Angeles Lakers Nov. 7 after testing positive for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
But fans selected Johnson to start for the Western Conference, and Johnson intends to play.


In Test of Kentucky Education Law, State Takes Over a Troubled District
For as long as anyone here can remember, there have been reports that many Harlan County School Board members engaged in nepotism and cronyism, with a business-as-usual attitude.
But only recently, after months of reviewing the board's practices, did state education officials move against the board.
In the first test of the punishment mechanism in Kentucky's pioneering legislation aimed at improving schools, State Education Commissioner Thomas C. Boysen charged the five board members with a variety of infractions, including awarding school contracts to relatives and obtaining kickbacks from businesses for school contracts.


Hawkins Recalls Who Lent A Hand
When they are picking candidates for the contributors section of the Basketball Hall of Fame, somebody should bring up the name of Gene Smith.
Smith was a New York City police officer who operated his own youth salvage program in the Bedford Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, rounding up youngsters from those notoriously mean streets in the 1950's and taking them day after day to the local Y.M.C.A. for supervised recreation.


Nuclear Laboratory Whistle-Blower Is Disciplined for Questioning a Test
The Labor Department has upheld the claim of a technician at a Government nuclear laboratory in Tennessee who said that after he complained about safety, plant managers retaliated by ordering him to sit in a room filled with toxic and radioactive chemicals and do useless work.
The finding runs directly counter to the assertion of the Energy Secretary, James D. Watkins, that a "culture change" has taken place at the government-owned plants, in which employees are free to come forward and voice their safety concerns.


Shearson Offers Bailout Plan For Insurer
Shearson Lehman Brothers yesterday announced a plan to rehabilitate the ailing First Capital Life Insurance Company by investing $50 million in the insurer and offering its 250,000 customers full value for their policies if they keep them.
The plan was prepared in conjunction with California regulators, who seized First Capital Life last May after tens of thousands of frightened customers turned in their policies for cash.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal National Mortgage Association, Washington, is offering $500 million in 7.5 percent, 10-year noncallable debentures due 2002 at a price of 100. *
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co., New York, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell up to $5 billion in debt securities and warrants to purchase debt securities. *
Stop &amp; Shop Co., Princeton, N.J., is offering $250 million in 9.75 percent issues due 2002 at a price of 100.  *
Texas Utilities Electric Co., Dallas, is offering $150 million in 8.125 percent first-mortgage bonds due 2002 at a price of 99.759.
The noncallable issues are rated Baa2 by Moody's and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's.
Preferred  *
BSN Corp., Dallas, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a registration for 185,000 of its 1.25 million shares of Sport Supply Group Inc. *
Nationsbank, Charlotte, N.C., has filed with the S.E.C. for seven million shares of common stock through Merrill Lynch. *
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co. has filed with the S.E.C. for $1 billion of depository shares. *
Valero Energy Corp., San Antonio, , has filed with the S.E.C. for a shelf registration for up to $150 million of debt securities and for a public offering of 2.5 million shares of common stock including a 500,000-share offering in Europe.
Both will be managed through Lehman Brothers.
Ratings *
General Accident Fire and Life Assurance Corp.'s rating on claims-paying ability has been lowered by Standard &amp; Poor's to AA-, from AA.
The company is based in Perth, Scotland. *
General Accident Insurance Co. of America Intercompany Pool's rating on claims-paying ability has been lowered by Standard &amp; Poor's to AA+, from AAA.
The company, a subsidiary of General Accident Fire and Life, is based in Philadelphia.


Tearful Testimony From Accuser's Mother
The prosecution rested its case against Mike Tyson on an emotional note today as the mother of Tyson's 18-year-old accuser tearfully described the change that came over her daughter after the incident, saying, "She's just not the same anymore and she hasn't been since she came home."
And later in the day a rapt courtroom heard the obviously anguished voice of a young woman identified as Tyson's accuser in a tape-recorded call to an Indianapolis police 911 operator to report an assault.


Talk Show Host (Subject, Food) Opens His Telephone Lines and His Heart
"HELLO, this is Arthur Schwartz," purred the newest voice in New York City talk radio.
"You're on 'Food Talk.' "
Weekdays from 12:15 to 1 P.M. on WOR (710 on the AM dial), Mr.
Schwartz, a cookbook writer and freelance restaurant critic, takes calls from anyone who wants to talk food.
They usually end up discussing their love lives, work situations, weight problems and health concerns.
Mr.
Schwartz opens his heart when he opens his telephone lines.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
4.00
5.49
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.82
3.86
5.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.87
3.93
5.93
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.86
6.95
7.66
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.74
7.81
8.02
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.89
9.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.75
6.74
7.22
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Science Cannot Duplicate Victim's Acts, Expert Says
An expert witness for the defense testified today that there is no scientifically sound way to duplicate the position or movement of a black teen-ager's arms at the moment he was shot by a white police officer in Teaneck.
The defense witness, Irving C. Stone, a forensic scientist from Dallas, disparaged a simulation by a fellow forensic scientist, Lucien C. Haag, who testified last week that the youth, Phillip Pannell, had his arms raised when he was killed.


City Opera '92: Busoni, Janacek and Broadway
In its 1992 season, the New York City Opera will maintain its commitment to 20th-century works -- which many operagoers consider the most crucial part of the company's mission -- with the first staged performances in New York of Busoni's "Doktor Faust" and the New York premiere of Janacek's "Excursions of Mr. Broucek."
But the company is also maintaining an aspect of its programming that some critics say is a dilution of that mission.
As in past seasons, the company's new productions include works that began life on the Broadway stage.
This year City Opera is presenting two musicals: Marc Blitzstein's "Regina," a 1949 work that, like the musicals of Leonard Bernstein and Stephen Sondheim, straddles theatrical and operatic styles, and "110 in the Shade," which sings in an undiluted Broadway idiom.
First produced in 1963, it has music by Harvey Schmidt, lyrics by Tom Jones and a book by N. Richard Nash, based on his play "The Rainmaker."


Engine-Testing Software Built for Speed
Auto makers typically spend five years and several hundred million dollars developing a car or truck engine.
Cray Research Inc., the supercomputer company in Eagan, Minn., has developed a computer program that it says will shave a year off the process by cutting the time required for testing, modifying and retesting prototype engines.
Cray executives say the main advantage of their new CRI/TurboKiva software is that it can display an engine's internal workings in vivid detail, showing the temperature of a section of a combustion chamber's wall or the velocity of air in a fuel-injection port.
Such information helps find the right design for reducing certain emissions, for example.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly  SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON THE CHARTER OF THE UNITED NATIONS -- 10 A.M.
COMMITTEE ON DEVELOPMENT AND UTILIZATION OF ENERGY -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON DECOLONIZATION -- 10 A.M.
Economic and Social Council  ORGANIZATIONAL SESSION -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Security Council  Meets at 3:30 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Food Notes
For Valentine's Day
So far, no one has started baking heart-shaped biscotti for Valentine's Day.
But wait, there's still time.


Review/Television; Free Speech and the Right to Hate
Most of tonight's two-and-a-half-hour offering from Bill Moyers consists of testimony from a trial that raised novel questions about legal responsibility for violence and older ones about the First Amendment's protection of obnoxious ideas.
Mr.
Moyers asks, "Can we afford free speech anymore?"
The defendants in "Hate on Trial," at 8 P.M. on Channels 13 and 49, are Tom Metzger and his clean-cut looking son John, the leaders, or proprietors, of the White Aryan Resistance.
They call themselves white racial separatists.
The organization seems to be a pop-son operation that appeals to a ragtag bunch of haters of blacks, Jews and others who do not meet the group's specifications for Americanism.


Tax Proposals Can Backfire at First
Like many medicines, the tax breaks proposed by the Administration to help nurse the economy back to health involve some temporary unpleasantness and annoying side effects.
The President's advisers hope these will be minimal -- though one substantial impact has already emerged.
Almost inevitably, when it became clear in late autumn that the President would need to propose an economic rescue package, speculation mounted that it would probably include an incentive for corporate America to invest in modernization.
And so Mr.
Bush proposed last week a 15 percent investment tax allowance for new equipment bought between Feb. 1 and Dec. 31.
Expecting a Break


A New Year Is Greeted Noisily in Chinatown


Nighttime Terror Revisits Cambodia
Only a dozen weeks after Prince Norodom Sihanouk returned as part of a United Nations-sponsored plan to bring peace to his homeland, the mood in Cambodia has become one of gloom and new fear.
Dissidents who had been promised the right to speak out against Government abuses have gone into hiding, terrified that they may become the next victims of a gang of gunmen who last week tried to kill the Government's most prominent opponent.


Personal Health
FRIENDSHIP, immortalized in literature, song and aphorism, are increasingly being recognized as vital to health as well as happiness.
In study after study, medical researchers have found that people who have friends they can turn to for affirmation, empathy, advice and assistance as well as for affection are more likely to survive health challenges like heart attacks and major surgery and are less likely to develop diseases like cancer and respiratory infections.


Why Coastal Property Owners Fight Back
To the Editor:
In "Environment Laws Face a Stiff Test From Landowners" (front page, Jan. 20), on lawsuits by property owners seeking compensation for restrictions on the use of their own land, you quote Senator John H. Chaffee of Rhode Island as saying, "For those of us who are deeply interested in preserving open spaces, this idea of compensation could be ruinous." The Senator doesn't get it.
The Fifth Amendment says "nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation," and that's what it means.


Market Place; No Faults Allowed In This Business
IN an industry where profit-killing competition and slumping business are the norm, Stratus Computer Inc. continues to defy the odds by stringing up quarter after quarter of solid profits.
Stratus has quietly and steadily built itself into the second-largest maker of "fault tolerant" computers.
Such machines are designed with enough backup components that they are never supposed to fail, as most conventional computers occasionally do, and they have become a mainstay in businesses where uninterrupted computer service is essential.
Automatic teller machines, electronic-funds transfers and Wall Street trading operations all rely on fault-tolerant machines.
For the fourth quarter ending Dec. 29, Stratus's earnings rose 30 percent, compared with the corresponding quarter in 1990.
For the full year in 1991,profits jumped 34 percent, to $49.7 million, on revenues of $448.6 million.


CHRONICLE
Those who miss seeing JOHN SUNUNU, President Bush's former chief of staff, on television can take heart.
He was named yesterday to fill in on CNN's "Crossfire" for PATRICK J. BUCHANAN, who is challenging Mr.
Sununu's former boss for the Republican presidential nomination.
Mr.
Sununu, who resigned as chief of staff in December amid controversy, will start sitting in for Mr.
Buchanan on the debate show, which is broadcast live from Washington on weeknights at 7:30 P.M.
He will serve as the conservative counterpart to the more liberal MICHAEL KINSLEY, the editor of The New Republic.


Murdoch Picks Australia Chief
News Ltd., the chief Australian subsidiary of the News Corporation, Rupert Murdoch's international media group, has named Ken Cowley chairman.
Mr.
Cowley, a 57-year-old Australian, succeeds Richard Searby, who has retired as a director of the company and most of its subsidiaries to pursue private interests.
Mr.
Cowley has also been appointed chairman of The South China Morning Post in Hong Kong.
The appointments are effective immediately.


LAWMAKERS VOTE EXTRA ASSISTANCE FOR MANY JOBLESS
Congress voted overwhelmingly today to extend unemployment benefits for two million jobless people for 13 more weeks, agreeing on an issue that inspired bitter debate much of last year.
President Bush has promised to sign the bill quickly.
The quick and nearly simultaneous actions of the House and the Senate demonstrate that the White House and Congressional Republicans want to avoid being portrayed as insensitive to the needs of those who have been hard hit by the recession in an election year.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; A Tough Year for New Hampshire's Undecided
Candidates for President often rise or fall on the collective judgment of voters in this state, people like Jim Anagnos Jr. and Jeff Hastings.
Like most of New Hampshire's 650,000 registered voters, Mr.
Anagnos and Mr.
Hastings probably know more about the major candidates than voters anywhere else.
But even as steeped in politics as they are, both men are more confused than convinced.


Ads for Program On Political Ads
Patriotic symbols from Mount Rushmore to the American eagle will publicize a pilot program to monitor the political advertising that appears before the New Hampshire Presidential primary.
Print and radio public-service advertisements, produced by Wunderman Worldwide in New York, will urge New Hampshire voters to participate in Project Run Fair.
They can express their opinions of the political ads by calling a "900" telephone number, 900-RUN-FAIR, from today through Primary Day, Feb. 18.


MacNamara, Clapp Merges With Solin
Two New York agencies, MacNamara, Clapp &amp; Klein Inc. and Solin Associates Inc. have merged to form MacNamara, Klein &amp; Solin Inc., a shop with about $60 million in billings from clients like Borden, Comsat and the Algonquin Hotel.
The agency will be headed by Don Klein, chairman and creative director; Frank MacNamara, vice chairman and director of media and communications, and Darrol Solin, president and chief executive.
Mr.
Klein had been chairman and creative director of his former agency, where Mr.
MacNamara had been chief executive.
Mr.
Solin had been chairman and chief executive at Solin.


In Space, and in East-West Politics, It's a Very Long Voyage to Mars
As the nation's civilian space program drifts aimlessly, undone by the cold war's demise, calls are rising for the United States to join its former Russian foes in history's most ambitious voyage -- sending humans across many millions of miles of space to explore Mars.
The undertaking would tap skills of East and West and give both sides needed new direction, experts say.
They note that NASA's $14 billion-a-year budget is under fire and that Moscow's space program is cracking under political and economic problems.


Credit Markets; U.S. Securities Up in Thin Trading
Prices of Treasury securities rose and interest rates fell in thin trading yesterday, reversing the price declines recorded Monday.
Traders and analysts said market participants took some comfort from Congressional testimony by the Federal Reserve Board chairman, Alan Greenspan, who went out of his way to emphasize that the Fed stood ready to lower interest rates further if that was needed to promote a recovery.


As the Snow Falls Heavily, the Winter Games' Problems Begin
Four days before the Winter Olympics will open, a major snowfall blanketed the Savoy region today, snarling traffic on twisting two-lane roads, interrupting training schedules for athletes and bringing French military personnel and schoolchildren out to clear the way.
In this remote ski resort, the immediate question was how the weather will affect Sunday's men's downhill ski race, the Olympics' showpiece skiing event, which is scheduled to be run here.
Snow began falling Monday night and about a foot fell in high elevations.
Weather forecasters said the snow would probably continue until Thursday, depositing up to 20 inches.


ALBERTVILLE '92: Three Days to Albertville; Lugers Slowed a Bit By Snow
Today's heavy snowfall led to slow times in training runs on the luge course in La Plagne, but the lugers seemed happy nevertheless.
The course they had complained about in December was in much better shape.
The one-man sleds slid down a 15-curve course that ran for more than three-quarters of a mile.
While the men made training runs, Cammy Myler of Lake Placid, N.Y., a contender for a women's medal, watched carefully.


It's Year of the Monkey, and Good for Babies
The capital crackled with fireworks today as millions of Chinese ushered in the Year of the Monkey, which tradition suggests will be filled with good fortune.
All of China seemed to come to a standstill for the nation's most important holiday, as workers stayed home to celebrate with their families and visit friends.
Almost everyone gets a three-day holiday, and some take several weeks off.


Chef From Vietnam Is Spreading the Word Of a Cool, Vivid Cuisine
TWO years ago, Binh Duong, who fled Vietnam in 1975 as Saigon fell, returned for a visit during Tet, the Lunar New Year.
"It was the first time I had heard the firecrackers again and, oh, man, it made me so happy," he said.
Mr.
Duong, who owns Truc Orient Express, a restaurant in Hartford, and La Truc Restaurant in Boca Raton, Fla., explained that during the war, the Government had forbidden New Year firecrackers because they could be mistaken for gunfire.
"They still don't celebrate like before, but slowly it's getting bigger and bigger," he said.


Large Award in Miniscribe Fraud Suit
A jury in a civil suit found yesterday that Hambrecht &amp; Quist, a prominent venture-capital and investment banking firm, and Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm, behaved fraudulently and negligently in connection with the Miniscribe Corporation, a disk drive manufacturer accused of falsifying its financial records.
The jury, in a state district court in Galveston, Tex., assessed damages of more than $550 million against Coopers &amp; Lybrand and Hambrecht &amp; Quist, as well as against William R. Hambrecht, founder of the investment firm, and against Q. T. Wiles, a noted corporate turnaround expert who ran Miniscribe for several years when the actions being questioned occurred.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Saatchi Sets Network for Health Care
LIKE pediatricians who move their offices closer to nursery schools, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. is changing the way it does business to exploit the rapid growth in health care.
Effective today, the London-based global advertising giant has formed Healthcom, a worldwide network of health-care agencies that previously operated as part of its two general international agency networks, Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide.


Resorts Casino
The Resorts Casino Hotel, owned by Merv Griffin, was relicensed despite regulators' concerns about the long-term financial stability of the operation.
But the New Jersey Casino Control Commission, which voted 5 to 0 for a two-year relicensing, said it would still require financial reports from Resorts, which emerged from Federal bankruptcy protection in August 1990.
The casino opened in May 1978.
Resorts International Inc.'s chairman, Steven Perskie, said the casino's operations were good, but that it had not devised a plan to retire its $430 million in bond debt.
Mr.
Griffin gave bondholders 78 percent of the casino in exchange for a $481 million reduction in bonds.


Aquarium Raises Hopes for Camden's Waterfront
Along a stretch of Delaware River waterfront near where the Campbell Soup Company once produced 10 million cans of soup a day and helped nourish Camden into a thriving industrial town, officials are pinning their hopes for the city's revitalization on fish.
Nearly 10 years after the idea was born and just more than three years after building began, the New Jersey State Aquarium will open on Feb. 29 amid expectations that it will be an immediate tourist attraction and the anchor for a number of waterfront projects that will end Camden's long economic and social slide.


The Pop Life
Driving Purists Wild
The English group Nitzer Ebb falls somewhere between categories: industrial dance music, techno and, now and then, just pop.
When the group appears at the Limelight on Tuesday it will do something that drives the rock purists wild.
It will perform its ominous and vague music without a band and with most of the music stored in a computer.


MCI Profits Up 13%, to $144 Million
The MCI Communications Corporation said yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings rose 13 percent.
In light of the lingering recession, the gains at the nation's second-largest long-distance carrier were strong compared with the profit decline recently posted by A.T.&amp; T., the industry leader.
Earnings growth at U S Sprint, the No. 3 carrier, which is scheduled to report later this week, is also expected to be weak.


Tearful Testimony From Accuser's Mother
The prosecution rested its case against Mike Tyson on an emotional note today as the mother of Tyson's 18-year-old accuser tearfully described the change that came over her daughter after the incident, saying, "She's just not the same anymore and she hasn't been since she came home."
And later in the day a rapt courtroom heard the obviously anguished voice of a young woman identified as Tyson's accuser in a tape-recorded call to an Indianapolis police 911 operator to report an assault.


CHRONICLE
YASIR ARAFAT, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, has married his 28-year-old secretary, Palestinian sources reported yesterday.
Mr.
Arafat, who is 62 years old and a Sunni Muslim, married SUHA TAWIL, a Palestinian Christian from Ramallah in the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
They married in a Muslim ceremony in November at Mr.
Arafat's residence in Tunis, The Associated Press reported.


Theater in Review
Chess  Masters Theater 310 Riverside Drive, at 103d Street Manhattan  Through Feb. 23 Music by Benny Andersson and Bjorn Ulvaeus; book and lyrics by Tim Rice; directed by David Taylor; scenery by Tony Castrigno; lighting by John Hastings; costumes by Deborah Rooney; new arrangements and orchestrations by Phil Reno; sound by Creative Audio Design; production stage manager, Doug Fogel; assistant director and choreographer, Madeline Paul.
Presented by the Artists' Perspective, in association with Chess Players Ltd.
WITH: Bob Frisch, Jan Horvath, Patrick Jude, Kathleen Rowe McAllen, J. Mark McVey and Ray Walker.


EXECUTIVES
*
Ambase Corp., Morristown, N.J., named Neil L. Cohen executive vice president and chief financial officer. *
Disney Consumer Products, Burbank, Calif., a unit of the Walt Disney Co., named Anne Osberg senior vice president, licensing; Margaret Whitman senior vice president, marketing, and Paul Pressler senior vice president.


A Restaurant Family Thrives, Always Together
ASK the Sindonis anything about their family -- who is related to whom, how many restaurants in New York are owned by their cousins, what life was like in Sicily -- and an extended debate, partly in Italian, ensues.
But ask them for the secret of their successful restaurant dynasty, which has spawned five restaurants in seven years, and there is no dispute: Hard, hard work, and family ties.
It all begins, not surprisingly, with the mother, Maddalena, whose life has been alternating periods of tragedy and triumph.
When her mother died in 1930, 4-year-old Maddalena was sent off to be raised by nuns because her father was unable to cope with a total of nine children.


Indonesia Acts on East Timor Killings; U.S. Complicity
To the Editor:
"The Tiananmen in East Timor" (editorial, Jan. 21) laments that the United States Government has not firmly protested Indonesia's recent killings of 50 Timorese at a wreath-laying ceremony for a slain youth last Nov. 12.


A Shelter Isn't Housing For the Mentally Ill
To the Editor:
I wish to add a postscript to your Jan. 12 report on the terrors that large shelters hold for the homeless mentally ill.


Junior Cook, 57, Tenor Saxophonist In Jazz Ensembles
Herman (Junior) Cook, a tenor saxophonist, was found dead on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 57 years old.
The cause of death has not been determined, said Beatrice Henellin, his companion.


Kentucky Trying to Find Money to Better Schools
The five-year plan for Kentucky school reform, the broadest education overhaul ever undertaken by a state, faces a stern test in its second year as legislators grapple with how to finance the plan in a recession.
The plan, which went into effect in the 1990-91 school year, cost nearly $600 million in its first year alone for changes in 176 districts, including offering early childhood education, instituting school-based management and raising the compulsory school age to 18 years old from 16.
It also gives state education officials the authority to remove boards and superintendents and take over districts for not complying.


Haven for Haitians Backed in Miami
After months of indecision and a complicated legal battle, the Bush Administration has begun forcing 15,000 Haitian refugees to return to their homeland.
But here in the city that was the main destination of those boat people, Mayor Xavier Suarez has been handing out bumper stickers that read "Interdict Drugs, Not Haitians."
Like hundreds of thousands of other people in the Miami area, Mr.
Suarez, a 42-year-old lawyer born in Cuba, came here as a refugee from a dictatorship that repressed and impoverished its people.
For those immigrants, as for many of those who were born here, Washington's decision to classify most Haitians as "economic refugees" ineligible for political asylum, a policy that The Miami Herald on Sunday called "Operation Racist Shield," smacks of hypocrisy and a double standard.


People
*
William P. Kupper Jr. has been named publisher of Health magazine, a vacant position, in New York.
He had been the advertising sales director at Life magazine, where a successor has not yet been named. *
Stephen Brown has been named executive management director of diversified accounts at J. Walter Thompson U.S.A., Detroit.
He had been general manager of J. Walter Thompson Toronto.


Senators Criticize Bush on Nominating Rules
The Senate's top Democrat blamed President Bush today for delays and contentiousness in the confirmation process in a floor speech that underscored the lingering rancor over the Senate's handling of Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court.
Announcing the results of a Democratic study of how the Senate evaluates Presidential nominees, Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Senate majority leader, said the White House was primarily at fault for problems that had mired the Senate and the Bush Administration in fierce confirmation battles.


An Unpresidential Primary
"The rules are designed to keep insurgents off the ballot," says Arthur Thompson, the New York campaign manager for Patrick Buchanan, who's struggling to qualify delegate slates for the April 17 Republican Presidential primary.
Welcome to yet another primary contest tarred by New York's notorious election law.
States like California, Florida and Connecticut sensibly guarantee all nationally recognized candidates a spot on the primary ballot.
New York, however, perversely persists in requiring them to invest undue time and money to gather petition signatures, and then to defend them against the nitpicking legal challenges invited by the state's labyrinthine petition rules.
(See box.)
Realistically, the rules can't be changed for this year's primaries, but steps can be taken to mitigate the unfairness.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


A Gathers Suit Dropped
It was announced yesterday that the negligence suit brought against PAUL WESTHEAD, the former Loyola Marymount coach, on behalf of the son of the late Hank Gathers in relation to Gathers's death had been dismissed.
Lawyers for Gathers's 8-year-old son said that after almost two years of pretrial discovery, it had become apparent that there was no evidence of individual liability on the part of Westhead, now the coach of the Denver Nuggets.
Westhead was the Loyola Marymount coach when Gathers, 23 years old, collapsed during a game at Loyola's Gersten Pavilion on March 4, 1990, and was pronounced dead less than two hours later.


A Search for Souvenirs of a Bygone Era


Hollywood Bows To Sumos and Drops A Film in Japan
The movie "Hell Camp" seemed to have everything going for it last year: an amusing script about Americans trying to master the customs of Japan, an Oscar-winning director, Milos Forman, and a Hollywood studio owned by the Sony Corporation, which would presumably clear the way for filming in Japan.
But just a few days before shooting was to begin last November, the project was abruptly canceled.
An official at Sony Pictures Entertainment said the Sumo Association in Japan had found the portrayal of sumo wrestlers to be unflattering and had refused to cooperate.


CHRONICLE
When MILT HINTON, the 81-year-old jazz bassist, turned 25, a friend gave him a camera as a birthday gift.
That led him "to take pictures of my musician friends, the way we see them, not the way photographers see them," Mr.
Hinton said yesterday.
The result is a 56-year photographic history of jazz in this country as reflected in more than 6,000 pictures.
Fifty photos from his collection will be shown in an exhibition opening Tuesday at the Sidney Mishkin Gallery at Baruch College, 135 East 22d Street.


U.S. Offering Compromise Terms To Israelis on Loan Guarantees
The Bush Administration has told Israel that it would consider its request for $10 billion in loan guarantees if Israel agreed to complete only those settlers' houses already under construction in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and to halt any new housing starts, Israeli and American officials say.
The American position, outlined to Israeli officials but still subject to negotiation, also seeks assurance that none of the money would support the completion of settlers' housing now under construction in those occupied territories.


SPORTS PEOPLE: TRACK and FIELD; Powell Gets His Day On the Awards Dais
For years, MIKE POWELL had watched CARL LEWIS being honored at awards ceremonies.
Yesterday, it was Powell's turn.
Because of his leap of a lifetime at the track and field world championships in Tokyo last August, Powell finally beat Lewis and in doing so surpassed the 23-year-old long-jump record of BOB BEAMON.
That's primarily why Powell was in New York yesterday to accept the Jesse Owens International Trophy, presented annually to the athlete who best personifies the qualities for which Owens is remembered.


Public &amp; Private; Evan's Two Moms
Evan has two moms.
This is no big thing.
Evan has always had two moms -- in his school file, on his emergency forms, with his friends.
"Ooooh, Evan, you're lucky," they sometimes say.
"You have two moms." It sounds like a sitcom, but until last week it was emotional truth without legal bulwark.
That was when a judge in New York approved the adoption of a 6-year-old boy by his biological mother's lesbian partner.
Evan.
Evan's mom.
Evan's other mom.
A kid, a psychologist, a pediatrician.
A family.
The matter of Evan's two moms is one in a series of events over the last year that lead to certain conclusions.
A Minnesota appeals court granted guardianship of a woman left a quadriplegic in a car accident to her lesbian lover, the culmination of a seven-year battle in which the injured woman's parents did everything possible to negate the partnership between the two.
A lawyer in Georgia had her job offer withdrawn after the state Attorney General found out she and her lesbian lover were planning a marriage ceremony; she's brought suit.
The computer company Lotus announced that the gay partners of employees would be eligible for the same benefits as spouses.


Mollen Is About to Resign From Deputy Mayor Post
Deputy Mayor Milton Mollen, who for two years oversaw New York City's vast criminal-justice programs and coordinated the Dinkins administration's anti-crime policies, will resign tomorrow or Friday to accept a private job, city officials said yesterday.
As the Deputy Mayor for Public Safety, Mr.
Mollen is the highest ranking official to leave the two-year-old administration of Mayor David N. Dinkins.
Other high-ranking city officials who resigned recently are Correction Commissioner Allyn R. Sielaff, Sanitation Commissioner Steven M. Polan and Personnel Commissioner Douglas H. White.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY THE MAYOR WEIGHS IN
Mayor Dinkins moved to quiet feuding between members of his own administration and a mayoral commission on the homeless that has called for sweeping changes in the city's shelter system.
In his first public comment on the commission's recommendations, the Mayor said he was open to all of its proposals, including rent subsidies for the homeless and the creation of a new agency to manage programs for the homeless.
A1.
DEPUTY MAYOR TO RESIGN
Deputy Mayor Milton Mollen, who for two years oversaw New York City's vast criminal-justice programs and coordinated the Dinkins administration's anti-crime policies, will resign tomorrow or Friday to accept a private job, city officials said.
He will be the highest ranking official to leave the Dinkins administration.
B3.
MR.
DINKINS GOES TO ALBANY
Mayor Dinkins went to Albany to lobby for approval of the local tax increases he has proposed in his budget and for a rejection of cuts in social-service programs proposed by Governor Cuomo.
But as in previous trips to Albany, the Mayor was greeted by the harsh realities of the state's complex politics and fiscal plight.
B3.
TAXATION BY FEAR
In his opening statement, a prosecutor argued that an organized-crime faction headed by Thomas Gambino used fear conjured by the Gambino name to extort a "mob tax" on every garment delivery in New York City.
B3.
Neighbor charged with slaying woman, 87.
B2.
Setback in Gotti jury selection.
B2.
REGION  KEY RULING ON MEDICARE
In a decision that could have national repercussions, a Federal appeals court ruled that New York State must pick up the difference between what doctors and hospitals charge for treating elderly poor patients and what Medicare pays in reimbursements.
B5.
DEFENSE ON THE OFFENSIVE
Continuing the defense attack on the state's contention that Phillip Pannell was killed with his arms raised, an expert witness testified that there is no scientifically sound way to duplicate the position or movement of the teen-ager's arms at the moment he was shot by Officer Gary Spath of Teaneck.
B4.
RECOMMENDATIONS ON TESTING
An eight-month study by a panel of educators will recommend to the New Jersey Board of Education the uniform testing of fourth-, eighth- and eleventh-grade students in science, civics, geography and history as well as the core skills of reading, writing and mathematics in an effort to establish a statewide educational assessment and monitoring system.
B5.
PUTTING THEIR FAITH IN FISH
The New Jersey State Aquarium will open on Feb. 29 in Camden amid expectations that it will be an immediate tourist attraction and the anchor for a host of waterfront projects that will end the city's long economic and social slide.
B5.
Suffolk Executive calls for building sale and up to 1,000 layoffs.
B5.
Shipyard plans up to 4,000 layoffs.
B4.
New York State sells $85 million in bonds.
B4.
Life imitates the movies on L.I.
B2.
Neediest Cases B6 About New York B3


Strong Brokerage Business And Cost Cuts Lift Sears Net
Lifted by an active stock market that generated commissions for its brokerage subsidiary and buoyed by lower operating costs in its retail operations, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company yesterday reported sharply higher earnings for the fourth quarter and full year.
Earnings for the fourth quarter, which ended Dec. 31, jumped 35.5 percent, to $513.1 million, from $378.8 million in the period a year earlier.
In the fourth quarter of 1990, income had been reduced by a pretax charge of $264.4 million to pay for the costs of laying off more than 33,000 employees and consolidating some operations.


Iona Stops Manhattan's Winning Streak at 9
There was only one empty seat in little Draddy Gymnasium at Manhattan College last night.
It belonged to the Jaspers' coach, Steve Lappas.
Lappas worked the sideline all night, exhorting his team to overcome a surprisingly strong challenge from Iona.
He got a workout but not a victory as Iona upset Manhattan, 83-77, before 3,112 fans, a season-high home crowd.


Neediest Helps the Retarded Learn About AIDS Protection
"Does anyone know what H.I.V. is?" Kelly Borden asked her students at the Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service.
The students looked puzzled.


Review/Film; Indian Immigrants in a Black-and-White Milieu
Near the beginning of Mira Nair's sweetly pungent new comedy, "Mississippi Masala," Mina (Sarita Choudhury) is driving a large, borrowed American automobile down a highway near Greenwood, Miss., arguing with her mother, who sits imperially in the back.
Mina drives with the hapless self-assurance of someone who doesn't often get behind a wheel.
With her head turned around to answer her mother, Mina slams into the rear of the stopped van owned by Demetrius (Denzel Washington), who owns a rug-cleaning service.
The van is slightly damaged, but no one is hurt.
Names and addresses are exchanged.
The incident is handled with comparative amiability, considering the nature of most such encounters.


New Chairman At National Car
Thomas N. Murphy, a senior executive with the General Motors Corporation, has been elected chairman of National Car Rental System Inc.
National, which is a private company, rents General Motors cars and G.M. is a part owner of National.
Mr.
Murphy has been placed on special assignment by General Motors to work full time with National.
He replaces Vincent A. Wasik, who resigned as chairman and chief executive and will continue as a consultant.
Robert J. McKenna has been named president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
McKenna, who was National's executive vice president for operations, will continue as a member of the board and will assume responsibility for day-to-day operations.
Mr.
Murphy has been group director of finance for the Buick-Oldsmobile-Cadillac Group since June 1989.


Cone Breaks Off Negotiations on Multiyear Pact
In a development that deeply surprised the Mets and that raised questions about David Cone's long-term future in New York, Steve Fehr, the agent for the right-hander, yesterday suspended negotiations on a multiyear contract.
"I'm taken by surprise, and I'll leave it at that," said Al Harazin, the general manager of the Mets.
"I felt we had been working toward something, that each party had to make one more move and we'd have a deal."


Trial Spotlight Falls on Mute Player
The leading figures in the trial of Officer Gary Spath of Teaneck take stage here each day in a tiny ground-floor courtroom: the judge, the prosecutor, the defense lawyer, the defendant and the family of Phillip Pannell, the teen-ager whom Officer Spath is accused of killing with reckless disregard almost two years ago.
But in the three weeks since testimony began, another player has been written into the drama, one who has remained mute so far, shunning the spotlight that increasingly seems to be pursuing him.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Greenspan said he had not ruled out further interest rate cuts as insurance to push the economy out of its doldrums.
His remarks seemed to be aimed at the financial markets.  [ Page D1. ]
Sales of U.S.-built cars and light trucks rose 11.1 percent in late January, auto makers reported.
The gain prompted many analysts to predict that the industry may be near a turning point.  [ D1. ]


Gaffney Proposes Layoffs and a Building Sale in Suffolk
Faced with a growing deficit and shrinking revenues, the Suffolk County Executive, Robert Gaffney, called today for the sale of the county's tallest public building, layoffs of up to 1,000 county employees and a halt to summer concerts and other county-financed cultural events.
"There is no way to lessen the fact that this county's situation is not only bad, but is getting worse daily," he said.


A Town Divided, Literally
BRIDES-LES-BAINS, France, Feb. 4 --
The residents of Brides-les-Bains might be excused a certain cynicism about the 1992 Winter Games.
The small resort town poured $13 million into renovations, which included a new tramway plus a revitalized casino and city hall.
The investment drew the town's treasury close to bankruptcy and has meant nothing but inconvenience.
As the Olympics approach, quaint Brides-les-Bains has been dissected by a quarter-mile chain-link security fence that prevents inhabitants and tourists from crossing the street into the main downtown district.
The residential section of the village and the casino are off limits to everybody but the international athletes and official delegation members who are housed there.


Panel Endorses a Drug to Treat Enlarged Prostate
An advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration last night recommended approval of a drug to shrink an enlarged prostate gland, raising the prospect that many men can avoid surgery for the common ailment.
The drug, Proscar, takes several months to shrink the prostate and needs to be taken for a lifetime.


Accounts
*
The Pepsi/Lipton Tea Partnership, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., to J. Walter Thompson New York, for the new joint venture's American ready-to-drink tea products.
Billings were not disclosed.
Thompson handles Pepsi and Lipton products in several countries.
The agency for other Lipton products, Lintas New York, handles Diet Coke, a brand produced by Pepsi's rival, Coca-Cola. *
Yonex Corp., Torrance, Calif., to Team One Advertising, El Segundo, Calif., for its premium tennis and badminton racquets.
Billings were not disclosed on the account, for which there was no previous agency. *
The Beverly Hilton, Beverly Hills, Calif., to McCann-Erickson Los Angeles, for an image campaign following a recent renovation.
The agency also handles other Hilton hotels.


No Evidence for a Conspiracy to Kill Kennedy
To the Editor:
After the assassination of President Kennedy, his widow and his brother Robert asked me to inquire into the Dallas tragedy and write an account of my findings.


Book Notes; Heathcliff and Huck Going Way of Scarlett
Literary trespassers are out there this coming book season, sneaking back into works of fiction that the original authors had finished and closed off.
First, there was the enormously successful "Scarlett" (Warner Books), in which, with the consent of Margaret Mitchell's estate, Alexandra Ripley poached the characters from "Gone With the Wind" and took them to Ireland and back.
Now, readers will find that Huck Finn has grown up and will learn what happened to Heathcliff when he left Wuthering Heights.


From Needy Student to Benefactor
Because Shaw University was willing to take a chance on a poor migrant farm boy 25 years ago, it will now be receiving a $10 million gift from him over the next five years.
Willie E. Gary, 44 years old and now a prosperous lawyer in Florida, calls his gift "a very small payment on the very big debt I owe Shaw." It is the largest gift ever received by the 126-year-old, historically black institution in Raleigh, N.C.


John Haber, Zen Monk And Opera Coach, 46
John Haber, an opera director, teacher and Zen Buddhist monk, died last Wednesday at New York Hospital.
He was 46 years old and lived at the Dai Bosatsu Zendo, a Zen monastery in Livingston Manor, N.Y.
He died of AIDS, said his brother, James Haber of Wayland, Mass.


No Evidence for a Conspiracy to Kill Kennedy; Open Committee's Files
To the Editor:
As a former staff member of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, I am convinced that the American public deserves to know what is inside that committee's files.


Quotation of the Day
"The unemployed need it, the state of the economy demands it, the Congress strongly supports it, and the President says he will sign it." -- SENATOR LLOYD BENTSEN, about the jobless benefits passed by Congress.  [ A18:4. ]


Honors
*
Maureen Moore, senior vice president and creative director at Cramer-Krasselt, Chicago, has been named advertising woman of the year by the Women's Advertising Club of Chicago.


Economic Scene; Soaking Lawns, Not Taxpayers
FROM San Diego to Marin County, Californians are discovering the dubious pleasures of the drier life -- of 60-second showers, econo-flush toilets and gardening with waste water.
Just punishment, one is told, for the hubris of building cities in the desert.
But economists and their sometime allies among savvy environmentalists see it differently: Even in the worst of droughts, argues Tom Graff, a lawyer at the Environmental Defense Fund, California should have enough water to go around.
The real problem, he insists, is the failure to allow markets, rather than politicians and planners, to decide who gets what.


Hong Kong Camps Are Tense After Riot
A riot in which 21 Vietnamese boat people, including 5 children, were burned to death Monday night has focused new attention on the volatile atmosphere in crowded refugee camps here, where rivalries between North and South Vietnamese gangs often lead to violence.
The riot was by far the worst in a series of disturbances in the Vietnamese camps, which house more than 58,000 boat people who have fled to this British colony by the thousands since 1975 in the hope of emigrating to the West.


Business Technology; Video Meetings Get Cheaper, and a Bit Better
For years, the idea of holding business meetings by television held a futuristic allure, although the technology was costly and the sounds and pictures were hardly the next best thing to being there.
But in the year since the Persian Gulf war raised fears of air travel and made video conferences an attractive alternative, executives have found that video-conferencing equipment is getting incrementally better -- and cheaper.
Breakthroughs in technology and mathematics, advanced telephone networks and clever sound engineering have created practical video conferences with per-minute costs comparable with cellular telephone calls.
"The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit" has finally made it to "Star Trek: The Next Generation."


Saint Laurent and 2,750 Fans Celebrate His 30 Years
The power of the art of fashion was linked to that of the theater on Monday night in a moving tribute to Yves Saint Laurent and the 30th anniversary of his couture house.
It was a stirring moment in the history of fashion, as 100 models appeared at the back of the deep stage of the Bastille Opera and moved purposefully forward in phalanxes of 8 or 10.
There were no model-like dips and turns.
These beautifully dressed women marched like warriors about to face an enemy army, or like pioneers about to settle a new land.


Diana Vrooms, Unbritishly, In a Mercedes
The Princess of Wales took delivery of a new sports car today, raising a chorus of criticism over her choice of a German-made Mercedes.
Members of Parliament and union leaders said the Princess, who is 30 years old, should have stuck with her British-made Jaguar.
She is the first member of the royal family in memory to use a foreign car.


Tearful Testimony From Accuser's Mother
The prosecution rested its case against Mike Tyson on an emotional note today as the mother of Tyson's 18-year-old accuser tearfully described the change that came over her daughter after the incident, saying, "She's just not the same anymore and she hasn't been since she came home."
And later in the day a rapt courtroom heard the obviously anguished voice of a young woman identified as Tyson's accuser in a tape-recorded call to an Indianapolis police 911 operator to report an assault.


Review/Music; City Opera Ensemble Does 'Tosca' in Brooklyn
For one Manhattanite, a trip to the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College on Saturday evening to hear the New York City Opera National Company perform "Tosca" was a sentimental journey.
In the mid-1960's, a touring production of "Tosca" by the New York City Opera at the University of Wisconsin in Madison furnished this critic's first experience of live opera.
A quarter-century of subsequent performances have obliterated almost any memory of that original "Tosca" beyond the fact that the staging was, understandably, rudimentary.
Such was the case here, too.
In Dona D. Vaughn's economical and tightly unified production, the basic layout remained the same for all three acts, with a wall sloping down and back from the right side of the stage and a few props focusing the action to the left and center.


Harlem Neighbor Charged In Slaying of Woman, 87
For $224, a 35-year-old man slashed the throat of his neighbor, an elderly woman, in her Harlem home on Monday afternoon, the police said.
Neighbors of the 87-year-old woman, Bessie King, of West 150th Street between Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard and Frederick Douglass Boulevard, said yesterday that they were shocked by the murder, although violence in the decaying neighborhood is not rare.
Many buildings in the area are abandoned, their windows filled with cinder blocks, and Ms.
King's apartment building is bordered on three sides by a moat of raw sewage.


Apple and Dell Cut Prices of Computers
Apple Computer Inc. and the Dell Computer Corporation, two leading personal computer makers, reduced prices on their products today to help bolster market share.
Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., said it was cutting the prices on many of its Macintosh PC models in the United States by 9 percent to 37 percent.
It also introduced two more powerful versions of the Powerbook 100 computer.
Dell, based in Austin, Tex., cut prices by 4 percent to 38 percent for its line of portable, desktop and floor-standing PC's.
Dell, a leading maker of I.B.M.-compatable machines, also reduced its prices on computer peripheral products by up to 47 percent.
The cuts are the latest in an increasingly competitive market in which fierce price competition to raise market share has reduced profit margins as demand has slackened.
"Apple is staying on the offensive," said Robert L. Puette, the president of Apple's U.S.A. operation.
But Apple cautioned that consumers might not see a corresponding fall in retail prices because of dealer costs that were adjusted under a recent dealer discount program.
The company lowered the price of its Macintosh IIci by 37.3 percent, to $3,299 from $5,269.
The Macintosh Classic's price fell by 9 percent, to $1,499 from $1,649.
Apple also introduced the Powerbook 100 computer line, with four megabytes of RAM -- or random access memory -- and a 40-megabyte internal disk drive.
Prices start at $2,399.
Dell said its cuts ranged from $80 to $2,400.
The price of its monochrone liquid crystal display 320N+ computer, with four megabytes of RAM and a 60-megabyte hard disk, for example, was cut to $2,499 from $2,999.
Apple's shares were unchanged today, closing at $65.75 each in over-the-counter trading, while Dell's rose 75 cents each, to $31.50.


Contender Doggedly Pursues Medical Comeback
Akeem Anifowoshe, the Nigerian boxer who suffered serious head injuries in a brutal title fight last June 15, is making strong progress in his rehabilitation.
After losing a close decision in the junior bantamweight championship fight against Robert Quiroga, Anifowoshe collapsed in the ring and was taken to a San Antonio hospital, where he fell into a coma.


EASTERN GERMAN IS INVESTIGATED
One of the most popular leaders of eastern Germany is caught in the crossfire of controversy about collaboration with the old Communist secret police, the Stasi, as east and west come to grips with Germany's near and distant past.
The parliament of Brandenburg, the largest of the states carved out of old East Germany, has ordered a commission to investigate the activities of Manfred Stolpe, the state's prime minister, when he worked as an lawyer representing East Germany's evangelical protestant church in its dealings with the communist regime.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances; Wealthy Investment Family a Big Help to Clinton
Two days before Bill Clinton's bitterly contested re-election in 1990, the Arkansas Governor grew concerned that his campaign was slipping.
He placed calls to members of an influential Arkansas business group, asking them to raise $50,000 for his campaign, according to people involved in the effort.
"He was somewhat in a panic," recalled Warren A. Stephens, one of those contacted by the Governor.


Vanbiesbrouck Hopes To Stay With Rangers
No current Ranger wore the Blue Shirt before John Vanbiesbrouck, who played his first game with the team in 1981 at the age of 18.
And if unrelenting trade speculation has any validity, no current Ranger could leave sooner than Vanbiesbrouck, who shares the lesser half of the goalie position with Mike Richter.
In the meantime, Vanbiesbrouck will probably guard the net again Wednesday night when the Rangers return home to protect their various peaks and streaks against the Penguins at Madison Square Garden.


Mayor Takes Fiscal Case To Albany
Mayor David N. Dinkins came to Albany today to fight a two-front fiscal war that may prove futile on both counts.
In testimony to a legislative budget hearing and in private meetings with state leaders, Mr.
Dinkins lobbied both for approval of the local tax increases he has proposed in his budget and for rejection of cuts in social-services programs proposed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


Sports of The Times; Still Time To Consider The Pistons
It's a risky business to select an Olympic squad a year ahead of time.
This may be dawning on the committee that selected the United States men's basketball team so hucksters could sell stamps and coins and tickets and advertising based on familiar names like Bird, Jordan and Johnson.
However, Larry Bird's back is creaky, Michael Jordan is touchy about the league's exploiting him for endorsements, and Magic Johnson has retired because of H.I.V.


From Icy Handshake to Shove-a-Rama
Boys will be boys: garcons will be garcons.
And so, while the United States Olympic hockey players were shaking hands tonight with the vanquished counterparts from France, a rumble broke out following an exhibition match at the Megeve Sports Palace.


Money Spent On Buildings Surges Again
Spending on school construction increased for the sixth straight year in 1990, as more school districts replaced aging buildings or modified crowded ones.
The construction boom, documented in an annual building survey by American School and University magazine, totaled nearly $9.7 billion in 1990 -- the last year for which information was available -- compared with $9.3 billion in 1989.
Spending for new school construction was $4.1 billion in 1990; in 1989 it was $3.7 billion.


Venezuela Crushes Army Coup Attempt
Loyal soldiers repulsed an attack by rebel troops and tanks on the Venezuelan presidential palace early today, crushing an attempt to topple one of Latin America's relatively stable democratic governments.
Seventeen soldiers died and 51 were wounded in Caracas, the Government said.
Morgue officials counted an additional 42 bodies, all civilians killed in cross-fire.
At least eight people, including a soldier, were killed in the industrial city of Valencia, the Government added.


Bridge
Every beginner learns, or should learn, a simple rule: As declarer in a trump contract look for an opportunity to ruff something in the dummy.
But the chance may be very hard to spot, as was the case on the diagramed deal from a rubber bridge game.
The bidding followed a sensible track to five clubs, on hands that would make six clubs on a good day.
In a slam South would have no choice: He would cash the club ace and continue with the six, hoping for a favorable trump situation combined with a normal diamond split.
This might seem the right play in five clubs, but it was not.
The declarer was Paul Orlet of Kansas City, Mo., and he demonstrated that the right play is to test diamonds before touching trumps.


Reviews/Music; Jimmy Webb Looks Back
Midway in the second of two solo performances at the Bottom Line on Friday evening, the veteran composer Jimmy Webb took the audience to what he called "Linda land" with a sequence of his songs that have been recorded by Linda Ronstadt.
"Wherever she is, she'll forgive me for my wrong notes," he announced, as he began the piano introduction for "The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress," one of two Webb songs Ms.
Ronstadt recorded on her 1982 album, "Get Closer."


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Apple Computer Inc., Cupertino, Calif.; Borland International Inc., Scotts Valley, Calif., and Novell Inc., Provo, Utah, plan to develop and support a common communication standard between programs. *
Computer Associates International Inc., Garden City, L.I., said that ADP Dealer Services had selected its CA-DB program for the Unix computer operating system to expand dealer support systems.


2-Man Gang Forgot Its Lines In Failed Robbery, Police Say
A security guard and a mechanic who said they were inspired after watching the movies "Goodfellas" and "New Jack City" over the weekend, held up a convenience store in Bethpage Monday night, the police said.
The mobsters manque should probably have watched a few more films before making their move: They robbed a 7-Eleven where one of the thieves was a regular customer and was easily recognized, the police said; they borrowed a car belonging to one of their sisters; then they went home.
And they collected only $75.
A Regular Customer
The Nassau County police arrested Christopher F. Sanatass, a 22-year-old mechanic, and Phil Levine, 22, a security guard.
They were arraigned in Nassau County Criminal Court today on charges of first-degree robbery.


Philips Said to Be Preparing A Big Investment in Whittle
Philips Electronics N.V., the Dutch electronics giant, is set to invest as much as $300 million in Whittle Communications, according to an executive involved in the talks who spoke yesterday on the condition of anonymity.
Whittle, based in Knoxville, Tenn., creates advertiser-supported television channels and magazines for schools and doctors' offices.
It is owned by Time Warner Inc., Associated Newspapers, the financier Chris Whittle and several others.


Auto Sales Rise 11.1% In Period
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks rose 11.1 percent in late January, the auto makers reported today.
The gain prompted many analysts to predict that the auto industry may be nearing a turning point.
Ronald A. Glantz, an automotive analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds in San Francisco, and other experts attributed the gain to several factors: the war with Iraq, which depressed sales a year earlier; pent-up demand for new vehicles; lower interest rates, and a slight improvement in consumer confidence.


Review/City Ballet; In 2 Works, Dancers Mind Their Manners
The New York City Ballet offered something old and something relatively new on Saturday afternoon at the New York State Theater when it presented George Balanchine's "Tombeau de Couperin" and a somewhat reworked version of Richard Tanner's "Prague Symphony."
The two works share a concern for manners, particularly those of classical ballet.
In the Balanchine piece, that concern is expressed in the way 16 corps dancers, dressed in simple but formal practice clothes, acknowledge one another as they move through geometric shapes and shifting partnerships.
Just as the Ravel score is in part an homage to 18th-century French music, Balanchine's choreography is an evocation of the earliest ballet forms and courtesies.


Bush Encounters the Supermarket, Amazed
As President Bush travels the country in search of re-election, he seems unable to escape a central problem: This career politician, who has lived the cloistered life of a top Washington bureaucrat for decades, is having trouble presenting himself to the electorate as a man in touch with middle-class life.
Today, for instance, he emerged from 11 years in Washington's choicest executive mansions to confront the modern supermarket.


Seton Hall Gets a Test, but Passes It
Seton Hall's Pirates may have discovered an unlikely but workable formula to rescue a confusing season.
Come from behind.
Have a nervous 7-foot-2-inch Luther Wright protect a late lead, from the foul line.
Survive two 3-point attempts in the last 6 seconds.
And fire up that bus.


Indonesia Acts on East Timor Killings
To the Editor:
"The Tiananmen in East Timor" (editorial, Jan. 21) leaves the erroneous impression that the response of the Indonesian Government to the tragic killings in Dili last Nov. 12 has been the same as that of Beijing: arrogant indifference and domestic cover-up.
This is not the case, as you report Dec. 27 and Dec. 29, and as has been covered in, for instance, the Far Eastern Economic Review.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Sunday about the settlement of a lawsuit against the Environmental Protection Agency misidentified the organization that sued.
It is the Natural Resources Defense Council.


Dinkins Seeking to Stem Dispute Over Proposals for the Homeless
Mayor David N. Dinkins moved yesterday to quiet feuding between members of his administration and of a mayoral commission on the homeless that has called for sweeping changes in New York City's shelter system.
In his first public comment on the commission's recommendations, the Mayor said he was open to all of its proposals, including rent subsidies for the homeless and creation of a new agency to manage programs for the homeless.


Terreri, Fetisov Move Like Clockwork
The only discouraging development in the Devils' 3-1 victory over the Flyers tonight was that goaltender Chris Terreri lost his bid for a shutout with less than three minutes left.
Everything else worked out just about perfectly for the Devils, especially their penalty killing.
Helped by the return of Slava Fetisov, who completed his five-game suspension by the league, the Devils killed all four penalties against them, including one for five minutes to Doug Brown for high-sticking Kevin Dinneen, with 2:56 left in the first period.


Rhett Forced to Stop
The college career of South Carolina forward JOE RHETT is over after medical tests showed he might collapse again on the court, the team's physician, BILL McKENZIE said at a news conference yesterday.
Rhett, a 6-foot-8-inch senior, collapsed in a game Jan. 25.
He suffers from a slow heart beat at rest, for which he had a pacemaker implanted two years ago, and a chaotic heart beat during intense exercise. (AP)


On the Trail From the Sky: Roads Point to a Lost City
Guided by ancient maps and sharp-eyed surveys from space, archeologists and explorers have discovered a lost city deep in the sands of Arabia, and they are virtually sure it is Ubar, the fabled entrepot of the rich frankincense trade thousands of years ago.
Leaders of the expedition reported that excavations so far have uncovered the ruins of eight towers and adjoining walls and deposits of pottery dating to Roman times and as far back as 2,000 B.C., perhaps earlier.
They said the location and size of the site and evidence of a violent destruction appeared to match historical accounts of Ubar's rise and fall.


Francis Birch, Is Dead at 88; Was a Professor
Francis Birch, professor emeritus of geology at Harvard University and co-designer of an atomic bomb, died on Friday in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 88 years old and lived in Cambridge.
He died of prostate cancer, said his wife, Barbara.


Toward a Policy That's No Longer Foreign
As is the case with all triumphs, America's cold war victory brings with it new difficulties.
None is more troubling than the gathering irrelevance of U.S. foreign policy.
Militarily, America has emerged unrivaled, yet much of our arsenal is destabilizing, unusable and irrelevant in new tasks of national security.
Economically, the Soviet defeat is complete, yet the cold war era also devoured our own productivity, real income and competitiveness, leaving a malignant gap between rich and poor and disgraceful and dangerous social conditions.
Politically, we led a successful anti-Soviet alliance, yet the victors now bicker, with no collective security against a threatening depletion of environment and resources.


Transit Audit Faults Plan of Half Fares for Disabled
A program that allows disabled New Yorkers to ride the city's subway and buses at half-fare appears to be riddled with abuses, inadequate supervision and possible fraud, an audit by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has found.
To qualify for the discount, applicants are required to have a private doctor or another health-care professional certify that they are disabled.
Created 17 years ago, the program was intended to benefit people with severe disabilities, including those who are blind, deaf, mentally retarded or have "ambulatory disabilities" that prevent them from walking without canes, crutches or wheelchairs.


Bronx Is Up, but Tartabull Will Take Manhattan
From the hills rising above the beaches and the shimmering deep blue ocean, Danny Tartabull can see the Bronx clearly.
The faces and the subway trains and the long, dark tunnel that lead to the sloping outfield grass at Yankee Stadium seem to spread in front of him, even from this far away.
The images do not really fit -- not in the serenity of a large white house tucked away in the rolling Santa Monica Mountains -- but Tartabull does not distinguish them.
In less than three weeks, he will report to the Yankee spring camp at Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
On April 7, he will make his first official appearance as the new right fielder for the Yankees.
He is counting the days.


Auditor Cites Abu Dhabi's B.C.C.I. Role
The auditor of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International said yesterday that detection of the multibillion-dollar fraud at the bank had been delayed because representatives of the Government of Abu Dhabi participated in the fraud and withheld information.
In its first public comments on the bank, the London office of Price Waterhouse, the bank's auditor, said disaffected B.C.C.I. staff members who threatened to tell what they knew were "often silenced through the payment of substantial sums."


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.87
5.57
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.82
3.82
5.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.86
3.87
5.88
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.78
6.86
7.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.72
7.74
8.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.85
9.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.74
6.75
7.21
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Canada Moves to Spur Consumers Into Buying
The Canadian Government, fighting a recession even more severe than in the United States, has just begun its own program to spur housing demand and revive the economy along with its political fortunes.
Like the measures President Bush proposed last week, the Canadian actions are meant to raise the entire economy on a wave of demand by new homeowners for appliances, furniture and other consumer items.
These actions could well give the United States a look at the possible results of its own program.


Under Pressure, Doctor Stops Silicone Injections
Dr.
Norman Orentreich, the New York doctor who was a prominent advocate of using injected silicone to smooth wrinkles, halted the practice on Monday because of pressure from a Federal investigation, his lawyer said today.
The investigators are looking into doctors who have continued to inject silicone despite reports over the years of occasional catastrophic results like permanent sores and lumps.
In rare cases, large amounts were injected and death resulted when the silicone migrated to the lungs.


White House Race Is Recast: No Kremlin to Run Against
With the cold war's end, the whole terrain of American politics is undergoing fundamental change, from the kinds of issues that preoccupy voters and candidates to the balance between Congress and the White House to the relative strength of the Republican and Democratic parties.
The evidence is just beginning to come in.
But it seems probable that the Presidency will lose some of the clout it has won at the expense of Capitol Hill over the last four decades, that domestic affairs will resume their normal place at the center of American politics and that the Republican Party will have difficulty sustaining its recent surge.


G.E. Unit Files For Certificates
GE Capital Mortgage Services, a unit of the General Electric Company, filed with the S.E.C. for up to $1 billion in pass-through certificates yesterday.
The securities are Real Estate Mortgage Investment Conduit certificates, known as Remic's, backed by a pool of conventional mortgages on one- to four-family residences.
No underwriter was named.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Cuomo, on the Sidelines, Is Watchful and Wistful
The question that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was asked at a news conference on Tuesday was about poor Randall Wells, the New Hampshire man who has received hundreds of misdialed telephone calls because his business's 1-800 number is similar to that of a Cuomo write-in campaign committee.
But the answer the New York Governor gave had nothing to do with the travails of Mr.
Wells.
It had to do with all the mail he continues to get encouraging him to run for President.


Santiago, in Arbitration, Gets Catch of the Day
In winning the rubber match of his three-hearing series with the San Diego Padres, Benito Santiago yesterday gained the highest pay ever for a catcher based strictly on salary: $3.3 million.
It was also the second highest salary ever awarded in arbitration, falling $50,000 short of the salary Doug Drabek of Pittsburgh won last year.
William Rentfro, the arbitrator, favored the salary Santiago submitted over the Padres' offer of $2.5 million.
Santiago thus doubled his 1991 salary of $1.65 million, which he received as a result of an arbitration loss.
He had tried for $2.5 million.
The year before, he won at $1.25 million over the Padres' $750,000.


Oswego A-Plant Put On a Warning List
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has put the New York Power Authority's James A. FitzPatrick nuclear plant near Oswego on its "Watch List" of reactors requiring increased regulatory attention because of personnel or management problems.
In a letter to the Power Authority, the commission said it was taking the step because "the performance of operations, radiological controls, and safety assessment and quality verification at the FitzPatrick facility has been in decline for over a year."


Gloom and Economic Anxiety Overtake the Poles
A recent national poll sums up the gloomy, foreboding mood these days in Poland, the country that was the first in Eastern Europe to reject the Communist system.
Asked to pick the best-qualified person to lead the nation from among six well-known figures in recent Polish history, a substantial majority favored "none of the above." President Lech Walesa, who came to prominence as the leader of the Solidarity union movement, placed behind Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski, the last Communist leader.


Calendar Of Events: Architects, Art, Glass
An American Architect
New York School of Interior Design, 155 East 56th Street; (212) 753-5365.
David Garrard Lowe, an architectural historian, will give a lecture tonight at 6 P.M. about the architect Richard Morris Hunt (1828-1895), who designed the Great Hall of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the base for the Statue of Liberty.
Fee, $5.
AIDS Benefit
Leslie Howard Alternative Art Source, 3 Charles Street (off Greenwich Avenue); (212) 989-3801.
A sale of folk art, decorative crafts and design jewelry will be held from 6 to 10 P.M. tomorrow to benefit Bailey House, a residence for homeless people with AIDS run by the AIDS Resource Center.
Admission is free.


Accounts
*
Life Extension Institute, New York, to Sacks &amp; Rosen Advertising Inc., New York.
Billings for the preventive-medicine testing company were not disclosed.


Democrats To Support A Tax Cut
House Democrats agreed tonight to press for a middle-class tax cut paid for by higher taxes on upper-income taxpayers, despite opposition to any such increase by the Bush Administration.
House Speaker Thomas S. Foley told reporters there was a "strong consensus" for such an approach, although at least two Democrats had argued against the middle-class tax cut, saying it would be too small to do any good.


War on Labor Explains Decline of Unions
To the Editor:
As an example of political passivity in hard times, you report (The Week in Review, Jan. 12) that "middle-class Americans have become more reluctant to join unions" since the 1950's and 60's.
This is misleading.
To be sure, figures from the Bureau of Labor Statistics confirm a sharp drop in union membership since the 60's, especially in the last 10 years.
Today, the percentage of the American work force that is unionized is lower than it has been since the onset of the Great Depression.


A Meeting Is Canceled
DANIEL McCARTHY, who is seeking approval as the successor to ROBERT NEDERLANDER as the Yankees' managing general partner, yesterday canceled a meeting scheduled for today with Commissioner FAY VINCENT.
"He had a conflict with a court appearance," Deputy Commissioner STEVE GREENBERG said, adding that the meeting had not been rescheduled.


Rural Roots That Refuse To Wither
I LIVE in Manhattan now.
A lot of country children do.
They can't wait to leave all that manure and the land of Sunday school pins and Reader's Digests piled in the bathrooms.
They tend to choose the biggest cities they can find, needing a powerful antidote to the provinces.
In the low-rise streets of Greenwich Village, I still drink espresso as greedily as someone coming off Maxwell House for the first time, and good crusty prosciutto bread as if Italy were about to vanish from Prince Street.
I have discovered how much cheaper films are than therapy, and I don't think I will ever tire of just walking, still put pleasantly off balance by the people I see, because they just don't act this way where I come from.


Don't Label Every Crime a Bias Incident
To the Editor:
As you say in "The Larger Crime" (editorial, Jan. 17), New York City government officials and the news media must exercise caution not to label every incident or crime as bias, when it may not be.
A recent example in my borough represents a clear example.
A few weeks ago a man described as "black/Hispanic" went into a fit of rage when the wife of a Korean-American grocery store owner refused to change a dollar bill for him.
Without further provocation, the man beat up her husband and hospitalized him for days.
An African-American restaurateur next door attempted to intervene and was told, "Shut up, nigger, or you will get the same!"


Review/Television; Megan Truly Has (Sob!) Only One Live to Live
Forget tissues.
This tear-jerker cries out for towels, big, absorbent ones.
Megan is dying this week on "One Life to Live," and as family and friends gather at her hospital bedside, the occasion is being used to provide a retrospective of the show.
"Tell me everything about the old days," Megan weakly whispers.
And every weekday from 2 to 3 P.M., the visitors do just that, telling her stories to keep her going, with help from a sprinkling of clips from the 6,000 episodes churned out since the show made its debut on ABC in July 1968.
Triggering this retro splurge was the decision of Jessica Tuck, the actress who plays Megan, to stretch her talents elsewhere, perhaps in prime time.
How to get rid of her with maximum impact?
Linda Gottlieb, executive producer, and Michael Malone, head writer -- a team who joined the show just in July -- decided to hit her with an immune-deficiency illness, in this instance lupus.
The disease is not normally fatal, so kidney complications were added as plot insurance.
Mix with the Scheherazade storytelling gimmick, and viewers get what the network hopes will be "an uplifting emotional journey." Welcome to daytime drama.


Venezuela Recounts How Coup Failed
As a sense of normality settled over Venezuela today after Tuesday's failed coup, officials recounted how a knot of young, militantly nationalist army officers came within minutes of assassinating the President of one of South America's oldest democracies.
The failed coup that sought to end Venezuela's 34-year-old democracy cost the lives of as many as 78 soldiers and civilians.
Today, 1,058 mutinous soldiers were under arrest, including 133 junior army officers identified as conspirators.


Rollin Hadley, 64, The Former Director Of Gardner Museum
Rollin Van Nostrand Hadley, former director of the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in Boston, died on Sunday at his home in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 64 years old, and had moved to Florida in December.
He died of a heart attack, said his daughter Sarah.


Bush Is to Avoid Using Controversial Sleeping Pill
President Bush will avoid taking the sleeping pill Halcion because of the public controversy over the side effects it may cause in some people, the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said yesterday.
But Mr.
Bush's personal doctor, Burton J. Lee 3d, said in a telephone interview that he would not completely exclude the possibility of prescribing Halcion if it were medically indicated for


Renewed Riots in Algeria Leave At Least 8 Dead, Military Says
At least 8 people were killed and 57 wounded, including several army officers and soldiers, in clashes between fundamentalists and Algerian security forces over the last two days, the authorities report.
The confrontations took place at Batna, about 270 miles southeast of Algiers, and were the worse of several between fundamentalists and security forces since an army-supported Government took power on Jan. 11.


Review/Music; Mendelssohn by St. Luke's
It was hard to imagine, before Roger Norrington's Mendelssohn program with the Orchestra of St.
Luke's on Sunday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, how the two disparate works would fit together if each were performed to full effect.
Could the ethereal magic of "A Midsummer Night's Dream" stand up to -- or might it undercut -- the earthy bluster of "Die Erste Walpurgisnacht"?
Not to worry.
Mr.
Norrington's quick traversal of the Overture and five movements of incidental music to "A Midsummer Night's Dream" afforded little magic.
The usually fine orchestra was, for the most part, surprisingly ordinary, and the women of the imported chorus, the Stadtischer Musikverein zu Dusseldorf, seemed tentative in the English texts.


LAWMAKERS UNVEIL SPY AGENCY PLAN
The chairmen of the Senate and House Intelligence Committees today proposed a sweeping reorganization of the nation's intelligence agencies, a move intended to jolt the Bush Administration and Congress into changing the intelligence system to fit the needs of the post-Communist world.
The joint plan, included in separate but similar bills, stands little chance of winning White House support or Congressional approval.
But it serves as the opening salvo in what promises to be an intense debate in Congress and the Administration this year on the future of American intelligence agencies.


BellSouth Taps Experience For Move Into New Services
In a sign that the "Baby Bells" are beginning to enter the brave new world of information services in earnest, BellSouth, the largest of the regional phone companies, yesterday named W. H. Williams, a 20-year Bell System employee, to a new position to oversee the field.
The Federal courts recently allowed Bell operating companies like BellSouth to offer an undefined range of information services from which they were previously banned by the accord that broke up A.T.&amp; T. in 1984.


House Votes to Investigate 'October Surprise'
After an intensely partisan debate, the House of Representatives tonight voted to investigate accusations that Ronald Reagan's Presidential campaign struck a deal with Iran in 1980 to delay release of American hostages until after the election.
The vote of 217 to 192, with no Republican voting for the measure and 34 Democrats opposing it, cleared the way for the creation of a Congressional task force to conduct the investigation.
The task force would deliver its preliminary findings to the House on July 1.


Home Video
How popular is renting movies at the video store?
Some studies indicate that people rent less often as they own their VCR's longer.
Others, however, show that while enthusiasm for renting films may not be as keen as it was in the early 1980's when videos were new, movie rentals are more than holding their own as a choice of entertainment.
Last week, for example, Alexander &amp; Associates, an industry consultant, reported 106.6 million rentals for the first week in January.
The figure is the largest one-week total ever recorded by the company and more than 12 million higher than the same week last year.


4 Catholics Are Killed By Gunmen in Belfast
Two men burst into a betting shop in a Catholic section of Belfast today and sprayed it with submachine-gun fire, killing four people and wounding 10.
The Ulster Freedom Fighters, an outlawed Protestant group that is fighting to keep Northern Ireland under British rule, took responsibility in a statement that ended with the words "Remember Teebane," a reference to the crossroads where eight men were killed by a bomb detonated by the Irish Republican Army last month.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Myra Melford The Knitting Factory


Parallel Parking


The Milk Of Family Harmony
PEGGY DICKS, an artist who teaches at Williams College, found the medium for a public art project on domestic violence in the ubiquitous milk carton.
When one of a group of battered women told her, "The supermarket was the only place he let me go by myself," Ms.
Dicks realized that the accessibility of supermarkets would make them ideal for her statement.


Jurors in Tyson's Trial Escape Fatal Hotel Fire
Mike Tyson's rape trial was postponed for a day after a three-alarm fire early this morning damaged the downtown hotel where jurors in the trial were sequestered.
Two firefighters and an Illinois businessman died in the blaze, though none of the jurors were hurt.
Ten other people were injured, including two firefighters who remained hospitalized for burns and smoke inhalation.
One of the firemen was in critical condition, the other in serious condition.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Almanac; New Hampshire's Growth


The Times Agrees to Buy Newspaper Distributors
The New York Times Company announced yesterday that it had agreed to acquire a wholesale newspaper delivery operation that distributes almost half of the copies of The Times sold in the New York area, as well as other papers.
The Times Company said it planned to acquire the operation, the Metropolitan News Company and Newark Newsdealers Supply Company, from Robert B. Cohen.
The Times did not disclose the purchase price, but said the transaction should be completed this spring.


Market Place; A Complex Route to Higher Yields
With interest rates down at banks and money market funds, more and more individual investors have turned to mortgage-backed securities in an effort to maintain a higher yield on their investments.
But few categories of investments are more complicated, and potentially more risky, and there is a widespread suspicion on Wall Street that many investors do not know what they are buying.
But they are buying the securities, known as collateralized mortgage obligations.
"There are no really reliable numbers, but we estimate that about $25 billion is held by individuals," said Andrew Carron, the manager of mortgage research at the First Boston Corporation.
He said that figure was rising by about $500 million to $1 billion each month.


Topics of The Times; Contract Confusion
The New York City School Construction Authority, which builds public schools, has barred a Queens company from bidding because of suspected ties to organized crime.
Yet the city's Housing Authority has just awarded the same company, Hi-Tech Mechanical Inc., $5.8 million in new contracts for plumbing and other repair work.
The discrepancy is troubling.
The school agency disqualified Hi-Tech in November 1990 on the ground that it was the "alter ego" of a plumbing and heating concern with close ties to major organized crime figures.
The agency's views deserve respectful attention because it has earned praise for its rigorous screening of potential contractors.


Stocks Gain in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices rose modestly today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues gained 168.55 points, or less than 1 percent, to close at 22,104.92.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei slipped 63.23 points.


Greg Anthony's Patience Shows
Gerald Wilkins walked off the court inspecting a sneaker.
Kiki Vandeweghe flipped a towel over his shoulder and headed toward the weight room.
Xavier McDaniel, palming a basketball in his hand, bolted through a side door.
One by one, members of the Knicks were departing from practice at the SUNY-Purchase gymnasium, and after Mark Jackson and Brian Quinnett took a conversation out of bounds, the floor belonged solely to Greg Anthony, the rookie point guard from the University of Nevada-Las Vegas.


Neimark to Mitsukoshi
The Mitsukoshi Group, the 300-year-old Japanese retailer, said yesterday that Ira Neimark, the retired chairman and chief executive of Bergdorf Goodman, had been appointed an adviser.
It said he would consult on store planning, vendor and designer relations, advertising and merchandise training.
He will also lecture in Japan.
Mr.
Neimark has spent his career in the retail business, retiring from Bergdorf last week after having served as chairman since 1983.
K Nitta, the executive vice president of Mitsukoshi U.S.A.
Inc. in New York, said, "We are very proud to have a man of Ira Neimark's stature join our company."


Officer Is Wounded In Brooklyn Shooting
A police officer was slightly wounded last night by a bullet that grazed his left hip as he chased a suspect on a Brooklyn street, the police said.
The officer, identified as Clifford Lawrence, 28 years old, was taken to Wyckoff Heights Medical Center in Brooklyn, a police spokesman, Andrew McInnis, said.
A hospital spokesman, Charles Bitz, said that the officer was brought in by the police at 10:20 P.M., and that the hip wound did not pierce the skin.
He was treated and released at 12:35 A.M., Mr.
Bitz said.


New Cellular Phones Raise A National Security Debate
Advocates of privacy rights are challenging the nation's most clandestine intelligence-gathering agency over how much confidentiality people will have when communicating via the next generation of cellular telephones and wireless computers.
The issue has emerged at meetings this week of an obscure committee of telecommunications experts that is to decide what kind of protections against eavesdropping should be designed into new models of cellular phones.
People concerned with privacy are eager to incorporate more potent scrambling and descrambling codes in the equipment to prevent the eavesdropping that is so easy and so common in the current generation of cellular phones.


Defense Over In Shooting In Teaneck
The defense rested today in the manslaughter trial of a white Teaneck police officer accused of shooting a black teen-ager.
The prosecutor then started a counterattack against the defense version of the shooting and a wider inquiry into possible tampering with evidence.
In a series of rulings, the presiding judge, Charles R. DiGisi, allowed the state to call rebuttal witnesses to challenge the accounts given by the officer, Gary Spath, and his partner, Officer Wayne Blanco.
In addition, the state's chief prosecutor, Glenn D. Goldberg, won the right to summon more law-enforcement officials in an effort to determine the origins of a nick on one of the cartridges in the crude handgun that the police say they found on the body of the youth, Phillip Pannell.


It's Geronimo! Then Down the Slippery Slopes
Skiing is an exciting sport, but apparently not challenging enough for some skiers looking for the thrills and chills of their bungee-jumping and para-sailing brethren.
Ski areas throughout the Northeast have responded by offering hybrid-ski events for the more adventurous of their patrons.
On Saturday and Sunday, for example, 40 to 60 parachutists will jump from a helicopter at 3,500 feet and try to land on the beginner's slope at Butternut, Mass., in front of the base lodge.
Competitors then negotiate a slalom course, with the combined results determining winners.


In Tough Times, Weicker Speaks and Gloom Fills Hartford
With the prospect of another bitter fight over Connecticut's budget before them, many lawmakers here seemed glum and guarded today as they waited for Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. to deliver his State of the State address.
Even the opening prayer, delivered by a Senate chaplain, was bleak.
"This day is a little less bright because of the clouds of uncertainty that hang over both chambers," said the chaplain, the Rev.
Joseph A. Devine, just before the Governor stepped to the podium.


American Children Trail in Math and Science
Schoolchildren in America, on average, score lower in mathematics and science than children in several other industrial countries, according to a study made public by the Educational Testing Service.
In a study that tested 9- and 13-year olds in math and science, Americans fared poorly for the most part.
The American 9-year-olds ranked third in science among 10 countries, but they were outranked by 8 of the 10 in math.
The American 13-year-olds ranked 13th out of 15 countries in science and 14th out of 15 in math.
The numbers of countries differed for the age groups because not all countries participated in the 9-year-old category.


Bush's Choice
To the Editor:
It is ironic to hear President Bush use the word "choice" three times in his State of the Union Message (front page, Jan. 29).
He makes "preserving and increasing" patient choice in picking a doctor the cornerstone of his health care program.
Yet he would deny American women and families reproductive choice.
He would gag doctors, denying their professional choice in advising patients.
Reproductive freedom is a health issue.
President Bush cannot say with integrity that choice is fundamental in one health care area, but not in another.
BARBARA P. GIMBEL Secretary, New York State Republican Family Committee New York, Jan. 29, 1992


Meeting the Neighbors, Old and New
Residents of the Central Ward were skeptical when police officers and state troopers moved into a dilapidated apartment in a small building there 13 months ago, saying they would work with tenants to drive out drug dealers.
But not any more. Now, some of those same skeptics have embraced their new neighbors.


U.S. OFFERS DETAIL ON IRAQI ATROCITY
The United States Embassy in Kuwait has sent the State Department details to bolster disputed accounts of how occupying Iraqis killed babies at Kuwaiti hospitals in 1990 by disconnecting their incubators.
Citing three witnesses and a number of second-hand accounts, the cable said embassy officials "are convinced that premature and newborn babies died when Iraqis removed life-support systems from Kuwaiti hospitals."


Irish America Sleeps As Doherty Loses
To the Editor:
Re "Supreme Court Ruling Clears Way for Deportation of an I.R.A. Man" (front page, Jan. 16): Future generations will judge the United States Government's decision to deport Joe Doherty as one of our nation's darker moments, when the United States political alliance with Britain superseded our concern for political liberty.
But my anger dictates a more immediate and personal indictment: the indifference of a major segment of the Irish-American community.


Walker Gives Up Quest
JOHN WALKER, the New Zealand runner who hoped to run a sub-4-minute mile at the age of 40 next month, has given up his hope and his running career after suffering a severe Achilles' tendon injury on Monday.
"I have run my last race," said the 40-year-old Walker, who once held the world record in the mile.
"It is sad but there was no way I could run the mile as planned on March 1."


A Garland of Freeze-Dried Vegetables
DON'T eat those strawberries!
To the world of dried roses and stuffed owls, add freeze-dried strawberries, asparagus and bibb lettuce made into topiaries, nosegays and garlands.


WEICKER PROPOSES BIG SPENDING CUTS
A year after he unleashed a political storm by proposing Connecticut's first income tax, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. today put forward a budget that rejects new taxes and calls instead for sharp spending cuts, especially in welfare and in other social programs.
The proposals, delivered in Mr.
Weicker's State of the State Address, embraced trends in government retrenchment -- especially in curtailing welfare benefits -- that have been felt from Massachusetts and Michigan to New York and New Jersey as states have struggled to redefine their public mission. 'Reading the Mood'
But the magnitude of Governor Weicker's budget cuts make the challenge for Connecticut particularly great.
His $8.1 billion budget calls for more than $1.1 billion in cuts in existing programs and the elimination of thousands of state jobs.


Kia Motors to Start Its Agency Search
Another opportunity for an agency to enter the major leagues of advertising by winning an automotive account is about to present itself.
The Kia Motors Corporation of South Korea will soon begin the search for an agency, following a decision to develop an American dealer network and sell cars here next year.


Japan's U.S. Plants Pose a Dilemma
Two Japanese auto makers are seeking Commerce Department permission to extend favorable duties they now receive on imported parts for their American-made cars.
The companies want to expand their factories in the United States without paying higher tariffs on the additional parts they will need to import.
Since opening their United States factories in the 1980's, the Toyota Motor Corporation and the Nissan Motor Company, like Detroit's Big Three car makers, have held a special Government exemption that lets them pay duties of no more than 2.5 percent on parts they import for assembly.
The standard duties for auto parts range from 3.1 percent to 11 percent.


USAir Marketing Chief Is Coming From United
USAir turned to United Air Lines to recruit its vice president of marketing, announcing yesterday that W. Thomas Lagow, United's senior vice president of planning, would take the post.
He will replace Randall Malin, who was ousted as the head of marketing by Seth E. Schofield, the chairman of the USAir Group Inc., the parent company.
Mr.
Schofield has been seeking to end the airline's heavy losses and problems, which were largely caused by the absorption of Piedmont Airlines in the 80's.


Unanswered in Attica Case: High-Level Accountability
The mixed verdict that ended the Attica civil-liability trial on Tuesday left unanswered the central question of a case that reopened 20-year-old wounds.
That question was whether high-level officials could be held publicly accountable for what a court once called the "orgy of brutality" that ended the most famous prison uprising in American history.
Legal experts and some participants in the $2.8 billion damage case said yesterday that the jurors' decision can be explained as a response to the impossible task of trying to deliver a verdict for history on a watershed event.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  U.S. POLITICS TURNING INWARD
The whole terrain of American politics is undergoing fundamental change after four decades of hard-line anti-Communism.
With the end of the cold war, knowledge of the rest of the world seems to count for very little: none of the Presidential candidates except Mr.
Bush have foreign-policy credentials, and his are often viewed as a liability.
A1  IRAQI KURDS FEEL PARALYZED
The Kurdish dream of independence from Iraq is vanishing amid internal dissension and a three-month economic blockade imposed by the Baghdad Government.
A1  U.N.
BERATES BAGHDAD ON OIL
The United Nations Security Council faulted President Hussein for breaking off talks in Vienna on resuming oil sales.
The Council said that his refusal to sell the oil on the U.N.'s terms made him responsible for his people's sufferings.
A10  KUWAITI INCUBATOR ISSUE
The American Embassy in Kuwait has sent the State Department details to bolster disputed accounts of how occupying Iraqis killed babies at Kuwaiti hospitals in 1990 by disconnecting their incubators.
A11  GLOOMY TIMES IN POLAND
From the cabarets to the Parliament, the prevailing talk in Poland is of strikes, social unrest and even a return to authoritarian rule.
Euphoria about toppling Communism has been supplanted by anxiety.
A1  HOW VENEZUELA FOILED A COUP
As normalcy returned to Venezuela, officials recounted how a knot of young, nationalist army officers came within minutes of assassinating the President of one of South America's oldest democracies.
A3  COURTING CENTRAL ASIAN STATES
Worried that Iran's influence is expanding, Washington plans to move quickly to open embassies in the Central Asian republics of the former Soviet Union.
A3  FIERCE CLASHES IN ALGERIA
At least 8 people were killed and 57 wounded in clashes between fundamentalists and security forces in the Algerian city of Batna.
Young militants had rioted to protest the sentencing of a Muslim cleric.
A6  Jerusalem Journal: Road 1 is a metphor for the city's tribulations.
A4  National A12-21, B7-8  A TWIST IN GENETICS
In research on the most common form of muscular dystrophy, scientists have discovered a novel mechanism of inheritance in which genetic damage gets more severe with subsequent generations.
A1  AUTO INSURANCE FRAUD
Regulators and researchers say that fraud is increasingly common and costly and that the industry is doing little to combat it.
Fraud has pushed up the premiums Americans pay, as insurers pass along the cost, these critics say.
A1  A WOMAN'S SELF-IMAGE
While many people see bodily flaws as superficial and take them in stride, to others, especially young girls, they can be devastating to their self-image.
More than 20 years after the start of the women's movement, many women still feel judged more on physical attributes than inherent worth.
A1  SEWAGE FOULS BEACHES
Millions of gallons of partially treated sewage is spilling into the Pacific Ocean just off San Diego after a pipe ruptured.
Beaches have been closed, and pipeline repairs will take at least six weeks.
A12  GOODBYE TO A BLUESMAN
Borrowing a page from the New Orleans book, Chicago bid farewell to the legendary bluesman Willie Dixon, who died last week.
A12  RETHINKING U.S.
INTELLIGENCE
In a move intended to jolt the Administration and Congress into adapting the country's intelligence system to fit a post-Communist world, the chairmen of the House and Senate Intelligence Committees proposed a sweeping reorganization of intelligence agencies.
A16  AND NOW FROM NIXON . . .
Former President Nixon weighs in with predictions for the New Hampshire primary and the political campaign after it.
A18  BEYOND THE DUKE CANDIDACY
The Presidential candidacy of David Duke has raised the broader issue of who should be allowed on, or excluded from, primary ballots.
A18  REVISITING A CAMPAIGN
The House of Representatives cleared the way for investigation of charges that in 1980 the Reagan Presidential campaign struck a deal with Iran to delay the release of American hostages until after the election.
A19  LOW SCORES, AGAIN
American pupils scored lower in math and science than did children in several other countries, according to a new study, but the head of the Educational Testing Service noted that the rankings were suspect because of difference in the student populations tested.
A14  HORATIO ALGER HEALTH PLAN
A Cleveland health insurance plan that lets small businesses offer coverage for less money is providing the Republican Party with a model of market forces at work.
A20  BUSH AND MEDICINE
President Bush will avoid taking the sleeping pill Halcion because of the public controversy over its side effects, but Mr.
Bush's doctor said he would not exclude the possiblity of prescribing the drub if it was medically indicated.
A20  A Federal appeals court challenges race-based scholarships.
A15  A doctor who invented a suicide device was charged with murder.
A21  A Manhattan doctor stopped using silicone injections.
B7  A round-the-world balloon flight got a new liftoff date.
B8  Metropolitan Digest, B1 WEICKER'S GRIM NEWS
The $8.1 billion budget proposed by Governor Weicker rejects new taxes and calls instead for $1.1 billion in spending cuts, especially in welfare and other social programs.
A1  SLOW GOING FOR SCHOOLS
Six months after an early retirement plan stripped the New York City school system of 211 of its principals, only 26 of those vacancies have been filled as parents and teachers have been bogged down in a new selection process.
A1  Neediest Cases B2  Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-12  New toys are not make-believe.
C1  Rural roots refuse to wither.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C15-24  For the Philharmonic, more than just a new contract.
C15  Sports B9-18  Basketball: North Carolina beats Duke.
B9  Obituaries D22  Lisa Fonssagrives-Penn, a leading fashion model in the 1940's and 50's.
Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Lending for peace in Israel.
A blind judge?
Don't censor P.B.S.
Topics: Custodians.
Letters A22  William Safire: Reading Boris's mind.
A23  Anthony Lewis: Mubarak's Egypt.
A23  Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane: Orphans of the ballot box.
A23  Betty Jean Lifton: Tokyo needs my old Chevy.
A23  Reiko Hatsumi: Detroit needs to think small.
A23


GENETICISTS FIND DEFECT WORSENS OVER GENERATIONS
In a finding that adds a strange new twist to traditional genetics, scientists have discovered that the most common form of muscular dystrophy is caused by a gene that gradually grows bigger each time it is inherited.
And the bigger it gets, the worse the disease.
The discovery about the form called myotonic dystrophy, made at the same time by three separate groups of scientists, brings to light a novel mechanism of inheritance, involving a sliding scale of genetic damage that gets more severe with subsequent generations.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Alabama Power Co., Birmingham, a unit of Southern Co., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf registration of up to $450 million of first mortgage bonds and up to $4 million class A preferred shares.


Signing Day: You've Seen These Names Before
Three top high school quarterbacks who signed national letters of intent yesterday are following famous family members into the college ranks.
Two are headed for the same schools.
Chris Walsh, brother of New Orleans Saints quarterback Steve Walsh, signed with his brother's alma mater, the University of Miami.
Koy Detmer, brother of the 1990 Heisman Trophy winner, Ty Detmer, signed with Colorado.
Ty Detmer played at Brigham Young.
And Patrick Sullivan, son of the 1971 Heisman Trophy winner, Pat Sullivan, signed with his father's alma mater, Auburn.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Sukova Advances


Delta Air Prices Trust Certificates
Delta Air Lines Inc., one of the few remaining prosperous large American airlines, priced $206.7 million of equipment trust certificates in two parts yesterday through Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The first part, consisting of $155.7 million in certificates due in 2007, were priced at par to yield 8.54 percent.
Because of early principal payments, the issue will have an average life of 10.4 years.


New Paper Recycling Rules Stir Concern
Environmentalists and recycling advocates say they fear that paper recycling standards due to be set today by an advisory group to the Environmental Protection Agency will do little to divert waste paper from landfills.
Since one of the main goals of recycling is to reduce the amount of trash, environmentalists say recycling standards should take account of paper products that have been used by consumers and thrown away.
In the past, they say, many paper companies have been able to meet Government rules using only scraps from their own mills, a situation that has no effect on trash.
Shifting Emphasis
Paper of all kinds is the biggest single component of municipal trash, and many municipalities, including New York, have looked to recycling to reduce the cost of trash disposal.
When paper is recycled, it is broken down into its wood fibers, and then ink and other contaminants are removed and the fibers are re-formed into new paper products.


Panel Votes to End Ban on Fetal Research
A Senate committee voted today to end the Bush Administration's ban on experiments with transplanted fetal tissue.
At the same time it approved a bill to authorize the National Institutes of Health to spend $2.4 billion in the fiscal year 1993.
The Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee voted 13 to 4 for an amendment to the authorization bill that would reverse the Administration's ban on the use of Federal funds for any experiments in which tissue is transplanted from an aborted fetus to patients.


Gambino Trial: Trucks and 'Guys in Trenchcoats'
A Manhattan garment maker testified in chilling detail yesterday that "four or five guys in trenchcoats" were used to instill fear and enforce what the prosecution said was organized crime's stranglehold on truck deliveries within New York City's garment industry.
His testimony followed opening arguments in the Manhattan extortion trial of Thomas and Joseph Gambino, the sons of the late Carlo Gambino, the reputed Mafia boss, in which the defense contended that the Gambino name was more of a cursed Mafia legacy than an instrument of fear.


Jurors in Tyson's Trial Escape Fatal Hotel Fire
Mike Tyson's rape trial was postponed for a day after a three-alarm fire early this morning damaged the downtown hotel where jurors in the trial were sequestered.
Two firefighters and an Illinois businessman died in the blaze, though none of the jurors were hurt.
Ten other people were injured, including two firefighters who remained hospitalized for burns and smoke inhalation.
One of the firemen was in critical condition, the other in serious condition.


Lawyer Who Is Blind Is Recommended to Be Federal Judge
A Manhattan lawyer whose resume includes the vigorous prosecution of Soviet spies and who lost his eyesight five years ago has been recommended to a Federal judgeship.
The lawyer, Richard Conway Casey, said he believed that if his nomination were approved, he would be the first blind person appointed to the Federal bench.


Corrections
A dance review yesterday about a performance by the New York City Ballet of "Tombeau de Couperin" and "Prague Symphony" at the New York State Theater misstated the time of the performance.
It was on Saturday evening, not afternoon.


Corrections
A brief theater review yesterday about "Julie Halston's Lifetime of Comedy" at the Actors' Playhouse omitted the name of the show's producer.
He is Drew Dennett.


It's All Downhill From Here
New York City would not have an athlete on the United States Winter Olympic team if Joan Pipkins didn't work for the phone company.
It was in 1987 that Mrs.
Pipkins, a computer technology teacher at the Nynex Corporation -- which happens to be a sponsor of the United States Luge Association -- brought home a brochure from the office featuring a weeklong July program in Lake Placid, N.Y., in which workers' children might learn how to luge.
Mrs.
Pipkins thought this was a great idea, and so did her son, Robert, then 14 years old, even though neither one of them had a clue about what a luge was.


Dapper Thieves Startle a Posh Hotel
A band of well-mannered, well-dressed and well-armed robbers appeared suddenly at the concierge's desk at the Regency Hotel on Park Avenue early yesterday morning and herded a dozen employees and guests into a bathroom and then into a ballroom as they looted the hotel's safe-deposit boxes.
As the hostages worried and the hotel's guests slept, the robbers, five to seven middle-aged white men in suits and ties and false mustaches and eyebrows, worked with methodical precision for an hour and a half, the police said.
They fled about 5:15 A.M., shortly before preparations were to begin for the power breakfasts for which the hotel is famous.


BRIEFS
*
Armstrong Pharmaceutical Inc., New Canaan, Conn., extended its multiyear agreement to 1995 with Rhone-Poulenc Rorer to manufacture Rhone's metered-dose inhaler steroid products, Azmacort and Nasacort. *
First Illinois Corp., Evanston, Ill., and Banc One Corp. amended their $347 million merger agreement to extend through March 31 the period in which both banking companies are obliged to proceed under the agreement.


Walker Aiming to Give U.S. Two Big Pushes
Is there anything Herschel Walker can't do?
He was an All-Pro running back for the Dallas Cowboys, and although his present team, the Minnesota Vikings, has wasted him, he still ranked fifth in rushing yardage last season in the National Football League.
In his Heisman Trophy year at Georgia, he would play football on Saturdays and compete in karate tournaments on Sundays.


23 Charged With Bribery At Javits Hall
Twenty-three men, including two former state police officers, were accused yesterday of charges of union corruption, extortion, fraud, thefts and violence that authorities said inflated exhibition costs and discouraged business at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center.
Almost from the day the crystalline-enclosed center opened on Manhattan's West Side in 1986, exhibitors have complained of shakedowns by employees, thefts and excessive labor costs.
The indictments unsealed yesterday are the first significant criminal charges brought against union officials and employees connected to the center.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
GETTING children to quit smoking, or persuading them not to start in the first place, can be more difficult than persuading an adult to do the same.
Children respond to different social pressures.
The adolescent mind-set of invulnerability, living for the moment and rebellion causes them to reject the arguments that lead many adults to stop smoking.
The health warnings on cigarette packs and advertisements appear to have little effect on children, who may see cigarettes as a way to lose weight, rebel, appear more mature or fit into a particular social group.


Topics of The Times; Controlling Custodians
A ruling last month by the State Civil Service Commission threatens to undermine New York City's efforts to gain tighter control over recalcitrant school custodians.
Under present rules, school custodians function as both city employees and independent contractors.
They receive an annual allowance, which covers supplies, equipment and salaries.
Principals have no direct supervisory role over the custodians or their employees -- making it difficult to enforce a decent standard of cleanliness and maintenance or to sensibly use the school during non-class hours.


Seating a la Taxi For an Office Suite
DESIGNERS often get their ideas in the most surprising places.
The light bulb went off in Kevin Walz's head a few months ago as he was riding in the back of a New York taxi on the way to Lafayette Street and the offices of the Island Trading Company, which Mr.
Walz had designed.


Rise of Commuter Vans Shows an Unmet Need
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 24 article reporting that private van services in New York City are taking over the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's business fails to mention that although the private vans cost the official transit system $30 million a year, the net benefit to the communities is overwhelmingly positive.
Instead of pointing out how much the private service costs the M.T.A., why not ask the more relevant question of how much the M.T.A.'s inefficiencies cost the consumers?
The money supposedly lost to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority is much better off in the hands of these industrious service providers.


CHRONICLE
PADDY ASHDOWN, the leader of the Liberal Democrats, Britain's third-largest political party, publicly acknowledged yesterday what he had tried to keep British newspapers from printing in recent days: that he had an extramarital affair five years ago with his secretary.
He said he was coming forward because a confidential memorandum dealing with the liaison had been stolen last month from his lawyer's office and offered for sale to a London newspaper.
The woman, who no longer works for Mr.
Ashdown, was identified by Andrew Phillips, Mr.
Ashdown's lawyer, as Patricia Howard, who was separated from her husband during the four-month-long affair.
At that time, she was known as Patricia Sullivan.


U.S. to Counter Iran in Central Asia
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today that Washington planned to move quickly to open embassies in the Central Asian republics of the former Soviet Union to counter expanding Iranian influence in these newly independent Muslim states.
The Bush Administration has already begun consulting with Turkey and Egypt on how they can all cooperate in order to help prevent Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan and Kazakhstan from falling under the political sway of Iran, which has been sending preachers, money and trade missions into all five Central Asian states, officials say.


CHRONICLE
YEHUDI MENUHIN,
Yehudi Menuhin, Menuhin!
O soul-smile rare and heart-cry genuine.
You are heaven and earth's fountain-delight.
And music world's summit-aspiration height."
More than 20 disciples of SRI CHINMOY, the Indian spiritual teacher in Jamaica, Queens, chanted those words the other evening in a long-awaited encounter.


Optima Credit Card to Charge Higher Rates to Riskier Holders
The American Express Company is trying to revive the fortunes of its Optima credit card by reducing interest rates for its best customers and raising rates for those most likely to become delinquent or to default.
The strategy comes after American Express discovered that its four-year-old Optima operation had lost about $150 million in 1991.
The change is similar to what other credit card issuers have done to make more distinctions between their best customers and others.


City Gives Bush a Health Plan Model
As the recession took hold of the construction industry here last year, Don Rodemann, a roofer, was working less and paying more for health insurance.
Finding it harder to manage the $424 a month contribution to his union insurance policy, Mr.
Rodemann, his wife, Sharon, and their three sons were about to join the ranks of 35 million uninsured Americans last year.
Then the Rodemanns turned to Mrs.
Rodemann's employer, Malley's Chocolates, which had joined an 18-year-old Cleveland project that helps small businesses offer cheaper, less comprehensive policies to their workers.
The Rodemann's now pay $194 a month.
Malley's picks up the other $194.


Loan Package Is Sold by U.S.
The Resolution Trust Corporation yesterday announced the sale of a package of loans for $200 million to a group headed by Lewis Ranieri, a Wall Street trader who owns a Texas savings and loan institution.
The deal is considered a prototype for future Resolution Trust sales of assets from failed savings and loan associations.
In the past, Resolution Trust either acquired and sold the real estate assets itself or allowed the buyer to pick the assets it wanted and bid on those alone.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Duke's Candidacy Raises Legal Questions About State Ballot Laws
The question being debated in states from Florida to Oregon is whether David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader and Nazi sympathizer, has a right to be on the Republican ballot in this year's Presidential primaries.
But in court cases and intrastate squabbling around the country, the underlying issue is far broader: Who should run in party primaries, and who should decide?


Review/Music; A Moscow Family Affair
Known once as the State Symphonic Orchestra of the Ministry of Culture of the U.S.S.R. and more recently as the Soviet Philharmonic, Gennady Rozhdestvensky's 11-year-old ensemble has been suffering the identity crises familiar to that part of the world.
It returned to Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night with yet another name: the State Symphonic Kapelle of Moscow.
The confusions stop at this splendid organization's title.
Indeed when it played out from the stage on Tuesday, one heard not a peep of complaint about Carnegie's post-renovation acoustics.
The hall took up the rich, perfectly defined string sound, cushioned it in its bosom and glowed along with it.
The evening's irony was how these wondrous resources could work counter to music's intentions, but so they did.
Charles Ives's "Robert Browning" Overture was literally killed with kindness.


U.N. Says 2 in Croatia Block Peace Proposal
President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia and Milan Babic, leader of the predominantly Serbian Krajina region of Croatia, are blocking plans to send a 10,000-member peacekeeping force to Yugoslavia, Secretary General Boutros Ghali said today.
In a report to the Security Council, the Secretary General said the cease-fire in the region was still "generally holding," though the number of violations appears to be increasing.
But he said he could not recommend deployment of the proposed peacekeeping force until the two leaders dropped their new objections to the United Nations peace plan, which all factions in the conflict accepted at the end of last year.


Coleman Puts in a Big Effort But the Nets Lose to Seattle
Derrick Coleman had game highs of 25 points and 20 rebounds.
Kenny Anderson came off the New Jersey bench to contribute 14 points in 28 minutes.
It wasn't enough.
With two-fifths of their starting lineup sidelined by injury, the Nets couldn't muster the firepower to overcome Seattle, and the SuperSonics won, 95-85, tonight, snapping the Nets' six-game winning streak at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the sale of the LTV Corporation's aerospace and missile businesses misstated President Bush's position on production of the B-2 bomber.
The President wants Congress to limit output to 20 bombers.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY SELECTING PRINCIPALS, SLOWLY
Six months after an early retirement plan stripped the New York City school system of 211 of its principals, only 26 of those vacancies have been filled as parents and teachers have been bogged down in a new selection process.
The president of the principals' union charged that the glacial pace of the selections set off ripples of uncertainty that are undermining the education of the system's 975,000 children.
A1.
ATTACK OF THE GENTLEMAN BANDITS
A band of well-mannered, well-dressed and well-armed robbers appeared suddenly at the concierge's desk at the Regency Hotel on Park Avenue and herded a dozen employees and guests into a bathroom and then into a ballroom as they looted the hotel's safe-deposit boxes.
B3.
HALF-FARE PROGRAM ASSAILED
A program that allows the disabled to ride the city's subways and buses at half fare appears to be riddled with abuses, inadequate supervision and possible fraud, an audit has found.
B3.
BRONX BIAS CASES: STILL A MYSTERY
One month after two black schoolchildren said they had been assaulted and smeared with a white substance on a street in the Bronx, the police still have no suspects and no witnesses.
Mystified by their lack of progress, they say they are considering a variety of theories, including the possibility that the children may have fabricated their descriptions of the incidents.
B3.
Witness describes a mob stranglehold on garment industry.
B2.
CUNY panel cracks down on student government.
B3.
Appeals Court judge expected to become Deputy Mayor for Public Safety.
B3.
REGION  ASSESSING THE ATTICA TRIAL
The mixed verdict that ended the Attica civil-liability trial on Tuesday left unanswered the central question of a case that reopened 20-year-old wounds: whether high-level officials could be held publicly accountable for what a court once called the "orgy of brutality" that ended the most famous prison uprising in American history.
B5.
COUNTERATTACK IN TEANECK CASE
The defense rested in the manslaughter trial of a white Teaneck police officer accused of shooting a black teen-ager, and the prosecutor started a counterattack against the defense version of events and a wider inquiry into possible evidence tampering.
B5.
TAKE THAT, NEW YORK
Angry New Jersey legislators have threatened a retaliatory tax on New Yorkers who work in New Jersey if Mayor Dinkins follows through on his proposal to raise the commuter tax on nonresidents who work in New York City.
B5.
A GRIM BUDGET IN HARTFORD
A year after he unleashed a political storm by proposing Connecticut's first income tax, Governor Weicker proposed a budget that rejects new taxes and calls instead for sharp spending cuts, especially in welfare and other social programs.
Around the Capitol, the prospect of another bitter budget fight left lawmakers glum and guarded.
A1 and B6.
The police move in to drive out drugs.
Newark Journal, B5.
Neediest Cases B2


Police Puzzled by Lack of Leads In Bias Attacks on Black Youths
One month after two black schoolchildren said they were assaulted and smeared with a white substance on a street in the Bronx, the police still have no suspects and no witnesses.
Unable to explain their lack of progress in the case or in investigating a similar report a week later, and despite extraordinary publicity and a $20,000 reward, the police say that they are considering a variety of theories, including the possibility that the children may have fabricated their descriptions of the incident.


Don't Censor Public Broadcasting
It's not surprising that the Republican Party's right wing finds public broadcasting "too liberal." Public television and radio reach out to diverse audiences; they challenge convention and authority in ways that couldn't possibly please everyone.
That's what Congress intended when it created the system.
What's alarming is that Senate Republicans are holding up funds for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
They seem bent on pressuring the C.P.B. into restricting certain broadcasts.


Sports of The Times; The Woman Who Outshot All the Men
Ginny Doyle was too young to pay much attention when Billie Jean King beat Bobby Riggs in that legendary tennis match in 1973 to make the point that some female athletes can do some things better than some male athletes.
But Doyle, a senior at the University of Richmond, recently did something better than any male college player had ever done, making 66 consecutive free throws.
Then on Tuesday, Doyle scored more points in an updated version of the old King-Riggs morality play.
In fact, Doyle made 20 straight points -- beating Billy Packer, once a star for Wake Forest, now a broadcaster with CBS.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Lending for Peace in Israel
The Bush Administration is fashioning a fair and sensible response to Israel's request for $10 billion in U.S. loan guarantees.
Israel has sought the guarantees for a valid purpose: to raise money for the absorption of Jewish immigrants from the former Soviet Union.
The hitch has been Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's massive expansion of Israeli settlements on the West Bank and in Gaza.
These settlements are designed to strengthen Israel's hold on the disputed territories, thereby undermining a Washington-promoted Middle East peace initiative.
Secretary of State Baker is rightly demanding that Israel halt building of new settlements as a condition for receiving American loan guarantees.
At the same time he offers a face-saving concession.
Israel would be able to complete the housing units already being built.
No American funds would support this construction; the U.S. would deduct from each year's guarantees an amount matching expenditures on roads and housing in the disputed territories.


Paramount Official to Head New TV Operation at Sony
Sony Pictures Entertainment Inc. said yesterday that it had named Mel Harris to head its new television group.
Mr.
Harris, 49 years old, is a longtime television executive who ran Paramount Television and helped expand it in the "first run" television business, which provides programming for local stations with such offerings as "The Arsenio Hall Show."


Economic Watch; How Welcome Mat Aids Israel
Can Israel afford to welcome the million Soviet immigrants expected over five years?
Many Israeli economists and business leaders think the questioners have it backwards.
Weighed in purely economic terms, they insist, Israel cannot afford to let them go elsewhere.
The immigrants, they argue, are an asset as well as a liability -- a remarkable pool of talent whose arrival is neatly timed to turbocharge Israel's drive to join the world's technological elite.
And even the liability could prove an advantage if the imperative to absorb workers rapidly and to raise capital abroad forces an end to the paternalist economic policies that have impeded rapid growth.


ALBERTVILLE '92: Two Days to Albertville; Suchow and Pipkins Get Big Starts in Luge
Wendel Suchow of Marquette, Mich., and 18-year-old Robert Pipkins of Staten Island took the early lead today in the competition for singles berths in the Winter Games.
The United States will be allowed three entrants in the men's competition Sunday and Monday at La Plagne.
One berth has been given to Duncan Kennedy of Lake Placid, N.Y., a medal favorite.
Suchow, Pipkins and Tim Wiley of Lexington, Mass., are the candidates for the other two berths.


'A New Dimension Of Economic Internationalism'
"One of the big questions the United States is faced with is: is its obligatiuon to the United States, to the West, or to the world? I think we have to lean more in favor of the rebuilding of the United States and take advantage of the historical window that's opened for resources and infrastructure. We need to do that here before we can safely run around with new global ambitions.
"One of the interesting nuances of world history is, if you go back and look at great capitalist boom periods, like the Renaissance or the late 19th century, everyone is involved with great theses of economic interdependence. It's true, there is a new dimension of economic internationalism today. Economic nationalism may develop at the continental level, with cohesive units like North America, Europe or East Asia. But if the ethnic forces are too powerful, they may rip apart these larger units.


Quotation of the Day
"More women have more money and power and scope and legal recognition than we have ever had before, but in terms of how we feel about ourselves physically, we may actually be worse off than our unliberated grandmothers." -- NAOMI WOLF, an author.  [ B7:1. ]


Parisians On Graffiti: Vandalism Or Art?
If the young graffiti writers were hoping to enter posterity through the back door, they failed.
Only hours after they spray-painted the reproductions of ancient statues in the Louvre-Rivoli Metro station before dawn on Jan. 11, their scrawly nicknames had been washed away.
On the other hand, if they were truly sophisticated, if they conspired to set off a fine old political row, if their real aim was to embarrass France's trendy and politically correct Culture Minister, Jack Lang, they must now be savoring a special triumph.


Smith College's Shows Celebrate a Green World
IN 1890, Smith College engaged the landscape architecture firm of Frederick Law Olmsted to lay out its campus as an ornamental botanic garden and arboretum.
Five years later, plans were completed for greenhouses in the Gothic Revival style.
The greenhouses now number 12.
There is a serpentine pond as in an 18th-century landscape garden, and with its lofty trees, the Victorian campus still reflects Olmsted's pastoral esthetic while its plant groupings serve scientific purposes.


Rangers Overcome Early Deficit and Defeat Penguins for 5th in Row


Police Officer Slain in Robbery Attempt Is Buried


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Bush's economic advisers said the economy would probably rebound in a few months, and they rebutted arguments that living standards have dropped under the Reagan and Bush Administrations.  [ Page D1. ]


CUNY Panel Urges Crackdown on Student Government
Cracking down on a citywide student government group that paid its president $7,500 a year and his twin sister $26,000 a year, a committee of trustees of the City University of New York has recommended eliminating the 85-cent-a-student activity fee that raised the $340,000 the group spent last year.
Members of the trustees' Committee on Student Affairs said yesterday that the recommendations were intended to give administrators and faculty more authority over organizations like the University Student Senate, whose president, Jean C. LaMarre, hired his twin sister to be his assistant for a salary that is about what a beginning instructor is paid.


Break in Pipe Spews Sewage Near San Diego's Shore
A ruptured undersea pipe is spilling millions of gallons of partly treated sewage from San Diego and 15 other towns into the Pacific Ocean, and officials have closed four miles of beaches north of the city's only sewage plant.
Officials today said it would take from six to eight weeks to fix the break, during which time the effluent would continue to flow into the ocean 1,000 yards offshore.
Work was to start Thursday, but a forecast storm threatened both to delay the work and to spread the effluent.


Seats Added for Tharp
To meet the demand for tickets, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, has opened the rear of its first balcony for Twyla Tharp and Dancers, which is performing at the theater through Sunday afternoon.
A total of 568 additional seats are available, in an area that has been generally closed for restoration since summer 1990, with tickets priced at $10 each, for performances on Friday, Saturday and Sunday.
The tickets will be available at the box office only, by cash or credit card.
Information: 581-7907.


If You Put a Nickel In and It Wheezes
RICK BOTTS, the editor of Jukebox Collector magazine, has a theory about why people collect vintage jukeboxes.
"They're always associated with pleasure," he said.
"You'd go out to eat, a jukebox was there. You'd go to a tavern, a jukebox was there."


U.N.L.V. Star Returns
It must surely seem to be an oversight that National Collegiate Athletic Association regulations, allowing colleges to pay for a student athletes's room, board, books, tuition and fees, make no provision for bail.
But rules are rules, so when University of Nevada-Las Vegas officials learned that his academic adviser had put up $200 bail for the Runnin' Rebels' leading scorer, J. R. RIDER, after his arrest last month, Rider was declared ineligible, threatening the team's 13-game winning streak as it prepared for tonight's game against California-Santa Barbara.


Paul A. Freund, Authority On Constitution, Dies at 83
Paul A. Freund, an authority on constitutional law and the Supreme Court who taught at Harvard Law School for 37 years, died yesterday at his home at Cambridge, Mass.
He was 83 years old.
Professor Freund, who retired in 1976 as Carl M. Loeb University Professor, died of cancer of the sinus, said Michael Chmura, a spokesman for the law school.


Review/Dance; Nikolais and Louis: Joy From Amazement
Alwin Nikolais and Murray Louis may clothe their company in extravagant costumes that disguise the natural shape of the body, or they may flood dancers with patterns of light that obliterate their facial features.
Nevertheless, even the most complex spectacles of their troupe, Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance, are rooted in the simple pleasure human beings take in amazing one another.
Just as children delight in dressing up in grown-ups' clothes from family closets, so Mr.
Nikolais and Mr.
Louis revel in putting on a show.
Often, the more fantastic it is, the better.
The dancers may look like robots or beings from outer space.
Yet despite all their up-to-date technological trappings, what they do is closely related to the traditional art of mimes, mummers, clowns and magicians.


Other Networks Closing In on NBC
Throughout much of the 1980's, NBC had such total command of television viewers on Thursday nights that the strategy employed by its competitors amounted to: "Give up and preserve whatever crumbs you can," said Alan Wurtzel, the senior vice president of research for ABC.
Now the whole pie seems to be up for grabs.


Jerusalem Journal; If Jews and Arabs Bristle, Can a Road Be Smooth?
As the face of this city is changed and remolded beyond cosmetics, sometimes beyond recognition, Jerusalem residents from both sides of its emotional divide take an almost perverse delight in saying that nothing here can escape the politics bred of war and uprising, faith and history.
Take Road 1, for example.
It plows a four-lane furrow north to south, straight through the onetime wasteland that was called the Green Line, which split the city into separate sovereignties from 1948, when the state of Israel was born in war, to 1967, when Israel won another war and control over the entire city.


Relax, Lie Down, Have a Shampoo
IT could well be one of the most relaxing places in Manhattan.
At Nymph (that stands for New York Master Practitioners of Hair), clients lie down to have their hair shampooed.
The light-filled salon, at 112 Mercer Street, between Prince and Spring Streets, with its fanciful, drapery-punctuated decor, is the handiwork of its owners, Sam and Lorraine Massey Wong.


Lisa Fonssagrives-Penn, 80, Artist Who Gave Up Career as a Model
Lisa Fonssagrives-Penn, a leading fashion model in the 1940's and 50's, died Tuesday at New York Hospital.
She was 80 years old and lived in Huntington L.I.
She died of pneumonia, a family representative said.


U.N. Says Hussein Is Most Responsible For Travail in Iraq
The United Nations Security Council blamed President Saddam Hussein today for the worsening plight of the Iraqi people, saying his refusal to sell oil to pay for essential imports means that he "bears full responsibility for their humanitarian problems."
The statement, issued after the Council's latest review of the trade embargo against Iraq, deplored Baghdad's decision on Tuesday to break off talks with the United Nations on selling oil under the restrictions laid down by the Security Council.


Conceptualize This, and Win a Job at J. Walter Thompson
LIKE those correspondence art schools whose entreaties to enroll once decorated matchbook covers, J. Walter Thompson North America is looking for people who like to draw.
Later this month, advertisements will ask eight fanciful questions of people who Thompson executives hope will consider becoming art directors at the agency.
The incentive to take the deliberately offbeat J. Walter Thompson Art Director Test is something that in these hard times is prized even more highly than a Clio: a job.


Flatware Sums Up The Sculptural 50's
SOMETIMES just a few objects can recall a whole era.
The streamlined, sculptural stainless steel flatware of Don Wallance, an American industrial designer who died in 1990, fills the bill for the 1950's.
Mr.
Wallance was born in 1909.
His reputation derived from his writing -- "Shaping America's Products" (1956) was a pioneering study of industrial design -- as well as from his designs of furniture and of cooking and serving utensils.
His flatware designs for the old H. E. Lauffer Company -- with titles like Design Two (1957), Bedford (1963) and Design Three (1964) -- bring back vividly the sculptural and functional look of the '50's.


Miramax Deal On Distribution
Miramax Films, an independent movie producer, said today that it had agreed to a deal with the Paramount Pictures Corporation, under which Paramount would eventually provide some Miramax films to theaters.
The deal initially calls for Paramount to distribute Miramax films on home video and to cable networks and broadcast television.
But Paramount said the deal would also allow Paramount to distribute to movie theaters those Miramax movies that might have particular commercial appeal.


Olympic Committee Attacks Campaign
A marketing official of the International Olympic Committee yesterday attacked the American Express Company for its use of so-called marketing campaign against Visa International, which paid $20 million for Olympic sponsorship rights.
At a news conference in Courchevel, France, three days before the Winter Games begin in Albertville, France, Mr.
Pound accused American Express of trying to pass itself off as an Olympic sponsor when, unlike Visa and others, it had not paid for those rights.
He said the committee was taking legal action to stop such marketing.


Joyner-Kersee Is Back
At the Millrose Games tomorrow night, JACKIE JOYNER-KERSEE will be competing in her first meet since suffering a badly sprained right ankle and a pulled right hamstring last year at the track and field world championships in Tokyo.
For Joyner-Kersee, the world record-holder in the heptathlon, her entry in the long-jump competition at the Madison Square Garden event will be the start of her physical and mental comeback.


What's Wrong With Irradiating Food? Plenty; Alters the Chemistry
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 21 front-page article on food irradiation:
Food irradiation affects the cells that make up the food.
Cells are composed of proteins, fats and nucleic acids -- the building blocks of DNA and genes.
All radiation scientists would acknowledge that irradiating food's proteins, fats and nucleic acids alter their chemistry.


Who Believes in Make-Believe? Not the New Toys
WHAT, as Freud might have asked, do young girls want?
According to one of the country's largest toy manufacturers, they want to strap onto their bellies a baby doll that creates a vivid illusion of being pregnant, with the shape, kick and heartbeat of the real thing.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Kitten, Bikini Kill and Boss Hog  Maxwell's


Samuel Brightman, 80, Democrats' Spokesman
Samuel C. Brightman, the Democratic National Committee's deputy chairman and spokesman during the Truman, Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, died on Jan. 29 at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 80 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.
Mr. Brightman died of emphysema, his family said.


Kickoff Classic Loses Michigan
The Kickoff Classic remained without a team when the University of Michigan ended discussions yesterday with the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority.
Jeff Long, Michigan's assistant athletic director for football and basketball operations, said the demands involved with starting a season in late August led Coach Gary Moeller to the decision.
"Once Coach Moeller sat down and looked at our schedule," Long said, "he thought it would be just too early to bring our athletes back."


At Home Abroad; Mubarak's Egypt
"He learned his lesson on the reviewing platform," a shrewd Egyptian said of President Hosni Mubarak.
The reviewing platform was the one at the military parade where Anwar Sadat was assassinated on Oct. 6, 1981.
As his successor, President Mubarak has eschewed dramatics -- the sudden gesture, say, of a trip to Jerusalem.
His watchword has been caution, his aim stability.


Early Surge Carries St. John's to Victory Over B.C.
A 19-point second-half St.
John's lead was down to 4.
Boston College had 42 seconds to manufacture another bolt of lightning.
"I'm looking at the scoreboard," said St.
John's Coach Lou Carnesecca, "and it's: 'Holy mackerel. It's another Georgetown game. They're going to catch us.' "


Sale in Seattle Turns Into an International Circus
Spin control, that very political, very Washington kind of word, would ordinarily seem to have little value in the world of major league baseball.
But, then again, the same could have been said about words and phrases like free trade, offshore interests and geopolitical ramifications.
Baseball's been flooded with all of the above lately.
And this week the national pasttime is trying to ease some of the damage caused by the intrusion of international politics.


New York City Is Moving Slowly In Replacing Retired Principals
Six months after an early-retirement plan stripped the New York City school system of 211 of its principals, only 26 of those vacancies have been filled as parents and teachers have been bogged down in a new selection process.
Donald Singer, president of the Council of Supervisors and Administrators, the principals' union, asserted yesterday that the glacial slowness of the selections has set off ripples of uncertainty that are undermining the education of the system's 975,000 children.


Trenton Senators Warn of Retaliation on Tax Rise
Angry New Jersey legislators have threatened a retaliatory tax on New Yorkers who work in New Jersey if Mayor David N. Dinkins follows through on his proposal to raise the commuter tax on nonresidents who work in New York City.
"These border tax wars are not productive for either state, nor do they pay off for New York City," said State Senator Robert Menendez of Union City in Hudson County, one of three Senators who have threatened to retaliate if New York City raises its tax on nonresidents, as Mayor Dinkins proposed last week in his budget message.
Mr.
Mendenez said he does not want a tax war, "but I will not allow New Jersey commuters to be victimized by unfair tax burdens."


Olivetti Chief Says Europe Falls Behind
Carlo de Benedetti, the chief executive of Ing.
C.
Olivetti &amp; Company, the Italian computer maker, announced today that his company would break even or at best make a small profit in 1992 after heavy losses in 1991.
His grim statement, coupled with a warning of the possible "de-industrialization of Europe" and a bitter attack on I.B.M.'s recent investment in the French computer maker Groupe Bull, amounted to a striking reflection of Europe's current economic gloom.


Blatant Fraud Pushing Up The Cost of Car Insurance
Some mornings, people in Lawrence, Mass., have awakened to see the top of a car jutting above the surface of the Merrimack River.
On inspection, police divers have found that so many people dumped their cars into the river, to file false stolen-car claims, that the last car in the night before had fallen onto a stack of others and would not sink.
Lawrence is just one example of how auto insurance fraud has become increasingly widespread and blatant in many areas of the United States: Regulators and researchers say that fraud is now far more common and costly to the nation than the insurance industry estimates, and that the industry is doing relatively little to combat it.
A Difference in Estimates
Critics say fraud has been an important force in pushing up the premiums Americans have to pay for auto insurance, from $40 billion to $100 billion since 1980, and that fraudulent claims -- everything from reporting accidents that never happened, to exaggerated car damage to faked injuries -- have been paid out with little challenge or investigation.


A Filly at Gulfstream Brings Good News for Steinbrenner
George Steinbrenner, the baseball exile, got new comfort from his racing stable today when his 3-year-old filly Spinning Round won the $74,250 Forward Gal Breeders' Cup Stake at Gulfstream Park.
It was the first race for Spinning Round since she ran fifth in the Breeders' Cup Juvenile Fillies last Nov. 2.
She now has won four of her nine career starts, and she has finished in the money seven times.


Study Finds Vitamin Counters Osteoporosis
A synthetic form of vitamin D appears to reduce the risk of fractures significantly in older women with brittle bones, a new study has found.
The researchers said their work suggested that treatment with the synthetic vitamin, called calcitriol, "is an important therapeutic option" for women with thinning bones, or osteoporosis, after menopause.


Spill Is a Sign of Wider Sewage Problems
America's aging and overloaded sewage systems are bursting at the seams, and today in San Diego that growing problem took graphic form as millions of gallons of brown and smelly effluent poured through a ruptured pipe into coastal waters.
The city's system, built 29 years ago to serve a population of about 250,000, now operates near or above capacity every day for 1.7 million residents of San Diego County and is under a court order to conduct a multibillion-dollar upgrading.


Big, Tiny, Old, New House Is Most Contradictory
ON Keeler Mountain, in North Salem, N.Y., William and Victoria Roschen live in a house that is both big and little.
Four thousand square feet clad in gray shingles, it is cozy enough for the two of them, yet somehow flexible enough to accommodate their extended family of 14: 8 children, 3 of their spouses and 3 grandchildren.
The secret is that the house is an alternating series of grand spaces and tiny rooms.
What makes it all work is a 16-foot rotunda (very grand) that soars 35 feet at the center of the house.


Two Ex-East German Guards Convicted in Refugee's Death
In the second such verdict in two weeks, a German court today convicted two border guards of shooting to death a refugee who had fled from East Germany.
The verdict increased pressure to find ways of punishing the East German officials who approved the shoot-to-kill orders.


Critic's Notebook; In Philharmonic Talks, Both Sides Got More Than Just a Contract
There are two points on which the management and musicians of the New York Philharmonic agree when discussing the contract the players ratified late last month.
One is that the contract gives each side so much that both the players and management can truthfully declare victory.
The second, largely a consequence of the first, is that the contract and the nearly six months of negotiation that led to it should be regarded as the beginning of a new era of cooperation between the orchestra's administration and its musicians, a distinct change from the prickly adversarial relationship the two sides had had since at least 1973, when the orchestra last went on strike.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
WALLBOARD is readily damaged by impact and moisture.
Fortunately, repairing minor scrapes and dents usually involves merely filling the flaw with a water-base spackling compound, smoothing the area, priming and painting.
But repairing major damage, like a hole caused by a doorknob or water damage from a roof leak, is more difficult.
Patches for large repairs must be braced from behind.


U.S. Reduces Bond Supply For Auction
In an announcement eagerly anticipated in the credit markets, the Treasury said yesterday that to reduce borrowing costs it would cut the amount of bonds to be offered at next week's quarterly refunding auctions.
To meet its financing needs, the Treasury is now expected to come to market with more securities with shorter maturities, because in today's market it will pay far less interest on those securities.


I.O.C. Action On Recognition
In a series of actions reflecting the immense political changes in Eastern Europe, the International Olympic Committee today recognized the three Baltic states as full members of the Olympic world, gave provisional recognition to Slovenia and Croatia and agreed to permit five republics of the former Soviet Union to participate as one team in the Albertville Winter Games.
Although the votes of the 93-member committee confirmed earlier decisions by its executive board, participants were well aware of the historic nature of the day.
Michele Verdier, a spokeswoman for the committee, termed the votes "the consequences of the rush to freedom."


Panel Votes to End Ban on Fetal Research
A Senate committee voted today to end the Bush Administration's ban on experiments with transplanted fetal tissue.
At the same time it approved a bill to authorize the National Institutes of Health to spend $2.4 billion in the fiscal year 1993.
The Seante Labor and Human Resources Committee voted 13 to 4 for an amendment to the authorization bill that would reverse the Administration's ban on the use of Federal funds for any experiments in which tissue is transplanted from an aborted fetus to patients.


Jurors in Tyson's Trial Escape Fatal Hotel Fire
Mike Tyson's rape trial was postponed for a day after a three-alarm fire early this morning damaged the downtown hotel where jurors in the trial were sequestered.
Two firefighters and an Illinois businessman died in the blaze, though none of the jurors were hurt.
Ten other people were injured, including two firefighters who remained hospitalized for burns and smoke inhalation.
One of the firemen was in critical condition, the other in serious condition.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Don Pullen's African-Brazilian Connection Condon's 117 East 15th Street Through Sunday


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about President Bush's appearance at the National Grocers Association convention in Orlando, Fla., referred imprecisely to the history of electronic scanners in grocery stores.
The Food Marketing Institute in Washington says a few scanners were used in supermarkets in 1974.


Court Questions Use of Race-Based Scholarships
A Federal appeals court has challenged the constitutionality of a scholarship program for black students at the University of Maryland, a ruling that calls into question scholarships based on race as a way to correct past discrimination.
The 3-0 decision reached on Friday by a panel of judges representing the 12-member United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond, is the latest decision in a simmering debate over whether scholarship programs for blacks and other minority students are constitutional.


Graves Keeps Proving To Be Plus for Rangers
Late last summer, when the Rangers were seeking to sign Adam Graves as a free agent from the Edmonton Oilers, the skeptics kept asking: What could be so valuable about a checking forward who scored only 7 and 9 goals in two previous seasons?
Scouts and aficionados knew the answer.
Graves is an honest, hard, clean hitter who adds an essential ingredient to the mixture of any forward line by enhancing the talents of playmakers and snipers.
Any goals he might score would be a bonus above and beyond his known value.


Shaker, Stickley and Others Reworked
REPRODUCTIONS are not what Ken Winslow is about.
Rather Mr.
Winslow, who has designed and built 46 stores as well as a number of showrooms and offices for Polo/ Ralph Lauren, decided that it was time to put together his own interpretations of such currently popular furniture styles as Shaker and Mission, as well as a sleek urban line and a neoclassical one.
These transformed, respectively, into American Country (hutches, ladder-back chairs and chunky-legged tables, like those at left); Lodge (Stickley-style sofas and armchairs); Metropolitan (linear dining chairs), and Classics (pedestal tables).
Mr.
Winslow was in business.


Dow Down 15 As Smaller Stocks Gain
Stock prices were mixed yesterday in heavy trading as blue chips lost ground at the end while secondary stocks made solid advances.
The Dow Jones industrial average, after rising earlier in the day, ended by losing 15.21 points, to 3,257.60, dragged down mainly by a sharp fall at Eastman Kodak.
But some other market gauges again broke their recently set records.


Yields on Tax-Exempt Money Funds Jump
The seven-day yields of tax-exempt funds tended to rise quite sharply for the week ended Monday, while the taxable money funds showed declines for the seven days ended Tuesday, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
Referring to the tax-exempts, Walter Frank, an economist for the organization, said, "Once more after a lull, a bigger supply of municipal issues is coming into the market, and that has helped drive up the seven-day yields because demand by the funds has been steady."


U.S. Hockey Team Dazzles Sweden, 3-2
Just when expectations for the United States Olympic hockey team had sunk somewhere below the refrigeration pipes, the Americans showed up tonight at a foggy ice rink near Mont Blanc and outplayed powerful Sweden, 3-2.
The United States players skated off the ice beneath a rain of beer bottles and cans tossed by the raucous Swedish fans, then celebrated this final exhibition game with praise all round.


Bush Aides See Gains Later in '92
President Bush's economic advisers said today that the nation's sagging economy would probably rebound in a few months, and they rebutted arguments that living standards have dropped under the Reagan and Bush Administrations.
In the President's Annual Economic Report, the White House said the nation's economy would grow by a sluggish 1.6 percent this year if Congress did not pass the President's package of tax cuts and other measures meant to stimulate growth.
If Congress enacted the program, the report said, growth would climb to 2.2 percent.


A Blind Judge?
Senator Alfonse D'Amato has recommended a blind lawyer for a vacancy on the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York.
Even in this age of increased opportunities for the disabled, the Senator's candidate, Richard Casey, pushes the outer boundaries of what the judicial system can accommodate.
If Mr.
Casey is otherwise qualified, his candidacy poses a novel and powerful challenge to the Justice Department and President Bush, who must decide whether to nominate him.
Sincere people will have strong reservations about fitting this particular disability to this particular office, but a blind nominee cannot be categorically ruled out.


Official Repays $50,000 to Mayor's Fund
A former Dinkins campaign official accused of embezzling more than $158,000 from the Mayor's re-election campaign has repaid part of the missing funds by depositing them in the campaign's bank account through an unknown third party, the campaign's lawyer said yesterday.
The lawyer, Harold Ickes, said $50,000 was wired to the campaign's account at Amalgamated Bank on Tuesday afternoon.
Later that day, Paul Rooney, a lawyer representing the indicted campaign finance director, Arnold I. Biegen, told Mr.
Ickes that the money was deposited on Mr.
Beigen's behalf.


Essay; Reading Boris's Mind
My trip to New York and Camp David was not a happy experience.
I told the bankers and businessmen we have done everything Gorbachev refused to do -- free markets, supply and demand, Polish shock therapy.
And did they come forward with investment?
Did the central banks come up with a way to help me stabilize the ruble?
No.


The Downhill: Awaiting Primal Screams
Looking down from the starter's shack, at a 63-degree drop to begin a 3,130-foot testimonial to acrophobia, Bernhard Russi spoke of his creation as a parent would about a growing child.
"I worry," said the man who designed the course -- La Face de Bellevarde -- on which the Olympic downhill is scheduled to be run Sunday afternoon.
"I worry because for four years I have been here working toward this, up and down this mountain more times than I could remember. I worry because now it is here but there are things, like the weather, that are out of my control."


Corrections
A chart on the Credit Markets page of Business Day yesterday, headed "Treasury Yield Curve," mislabeled the two yield curves for Treasury securities.
The black line represented the current yields, which are higher than the yields a month ago, shown on the white line.


Safe-Deposit Boxes Left Empty as a Park Avenue Hotel Is Politely Looted


Federated Is Back,to Wall Street's Delight
Federated Department Stores Inc. left bankruptcy court yesterday after a two-year stay and stepped into the public arena, where Wall Street gave its shares an enthusiastic welcome.
It was the day's most actively traded stock, with 6.7 million shares changing hands.
The stock, which analysts said had ranged from $12 to $14 a share in over-the-counter trading earlier this week, opened on the New York Stock Exchange at $16.50 and ran up to $18.25 before closing at $17.25.


Bridge
An old anecdote concerns a player who was defending a four-spade contract and was about to give his partner a heart ruff.
He only had two hearts, and they were due to give a suit preference message: the eight would ask for a diamond, and the three for a club.
Unfortunately he needed a trump return, so he put his two hearts face down on the table, shuffled them, and turned one up at random.
His partner understood the message, returned a trump, and the opponents screamed very loudly indeed: They were the victims of some highly improper but decidedly creative chicanery.


The Neediest Was a Lesson On Charity
Although his Latin may have grown a bit rusty over the last half century, Andrew Heineman will never forget the high school teacher he still calls Mr.
Nagel.
"He was about six feet tall with cropped white hair that had a little curl and he wore glasses," Mr.
Heineman wrote.
"He would stand prominently at the entrance of school rattling a pencil against his clipboard and when you'd walk by he'd say, 'Okay Heineman, how much have you given?' And he'd look at the clipboard with all his students' names. 'Ten dollars! Surely, you can give more.' "


N.F.L. Puts the College Best to the Test
National Football League teams last fall asked their scouts to criss-cross the country to watch from afar the best players that college football has to offer.
At the National Scouting Combine, scheduled today through Monday in the Hoosier Dome, N.F.L. teams can get up close and personal with the collegians, using a battery of tests and elbow-to-elbow, face-to-face encounters to discern which players they should select in the N.F.L. draft April 26-27.


Woman's Image in a Mirror: Who Defines What She Sees?
On most people's beauty scale, Stacey Stetler would be a 10.
A blond, blue-eyed, 5-foot-11 New York model, she has confidently sashayed down the runway for Yves Saint Laurent in Paris and has graced the covers of fashion magazines.
But until recently, when Ms.
Stetler looked in the mirror she saw less perfection and more flaws.


Time Warner to Take Over Cable Operator
Time Warner Inc. and the American Television and Communications Corporation said yesterday that they had reached an agreement under which Time Warner would acquire the 18 percent of the cable television systems operator that it does not already own.
The arrangement, which has been approved by the boards of the companies, will make easier for Time Warner to put American Television into the $1 billion joint venture it plans to form with C. Itoh &amp; Company and the Toshiba Corporation, both of Japan.


Kurds' Dream of Freedom Slipping Away
The Kurdish dream of independence, which seemed almost within reach when Saddam Hussein's forces withdrew from the Kurdish-populated northeastern corner of Iraq last year, is vanishing amid internal dissension and a three-month economic blockade imposed by the Baghdad Government.
The remnants of the Iraqi civil authority in this region, deprived of leadership and money from Baghdad but lacking direction from any central Kurdish authority, are nearly paralyzed.
Lawlessness has overtaken parts of the north, where Kurdish brigands pilfer food stocks, steal vehicles at gunpoint and threaten those who challenge them.
Other thieves, many of them corrupt Kurdish officials, are stripping the economy of everything that can be carted over the frontier to Iran and sold, from bulldozers to electrical wire.


European Job For Wunderman
The American Express Company has awarded an important new European assignment to Wunderman Worldwide, following presentations by three agencies that handle various of the company's accounts.
The assignment, for which billings have not been determined, is to create advertising to enhance the image of American Express's charge cards among merchants across Europe.
Wunderman, the direct marketing unit of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., has handled an account in France with a similar purpose.


INSIDE
Broad Change Sought In Intelligence Agencies
The chairmen of Congress's two intelligence committees proposed a sweeping reorganization of the C.I.A. and other agencies.
While the proposal has little chance of passage, it kicked off a long-expected debate on adapting the agencies to a post-Communist world.
Page A16.
Bush's Health-Plan Model
A Cleveland project set an example that the White House will point to as proof that market forces can ease a health insurance crisis.
Page A20.
House Votes Hostage Inquiry
The House voted to investigate accusations that the 1980 Reagan campaign and Iran conspired to delay the release of 52 Americans.
Page A19.
Bribes Charged at Javits Hall
Twenty-three men were accused of extortion, violence and other crimes at the convention center.
Page B1.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaing Trail; From Nixon, Predictions on the Presidential Race
In a political season of character issues and secret tapes, Richard M. Nixon offers some predictions.
The former President, passing through town to talk some politics, forecast the 1992 election this way:


Have Job, Will Travel
The Los Angeles Clippers have called a news conference for this morning to announce the selection of a new coach, presumably LARRY BROWN, the San Antonio Spurs former coach who was dismissed at his own request on Jan. 21 after a dispute with the club's owner.
Clipper officials weren't talking for the record, but KSAT-TV in San Antonio said a reliable source on the West Coast had confirmed that Brown was the choice to succeed MIKE SCHULER, who was dismissed on Sunday.


What's Wrong With Irradiating Food? Plenty; Feasible and Safe
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 21 front-page article on food irradiation is reminiscent of stories aired during the early years of milk pasteurization.
Foes of any new technology, then as now, eventually fade from the scene as consumers recognize the benefits and embrace it en masse.
There are indeed a few romantic souls who even today cling to the imagined (metaphysical?) benefits of raw, untreated milk; and they will go so far as to deny others this newfangled pasteurization technology.


Pirates Name Simmons As General Manager
After weighing five candidates for general manager, the Pittsburgh Pirates' new president MARK SAUER has settled on the one he knows best, TED SIMMONS, the former catcher who has been the director of player development for the St.
Louis Cardinals since 1988.
The two men got to know each other when Sauer served as a Cardinals executive vice president from late 1989 to early last year, and in this case, at least, familiarity did not breed contempt.


CHRONICLE
SALLY JESSY RAPHAEL'S 33-year-old daughter, Allison Vladimir, died accidentally from the combined effects of several prescribed drugs and over-the-counter medications, the coroner in Bucks County, Pa., announced yesterday.
"The cause of death is respiratory arrest due to the combined adverse effects of medication she was taking," Dr.
Thomas J. Rosko, the coroner, said yesterday in a telephone interview from his office in Doylestown, Pa.
Dr.
Rosko would not divulge how many different drugs Miss Vladimir had taken before she was found unconscious in bed early Sunday in a private home behind a bed-and-breakfast inn owned by her mother, the television talk-show host.


Balloonists, Again, Get Ready to Fly
Despite a spate of minor but troublesome mechanical problems, a projected round-the-world flight by balloon is expected to begin Sunday or Monday, its handlers said today.
"Things look pretty chaotic around here, but it's all coming together," said William Armstrong, a member of the support group for the Earthwinds balloon.
"If circling the world were easy, balloonists would have done it long ago."


Reading Between Lines Of Catalogue Fantasies
LIKE most gardeners, I am suffering from cabin fever and am knee-deep in seed and nursery catalogues.
And once again I am reminded that these catalogues, particularly those filled with color photographs, are sometimes less than forthright.
No catalogue I know of has ever bothered to explain to novice gardeners that it inadvertently promotes an illusion.
In a catalogue, everything blooms at once.
Peonies consort with chrysanthemums, cannas with daffodils, and apple trees in fruit with apple trees in bloom.


MIPS President Quits For Software Position
Charles M. Boesenberg resigned yesterday as president of MIPS Computer Systems Inc. to join Central Point Software, a private company that produces utility programs for personal computers.
Mr.
Boesenberg, who is 43 years old, joins Central Point as president and chief operating officer.
As president, he suceeds Corey Smith, who will continue as chief executive.


What's Wrong With Irradiating Food? Plenty
To the Editor:
Many New Yorkers are grateful that the State Legislature and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo have prudently placed a moratorium on the sale of irradiated foods in New York State.
"Irradiated Food Coming, but Not Without Protest" (front page, Jan. 21) does not make clear why consumers have strenuously objected to this process, which has not been proved safe and is not necessary.
If consumers are expected to eat food that has been exposed to radiation, the burden of proving safety should be on those who want to irradiate it.
The industry and the Food and Drug Administration have not presented a strong enough case for the safety of eating irradiated foods.
A large number of scientific tests indicate that there are potentially grave health risks, such as cancer, associated with eating irradiated foods.


Alchemist's Envy: Turning Iron to Lace
RED HOOK, where Brooklyn bulges into New York Harbor, is a neighborhood frequented by stray dogs.
The most common vehicle is the 18-wheel tractor-trailer; the dominant architectural form, the rectangular boxes being loaded and unloaded at the nearby container port.
On the plus side are billion-dollar views of lower Manhattan and, for those in the market for ornamental ironwork, several shops that custom-make balconies, railings, window guards, security gates and anything else a homeowner might need in the way of wrought iron.


Alexander Expected to Be Named Deputy Mayor
Judge Fritz W. Alexander 2d, a former law partner and close friend of Mayor David N. Dinkins, is expected to resign from the New York State Court of Appeals today to become New York City's Deputy Mayor for Public Safety, city officials said yesterday.
The 65-year-old judge, who made history in 1985 by becoming the first black to be named to a full term on the Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, will replace Milton Mollen, 72, who is stepping down after two years of overseeing the city's vast criminal-justice system to take a job in the private sector.


Chicago Journal; The Death of 'the Blues' Prompts a Big Send-Off
This city of Southerners in the North borrowed a page from the New Orleans book of mourning today to say goodbye to one of its natural resources, the legendary bluesman Willie Dixon, who died last week.
It was the page that said celebrate.
Celebrate a wonderful life.
Celebrate with music and song.
And that is exactly what Chicago did today, with the city's first New Orleans-style funeral procession in memory.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Bank One, Sturgis, Mich., a unit of Banc One Corp., Columbus, Ohio, named Joseph F. Smith president and chief executive. *
Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc., Atlanta, a unit of Coca-Cola Co., appointed Vicki G. Roman treasurer.


Books of The Times; Of the Corporate Culture And Time Marching On
To The End of Time  The Seduction and Conquest of a Media Empire By Richard M. Clurman 368 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


Dr. Jean Hamburger, 82, Pioneer In Kidney Medicine and a Writer
Dr.
Jean Hamburger, a pioneer in the field of kidney transplants, an acclaimed writer and president of the French Academy of Sciences, died Saturday in Paris.
He was was 82 years old.
He died from complications after heart surgery, said Dr.
Thomas E. Starzl, professor of surgery at the University of Pittsburgh.


COMPANY BRIEF
*
Computer Products Inc., Boca Raton, Fla., entered into a letter of intent to sell its government electronics division, Tecnetics Inc., Boulder, Colo., to a group of senior managers and outside investors for an undisclosed amount of cash and notes. *
Flight Dynamics Inc., Portland, Ore., a unit of Inner Pacificorp, agreed to sell substantially all of its assets to Hughes Flight Dynamics Inc., a unit of General Motors Corp., for $14.5 million and the assumption of trade payables and specified liabilities.


Doubleday to Publish Sam Walton Memoirs
Doubleday announced yesterday that it has acquired the rights to publish the autobiography of Sam Walton, the billionaire retailer and founder of Walmart, after a competitive two-and-half-day auction.
The publishing house paid about $4 million for the worldwide, paperback and audio rights to the book, tentatively titled "Sam Walton: Starting on a Dime," several people who participated in the auction said.
The book is to be written with John Huey, a senior editor at Fortune who has written several magazine pieces about Mr.
Walton.


Washington Talk; On How to Make Political Ends Meet
The House Ways and Means Committee's hearings on tax and growth legislation may not have any effect on what kind of bill Congress may pass this spring.
Canny closed-door politics, not earnest open arguments, will control that process.
But the hearings offer instructive examples of the cynicism and special pleading that go into tax writing.
And once in a while, they even offer edifying discussions of interesting ideas that will be utterly disregarded in the eventual law-making.


Where Entertainment Industry Is Leading Us; Dangerous Precedent
To the Editor:
We applaud Teller's condemnation of the pornography victims' compensation bill (Op-Ed, Jan. 17).
The bill allows victims of sexual crimes to bring civil suits against publishers and distributors of material that is "obscene or constitutes child pornography," if they can prove that the material was "a substantial cause of the offense," and if the distributor should have "foreseen" that such material created an "unreasonable risk of such a crime."


Scientists Say DNA Analysis Is Reliable in Identifying Suspects
Scientists who analyzed data used in DNA fingerprinting say it is extremely unlikely that the technique, if properly performed, would wrongly implicate an innocent person in a crime.
DNA fingerprinting, the analysis of genetic material taken from small samples of blood, semen, hair or tissue, is based on the idea that each person's DNA is unique.
Though the technique has been used in hundreds of criminal cases, critics contend that it has not been proved reliable.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Tom Bolton, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Named Fred Kendall manager of Utica of the New York-Penn League.
YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with John Habyan, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Kent and Tom Quinlan, infielders, and David Weathers, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
National League
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Agreed to terms with Gary Carter, catcher, on a one-year contract.
METS -- Agreed to terms with Paul Gibson, pitcher, and Daryl Boston, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Named Larry Brown coach and signed him to a five-year contract.
Football  National Football League
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Named Alex Gibbs offensive line coach and Jay Robertson defensive assistant coach.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Named Marvin Lewis linebackers coach and Bob Harrison wide receivers coach.
World League of American Football
OHIO GLORY -- Named Dennis Thurman defensive coordinator and Wally English offensive coordinator.
Hockey  National Hockey League
MONTREAL CANADIENS -- Sent Roland Melanson, goaltender, to Fredericton of the American Hockey League for conditioning.
RANGERS -- Sent Doug Weight, center, to Binghamton of the American Hockey League for conditioning.
QUEBEC NORDIQUES -- Signed Bill Lindsay, left wing.


It's Official: Holtzman Seeks Senate
Elizabeth Holtzman, the brainy and driven New York City Comptroller, has a single ambition these days: to politically destroy the man who unraveled her dream of becoming a United States Senator nearly 12 years ago.
"Alfonse D'Amato has to be defeated, no ifs, ands or buts," she declared briskly at a December breakfast in Buffalo, where she was trying to woo influential women.
"I can beat Alfonse D'Amato. I can take the issue of choice right to his doorstep. I can take the issue of corruption right to his doorstep."


End the Ban on Fetal Research
This week the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee took very wise action: it approved a bill to end the Bush Administration's ban on experiments with transplanted fetal tissue.
Such tissue can play a vital role in facilitating research on Parkinson's disease, Huntington's chorea, childhood diabetes, perhaps even Alzheimer's disease.
The study of fetal cells also might be useful in the treatment of cancer.
The rationale for the ban, first imposed by the Reagan Administration, has always seemed flimsy.
Dr.
Louis Sullivan, speaking for the Bush Administration, worries that some women considering an abortion might be swayed to go ahead by the idea that the tissue of their fetus would help medical research.


Big Owens-Corning Charge Sends Its Shares Surging
The Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation said yesterday that it took an $800 million charge against earnings in the last quarter to cover uninsured asbestos liabilities through the end of the decade.
Wall Street welcomed the move as a belated response to investors' desires for a clearer accounting of how the company expects to be affected by the tens of thousands of asbestos lawsuits it faces, and Owens-Corning's stock surged, closing up $7.75, or nearly 27 percent, and reaching $37 a share before ending at $36.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Where Entertainment Industry Is Leading Us
To the Editor:
"Obscenity Laws Exist, but What Breaks Them?" (The Week in Review, Jan. 19), on the difficulty of obtaining obscenity convictions, is all too accurate.
Either we give up on obscenity control, or we get a new ruling from a more conservative Supreme Court.


Pittsburgh Journal; Horror Is a Thing Of Beauty In a Movie
Few legitimate industries can find their roots in horror and psychopathic killings, but that is the story of the growing film industry here.
George Romero, the Pittsburgh-based impresario of horror, put the city on the map for filmmakers in 1967 with the cult film "Night of the Living Dead." And since Jonathan Demme shot "The Silence of the Lambs" here two years ago, Pittsburgh has been the backdrop for 23 major films and television movies.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.00
6.38
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.80
3.82
5.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.86
3.86
5.89
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.81
6.78
7.70
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.76
7.72
8.05
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.88
8.85
9.27
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.74
6.74
7.19
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Opponents Are Just Mad About U.S. Hockey Team
On Tuesday in Megeve, there was a French player with his back turned, looking for trouble.
On Wednesday in Chamonix, there were some Swedish fans pelting the ice with cans of beer.
Imported beer.
What was Clark Donatelli going to do? Ignore all this?


Review/Art; Inviting (if Fanciful) Rooms From the View of Roy Lichtenstein
Roy Lichtenstein has a nearly in exhaustible talent for putting his best-known visual strategies to fresh uses.
This is resoundingly affirmed by his latest paintings, a series of big, cartoonish domestic interiors on view in SoHo at the Leo Castelli Gallery and at 65 Thompson Street, a nearby exhibition space operated by Mr.
Castelli and the Gagosian Gallery.
Two paintings from this series were prominent in last spring's Whitney Biennial, but this double show is New York City's first chance to see a large group of the "Interiors," as they are collectively known.


Corrections
An article yesterday about America's overloaded sewage systems misidentified one of the localities under a court order not to dump into the ocean.
It is Los Angeles County, not the City of Los Angeles.


Limo or Train, Bonilla Knows Way to Shea
Bobby Bonilla signed an autograph for the homeless man wedged against the door, and the limousine at last slid into midtown traffic and began its unglamorous glide along 42d Street.
Bonilla stared out an open window, the peep-show parlors and pornographic bookstores creeping by in the dirty February sunlight.
At a red light, another limousine came to a halt alongside Bonilla's, and a passenger, his face bloodshot and belligerent, screamed at Bonilla.
In New York, evidently, even the quality of limo life is eroding.
Unmoved, but not exactly unhurried, Bonilla fingered a switch and 42d Street disappeared behind his car's smoked window.


Down-to-Earth Dining? Try Brooklyn
OF the 10,000 or so sit-down restaurants peppered through the neighborhoods of New York City, few achieve world-class greatness.
Many just charge as if they do.
Many more are fast-food joints that squeeze out prefabricated dishes.
But there are exceptions.
This column is intended to celebrate those working stiffs of the restaurant world where, for $25 and under, a person can eat lavishly, not stinting on appetizers, main courses or desserts.
Take the Greene Avenue Grill.
In the Fort Greene section of Brooklyn, this intimate spot nourishes the film makers, musicians, artists and young professionals who are giving new life to this patch of battered brownstones adjacent to Fort Greene Park.
Louis Armstrong beams down from one white wall of the simple, angular main room; Miles Davis glowers from another.
But it is the food that gives the place its beat.


Sliding Into the Olympics


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Vietnam War Draft Status Becomes Issue for Clinton
Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas fended off questions today about his draft deferment during the Vietnam War, denying that he deliberately sidestepped military service by misleading his local draft board.
Mr.
Clinton, who did not join the military and has said he opposed the war, said he gave up his student deferment status in the fall of 1969 to make himself available for military service rather than to avoid it.


Roger Colloff, 46; Led CBS Flagship To Several Emmys
Roger Colloff, vice president and general manager of the CBS network flagship, WCBS-TV, Channel 2 in New York, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer of the colon, the hospital said.


I.B.M. Considers Sale Of Plants to Solectron
I.B.M. is considering selling two circuit-board assembly operations to the Solectron Corporation, a contract manufacturer of electronic products, the two companies announced today.
Under the plan, Solectron, based in San Jose, Calif., would continue to operate the plants and supply the International Business Machines Corporation with circuit boards.
Solectron would pay for the plants partly with shares of its stock.
As a minority shareholder in Solectron, I.B.M. would give the company access to certain I.B.M. manufacturing technology.


Gangs Terrorize Asians Near Boston
In the last six weeks the homes of at least nine Asian businessmen in Boston's suburbs have been invaded by gangs of young Asians armed with automatic weapons and machetes.
The businessmen and their families have then been tied up, beaten and robbed of cash and jewelry.
The attacks have largely baffled the police and have frightened many Asian-Americans here.


Books of The Times; Fallout From a Multitude of Liaisons
Life Force By Fay Weldon 222 pages. Viking. $21.


Accuser Flirted With Tyson, Witnesses Say
INDIANAPOLIS, Feb. 6 -- When Mike Tyson's accuser first met the former heavyweight champion at a beauty pageant last July, she was "star-struck," flirted with him and was soon talking about his money, four witnesses testified today in his rape trial.
One of the witnesses, Madelyn D. Whittington, a college senior from Ohio, testified that minutes after the 23 contestants in the Miss Black America pageant were introduced to Tyson, the accuser told her of plans to go out with him.


4 New Republics Provide Details On Dismantling Ex-Soviet Arsenal
Four republics of the former Soviet Union have provided some details to the Bush Administration on plans to eliminate a number of strategic nuclear weapons over the next seven years and to concentrate those remaining on the territory of Russia.
Using the framework of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty agreed to last July between the United States and the Soviet Union, the newly independent republics will remove all strategic nuclear arms from Belarus, Ukraine and Kazakhstan, the Administration has been advised.


Pop Jazz; When Lyrics Take Flight For Fancy
"There couldn't be a tree outside the window, could there?" asked Robyn Hitchcock.
It was a mild winter afternoon, and the tall windows of the singer and songwriter's Philadelphia hotel room were flung wide open to let in the unseasonably warm air.
Something was casting treelike light patterns on the wall, like those cast by rustling leaves in the heat of summer.
Mr.
Hitchcock rose and walked over to the window.
The shadows, it turned out, were caused by nothing more than the undulating white curtains wafting in the breeze.
Mr.
Hitchcock seemed a trifle disappointed to look out the window and see only sky and distant rooftops.
The room was on the 20th floor of the hotel, so there couldn't very well have been a tree outside the window.
But in Mr.
Hitchcock's universe, almost anything is possible.
His songs are alive with fantastic detail.
A man shaped like a balloon walks up Sixth Avenue and bursts.
A fellow's dead wife shows up one afternoon for tea, then scolds him when he serves it with sugar.
Insects and fish, flora and fauna take on human characteristics, and vice versa.
For him, a leafy tree growing outside a 20th-story window in the dead of winter would be positively pedestrian.


Anderson's Start Is Not Enough for Nets
Ready or not, Kenny Anderson got the first start of his professional career tonight, but the Washington Bullets ruined the prime-time debut of New Jersey's high-priced rookie guard and won for the third time in three attempts this season against the Nets, 124-108.
The defeat stretched the losing streak of the 19-28 Nets to seven games as both teams broke for the All-Star Game weekend.
The winning margin for Washington was 16 points, but the game wasn't nearly that close.
The Bullets' biggest lead of the night was nearly twice that, 30 points at 101-71, with 9 minutes 54 seconds left in the final period.
The biggest Nets lead in the game was 2 points, but that was at 6-4 with 9:28 remaining in the first quarter.


In Crown Heights, Unrest After Killing
A 38-year-old Hasidic woman was found stabbed to death in her Crown Heights home, setting off a protest that escalated into rock- and bottle-throwing in the racially troubled Brooklyn neighborhood.
The gathering was angry but peaceful for much of the evening.
The violence broke out after about 200 Hasidim marching to demand better police protection clashed with some black and Hispanic residents near the woman's home.


CHRONICLE
There were reports this week, following articles in Italian and Spanish newspapers, that PLACIDO DOMINGO had been proposed as the next artistic director of La Scala.
Not a chance, at least not now, the tenor said yesterday from Vienna.
His name was brought up by GIUSEPPE ZECCHILLO, a member of the council of the musicians' union in Milan, as a replacement for CESARE MAZZONIS, the current director, who is resigning to assume a similar post in Florence.


Humanity at Work: Low Key and Effective
THIS is a little story about a kind of quiet encounter that happens in American communities.
They're often so small and so frequent, these quiet encounters, that they don't even seem like news.
And they are overshadowed by far more important events like speeches, more shootings, more leveraged buyouts going predictably bankrupt, more opinion polls about more politicians who want to change jobs and more commissions belatedly calling for more money that doesn't exist to solve yet another immutable problem.
Call those "not me" stories. This is a "why not me" story.


On Your Mark: It's the Millrose Games
The Snickers Millrose Games has the customary mosaic of established track and field stars being challenged by lesser mortals in 19 major events beginning around 7 o'clock at Madison Square Garden tonight.
About that time, Jackie Joyner-Kersee, 5 feet 10 inches, 155 pounds and 25 days from her 30th birthday, will attempt her first long jump in some time.
Joyner-Kersee, an Olympic champion and world record-holder, last competed last summer, when she withdrew from the world championships in Tokyo with ankle and hamstring injuries.


BUSH UNVEILS PLAN FOR HEALTH CARE
President Bush moved today to plug a gap in his election-year domestic plans by proposing several tax incentives and other changes in the law that he said would make quality medical care affordable for every American.
In making his plans public, Mr.
Bush joined the Democratic Presidential candidates in proposing ways to improve the nation's health-care system, a debate from which he had been conspicuously absent.


CHRONICLE
By his own admission, STEPHEN KING is not much of a swimmer, but this week the horror writer and his wife, Tabitha, came to the aid of the University of Maine's swimming and diving teams.
They pledged $30,000 to maintain varsity status for both programs in the 1992-93 year.
The teams would have been reduced to club status as part of a $188,650 cut in the athletic budget.
Mr.
King, a member of the university's class of 1970 who admits that he can only do the dog paddle, said yesterday: "There is plenty of money for the college sports where people get hit -- football, hockey, baseball -- where you can get stitches, but not for swimming, where no one is hit and no one goes down."


Small Profit Raises Hopes For Chrysler
The Chrysler Corporation's fourth-quarter financial report displayed a ray of hope yesterday, but analysts cautioned that the No. 3 auto maker faced several more obstacles, including a fickle auto market, before it was out of the woods.
The company overcame huge losses last year and posted a small fourth-quarter profit, thanks to a one-time gain from the sale of its 50 percent interest in a joint car-making venture with the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation of Japan.


3 Western Allies Seek End To a High-Tech Export Ban
In a policy shift reflecting the end of the cold war, three European countries have proposed to their Western allies that they drop virtually all restrictions on exporting civilian telecommunications gear, according to people familiar with the discussions.
The proposal, generated by the increasing frustration felt by European telecommunications manufacturers eager to modernize the former Soviet Union's telephone system, would effectively remove the United States' veto power over the sale of fiber-optic and related communications equipment.


Pressure on Dinkins?; Volatile Mix at City Hall Is Stirred By Panel's Proposals on the Homeless
A blue-ribbon commission on the homeless that Mayor David N. Dinkins appointed to help relieve pressure on his administration and build political consensus for dealing with a daunting problem has instead wound up putting highly public pressure on the Mayor and dividing his own advisers.
How that happened is a tangled tale of politics, personal ambition, philosophical differences, entrenched public bureaucracies and competing private interests that has left the Mayor seeming to fend off the controversial notions of the commission headed by Andrew Cuomo, instead of embracing them as his own.


Duke Loses Hurley Too
Duke, the defending national champion, has lost more than its first game in 18 starts this season.
En route to breaking the school's career assist record during the 75-73 upset by North Carolina on Wednesday night, the Blue Devils playmaker, BOBBY HURLEY, also broke a toe in his right foot.
Hurley could be sidelined for three weeks.
The 6-foot junior had started 95 straight games since arriving at Duke from St.
Anthony of Jersey City and is a key to the Blue Devils' perimeter defensive pressure and fast-break attack.


Sounds Around Town
Guitar Magic
Magic Slim, Chicago B.L.U.E.S., 73 Eighth Avenue, at 13th Street, Manhattan, (212) 255-7373.
Magic Slim is the master of looping and graceful guitar solos.
Indebted to Magic Sam, he loves the backbeat of a rocking shuffle, which inevitably makes the audience happy.
And he's a good singer who has a penchant for classic blues and soul songs like "Mustang Sally" as well as novelty tunes.
Shows tonight and tomorrow start at 9:30; there is a $12 cover charge.
Iconoclastic Pianism
Dorothy Donegan, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street, Manhattan, (212) 255-4037.
One of jazz's great eccentrics, Dorothy Donegan manages to crack most of the rules of classic jazz.
She'll move from a swinging piece into a classical section only to go directly to boogie-woogie.
A post-modernist before post-modernism existed, she has the technique, and swing, to made it all listenable.
Sets tonight and tomorrow are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; on Sunday, 9:30 and 11:30 only.
The cover is $15 today and tomorrow and $12 on Sunday and there is a $7.50 minimum on all three days.
El Rey


Quarter's Loss Caps Salomon's Rocky Year
Salomon Inc. yesterday reported a $29 million loss for the fourth quarter, capping a tumultuous year that began with solid profits and ended with a shift toward more conservative management following a Treasury auction scandal.
While competing Wall Street firms harnessed 1991's active stock market to achieve record-breaking profits, Salomon was bogged down by the lingering effects of the scandal and by losses in its Phibro Energy oil trading and refining subsidiary.


Washington at Work; Watergate Reporter Takes Turn Being Dissected After He Is Kind to Quayle
Bob Woodward is the most famous investigative reporter in America.
Dan Quayle is among the most ridiculed politicians of modern times.
So when Mr.
Woodward and his colleague, David S. Broder, set out last year to learn everything they could about the Vice President, Washington awaited bombshells.
But when the authors published their book-length series last month in The Washington Post, there were not any.


'Oz' Author Kept Intentions to Himself
To the Editor:
" 'Oz' Author Never Championed Populism" by Michael Patrick Hearn (letter, Jan. 10) was a treat.
As author of the 1964 article in question, "The Wizard of Oz: A Parable on Populism," I am honored to be identified by the authority on most things Ozian as the one who might have alerted readers to L. Frank Baum's fascination with things political.


Owners Delay Action On Seattle Group's Bid
Major league baseball's ownership committee held its first formal meeting to discuss a Japanese company's bid to buy controlling interest of the Seattle Mariners, but the only decision resulting from the two-hour meeting yesterday was that more information was needed.
Because the committee members also said that they doubted they would have enough information gathered in time to make a presentation to the full body of club owners at a quarterly meeting in the first week of March, the Mariners seem to be barreling toward a showdown with a March 27 date that the Mariners owner believes to be the last day in which Seattle-area groups will have the opportunity to purchase the team.


The Spoken Word
ARCHITECTURAL LECTURE, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
A lecture to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the first architectural exhibition at the museum, given by Kenneth Frampton, a professor of architecture at Columbia University.
Monday at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10 ($5 for students).
Information: (212) 708-9480.
LECTURE, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
Gloria Steinem, whose most recent book is "Revolution From Within," will discuss her work and current events.
Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
LECTURE, Association for the Advancement of Psychoanalysis, 329 East 62d Street, Manhattan.
"Who Gets to Home Plate? (Some Thoughts on the Longevity of the Creative Life)," by Jane Simon, faculty member of the department of psychiatry at Columbia University.
Today at 8 P.M.
Admission: $3.50.
Information: (212) 838-8044.
POETRY READING, Cafe at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, Manhattan.
The poets Hattie Gossett and Mike Tyler will read from their works.
Sunday at 10 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 598-7150.
STORYTELLING, Museum of American Folk Art, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street, Manhattan.
Mexican stories and myths told by Marcia Lane, a storyteller.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 595-9533.
TALK AND SLIDE SHOW, Transit Museum, Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Boerum Hill, Brooklyn.
"The Bridge and the El: Midwives to the Modern City," a discussion about the Brooklyn Bridge and the elevated subway, led by Barry Lewis, an architectural historian.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Admission: $5.
Information: (718) 330-3060.
GALLERY TALK AND SLIDE SHOW, Wave Hill, 675 West 252d Street, Riverdale, the Bronx.
"Abstracting the Landscape: The Artistry of Landscape Architect A. E. Bye," a discussion of Bye's work by Eliza Pennypacker and Kristi Wormhoudt, curators at Wave Hill.
Sunday at 1 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 549-3200.
READING AND TRIBUTE, the Poetry Project, St.
Mark's Church, Second Avenue and 10th Street, Manhattan.
Charles Pinion, a screenwriter, will read from his work "Killbillies," and Dave Atkins, author of the screenplay "Arrowtooth Waltz," will read from his work.
Today at 10:30 P.M.
Admission: $5.
On Sunday at 5 P.M.: a tribute to Harry Smith, a film maker and poet, with reminiscences, films and other activities, featuring the writers Allen Ginsberg, Jonas Mekas, Gregory Corso and others.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
POETRY READING, Dyckman House Museum, 4881 Broadway, at 204th Street, Manhattan.
Local poets will read from their latest works.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Information: (212) 304-9422.
GALLERY TALKS, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
"Sculpture: Sight, Touch and Idea," by Amelia Arenas, today at noon; "Mondrian and Malevich," by Mina Roustayl, today at 1 P.M.; "Delaunay and Kupka," by Ms.
Moustayl, today at 3 P.M.; "Surrealism in America," by Barbara Larson, tomorrow at 1 P.M.; "The Paley Collection," by Ms.
Larson, tomorrow at 3 P.M.; "Gay Block: Rescuers of the Holocaust," by Julie Reiss, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "Gemini G.E.L.," by Ms.
Reiss, Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free under age 16).
Information: (212) 708-9480.


Standards On Paper
An advisory committee to the Environmental Protection Agency yesterday approved definitions and standards for recycled paper that are more restrictive than those now in effect but do not meet the goals of environmental advocates.
The Recycling Advisory Council of the National Recycling Coalition approved standards stating that paper products must contain a certain amount of material that has been processed outside paper mills to be eligible for procurement by the Federal Government.


Witness Contradicts Major Detail in Teaneck Officer's Testimony
A captain in the Teaneck Police Department today contradicted a significant detail in an officer's testimony about the fatal shooting of a black teen-ager as two white officers chased him on April 10, 1990.
The captain, Patrick Hogan, said Officer Wayne Blanco told him shortly after the shooting that the youth, Phillip Pannell, had not reached into the left pocket of his parka before he was killed.


Theodor Herzl Gaster, 85, Scholar of Myths and World's Religions
Theodor Herzl Gaster, a scholar of comparative religion whose popular works made the myths of the ancient world accessible to large audiences, died on Monday in Osteopathic Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 85 years old and lived in Philadelphia.
Hospital officials said he died of heart failure.


DEMOCRACY PUSH IN HAITI BLUNTED
With the return of hundreds of Haitians this week from the American-run refugee camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and the relaxation of a United States embargo against Haiti, the momentum of a four-month-old effort to restore democracy in this country appears to have been badly blunted.
Only a week ago, as pressure generated by the refugee crisis rose in Washington, officers in the Haitian Army who were involved in a coup against the country's first elected Government in September were anxiously approaching politicians for help in obtaining foreign visas to escape a widely rumored foreign intervention.


Arabs Protest Killing of West Bank Prisoner


Quartet in a Debut
The Takacs String Quartet is to make its Carnegie Hall debut tonight at 8.
The quartet, whose members are the violinists Gabor Takacs-Nagy and Karoly Schranz, the violist Gabor Ormai, and the cellist Andras Fejer, is to play Haydn's Quartet in D (Op. 76, No. 5), Kurtag's Quartet No. 3 and Schubert's "Quartettsatz" in C minor.
Also on the program is Schumann's Piano Quintet, with the pianist Andras Schiff.
Tickets are $8 to $25.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


'Lead by Example'
"The new world order in the next two years will feature two developments that are now being played out in Europe - increased national sentiment among countr4ies in the East, and increased emphasis on political and economic integration among countries in the West.
"In the international arena, nationalism can prove to be destructive in the long run. Given that, the United States should work to curb the excesses of nationalism by promoting forms that buttress the mutual cooperation of nations. I think you can become a powerful giant if you lead by example. We're having severe problems with population growth in the world. The United States could step up and say: 'We recognize this. Here's what we should do.'
"I also have in mind the creation of some international economic policy whereby various countries would reach agreement on economic strategies that would maximize stability and growth in all nations. Our economies are so interdependent it's no longer possible for amodern nation to take steps to confront account economic policies in other countries.
"There is also a need to reach agreement on international solutions to such issues as the massive and growing immigration of citizens frompoor to rich nations and the growing gap between rich and improverished nations. The United States could in m any ways try to strengthen the United Nations so it could adequately address these problems. It would be a serious mistake to return to isolationism cloaked in nationalist sentiment."


Lufthansa Appoints Top American Official
Lufthansa announced yesterday that Frederick Reid had been appointed senior vice president for the Americas, making the 41-year-old San Francisco native the highest-ranking American in the recent history of the German airline and perhaps in its entire 60-year history.
The appointment is effective June 1, but Mr.
Reid is essentially functioning in that role now.


Quotation of the Day
"We have a foreign policy today in the shape of a doughnut -- lots of peripheral interests, but nothing at the center. There is no one central problem from which all others emanate and which can be used to galvanize the public." -- MICHAEL MANDELBAUM of the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies.  [ A1:6. ]


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Chase Manhattan Corporation, New York, appointed Drew J. Otocka senior vice president.  *
CIT Group/Credit Finance, New York, a unit of CIT Group Holdings Inc., New York, has appointed Paul A. Cottone senior vice president and Eastern regional manager.


A. J. Kitt Is Steady On 2-Star Course
In his first meeting with The Mountain, A. J. Kitt was not exactly swept off his skis, which was the good news as well as the bad.
The one and only United States contender for a men's Alpine medal had no outstanding difficulty today with the Olympic downhill course.
But neither did he appear to develop that special affinity for the long and winding road, La Face de Bellevarde


Procter &amp; Gamble Picks Executives' Successors
Two longtime research and development executives at the Procter &amp; Gamble Company announced their retirements yesterday, and the consumer products giant named their replacements.
J.
Richard Andre, 65, will retire as vice president of paper products research and development worldwide at the end of this month after more than 40 years at the company.


Bangladesh, Inured to Poverty and Cyclones, Is Burdened by Refugees


Wall St. Tradition of Giving To the Neediest Is Continued
The bright and the eager who flock each year to Wall Street's equivalent of boot camp, the analysts program, inherit two traditions: 80-hour workweeks and an annual campaign to benefit The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The analysts understand the necessity of hard work during their two-year stints.
It is the time-honored way of identifying the movers and the shakers amid the cum laudes and the Phi Beta Kappas.
But they are less certain about the origins of their connection with the Neediest Cases.


Let's Not Lose Sight Of St. Patrick's Day
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 25 report that New York City has charged the organizers of the St.
Patrick's Day Parade with illegal discrimination in seeking to exclude a gay Irish group: I'm sure gays have always marched in the St.
Patrick's Day Parade, but not under a banner discussing their sexual preference.
Resistance to their doing so is not necessarily homophobic, but a sincere belief that sexual orientation has nothing to do with the parade and that its intrusion would change the character of a time-honored day.


Robert Ginsburgh, 68, Johnson Military Aide
Maj.
Gen.
Robert N. Ginsburgh, retired, a former staff member of the National Security Council and military aide to President Lyndon B. Johnson, died on Monday at the Bethesda Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md.
He was 68 years old and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


'Domestic' Label for Mazda Would Be First for Japanese
The Mazda Motor Corporation offered solid evidence today that its cars are becoming more American, introducing its new 626 compact model, which Mazda said would be the first "foreign" brand car to be classified as domestic for purposes of Federal fuel-efficiency regulations.
Mazda introduced the car at the Chicago Auto Show.
All of the 626's steel, glass, paint, electronics and major components -- except the engine and transmission -- are bought from United States suppliers.


No Demons in Central Asia
The Bush Administration is right to speed the posting of new American ambassadors to Azerbaijan and the former Soviet Central Asian republics of Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
But by linking its haste to Iranian ambitions in the area, Washington shows alarming signs of succumbing to a simplistic fear of a pan-Islamic bloc.
These countries have a legitimate need to diversify their economic links, and that includes trade with Iran or other Islamic countries.
A panicked U.S. reaction could actually provoke the religious polarization it is meant to combat.
Secretary of State Baker needs to examine these issues with an open mind when he visits the region next week.


Connecticut's Inescapable Pain
Gov.
Lowell Weicker's new budget for Connecticut spreads harsh reality with a sharp knife.
He offers a plan for real reductions in almost every category of state spending, remarkably free of fictitious savings.
Some of his proposals cut too abruptly -- school aid, for example.
But given the circumstances, his overall focus on cutting back is the only reasonable option.
After last year's bruising battle over the adoption of the state's new income tax, Mr.
Weicker couldn't even contemplate proposing more taxes.
Indeed, the issue is still so fractious that he even ignored sensible suggestions to make the income tax more palatable to middle-income taxpayers by adopting a fairer rate structure.


Prospects for Yugoslav Accord Improve
Prospects for a political settlement to Yugoslavia's civil war improved today when the leader of the breakaway republic of Croatia, Franjo Tudjman, reversed his position and agreed to unconditional acceptance of the United Nations peace plan.
But Milan Babic, who has proclaimed himself president of Krajina, an ethnic Serbian enclave in Croatia, continues to reject the plan, which would deploy 10,000 United Nations peacekeeping troops.
Other Serbian leaders have promised to persuade Mr.
Babic to change his mind.


Corrections
An article in the Currents column of The Home Section yesterday about milk cartons that carry a message for victims of domestic violence misidentified the designer of the campaign.
She is Peggy Diggs.


Pittsburgh Journal; Horror Is a Thing Of Beauty In a Movie
Few legitimate industries can find their roots in horror and psychopathic killings, but that is the story of the growing film industry here.
George Romero, the Pittsburgh-based impresario of horror, put the city on the map for filmmakers in 1967 with the cult film "Night of the Living Dead." And since Jonathan Demme shot "The Silence of the Lambs" here two years ago, Pittsburgh has been the backdrop for 23 major films and television movies.


The Art Market
New Light for Photography
Photography is gaining new respect in the New York museum world.
This week, the Metropolitan Museum of Art announced the formation of a separate photography department headed by Dr.
Maria Morris Hambourg, who has been an associate curator in the department of prints and photographs since 1985.This is the first department to be created at the museum since the opening of the Robert Lehman Collection of Old Masters in 1975.
Meanwhile, the Whitney Museum of American Art has said it will begin aquiring photographs for its permanent collection.


Richard Brackeen, 53, Executive, Is Killed by Gunshot in His Home
Richard E. Brackeen, a longtime aerospace executive who was former chief executive officer of the Fairchild Space and Defense Corporation, was shot on Wednesday at his home in Great Falls, Va., and died soon afterward at Fairfax Hospital.
He was 53 years old.
He died of a single gunshot wound to the upper body, Officer Bill Coulter, a spokesman for the Fairfax County police, said yesterday.
Officer Coulter said that the shooting was still under investigation.


Cartoons With a Political Conscience
If times seem tough, remember that Betty Boop was once homeless and Porky Pig nearly saw his father's farm go bust.
These sad events occurred during the early 1930's, the golden age of the socially conscious cartoon.
Fourteen of them, some quite rare, will be shown tonight and tomorrow under the title "Cartoon Soup Kitchen," part of the Film Society of Lincoln Center's current program of films on the Depression.


A.T.&amp; T. Loses In Patent Trial
A Federal jury in Midland, Tex., ruled that the American Telephone and Telegraph Company must pay $34.6 million for infringing the patent on one of its most widely used telephone switching devices.
The patent holder, Collins Licensing L.P. of Dallas, contended that A.T.&amp; T. had willfully infringed its patent and should be liable for more than $300 million in damages.
But the six-member jury found that A.T.&amp; T. did not willfully violate the patent, and awarded the far smaller amount.


Trade-Off in the Schools: Principals Pay Political Dues to Get Jobs
Ira Victor, Lou Corominas and Judy Rothschild are seasoned educators in the central Bronx, but talent alone, they say, would not have been enough to win them the acting principal and acting assistant principal jobs they now hold.
They also had to work in the election campaigns of members of their school board, calling voters and chauffeuring election workers.
"I knew I could not get an appointment based upon competence as an educator," said Mr.
Victor, the acting principal of Public School 47 in School District 12.
"The process appeared to be closed to me."


At the Bar; As The Quayle-A.B.A. Debate Heats Up, Lawyers Fear They May Be Campaign Targets.
Last August, Charles Beckham of El Paso, president of the Texas Young Lawyers' Association, had a disturbing conversation with his 5-year-old daughter, Cameron.
It happened while the two were watching the latest televised adventures of the Care Bears.
"Daddy," she asked, Mr.
Beckham wrote recently in The Texas Bar Journal, "why doesn't the Vice President like you?"


World Bank Backs Unsound China Dam
To the Editor:
"Dispute Over a Dam on the Scenic Yangtze" (Science Times, Jan. 21), on Chinese Government plans to construct the world's largest hydroelectric dam at Three Gorges, points out that internal opposition to the project was suppressed after the Tiananmen Square massacre.
For the project, China will need massive foreign loans, particularly the support of the World Bank.
Unfortunately, the bank is one of the few institutions that still support the top-down centralized economic planning to force through a megaproject like Three Gorges.


Pipkins Gets Berth After Luge Runoff
The unlikely saga of Robert Pipkins continues.
Today, the 18-year-old from Staten Island won a three-man runoff and will compete in the men's singles luge here Sunday and Monday in the XVI Olympic Winter Games.
Pipkins is the only black luger in major international competition.
He won the world junior championship two weeks ago in Sapporo, Japan, but he began the winter as perhaps a 100-1 shot to race in the Olympics and remains a long shot to win a medal.
Today, he slid down the 15-curve, 1,249-meter course like a potential Olympic medalist.
In his two runs during the official training program, he was timed in 46.379 seconds for the first run and 46.275 for the second for a total time of 92.654 seconds.
Wendel Suchow of Marquette, Mich., finished second in a total time of 92.769 seconds and also won a starting berth.
Suchow will also compete in the doubles.
Wiley Is Odd Man Out
The odd man out was Tim Wiley of Lexington, Mass., in 93.899 seconds.
Ironically, Wiley finished first in last month's United States Olympic trials in Lake Placid, N.Y., but American luge officials still required him to take part in the runoff.
Pipkins's time of 46.275 seconds in the day's final heat was impressive.
Of the 65 starters, including Olympic, World and World Cup champions and other medalists, he was the second fastest.
Only Georg Hackl of Germany, the 1988 Olympic silver medalist, was faster.
His time was 46.019 seconds.
In the Olympics, singles lugers run two heats a day for two days and the times are added to get the final result.
The three Americans in the Olympic singles will be Pipkins, Suchow and Duncan Kennedy of Lake Placid.
Kennedy was not required to take part in the United States trials and was placed on the team automatically because of his success on this winter's six-race World Cup circuit.
He finished second in the World Cup overall standing with 164 points, a point behind Markus Prock of Austria.
After the runoff, the Americans were strangely quiet.
Suchow told a friend he was happy, but he did not want to do interviews or even smile because he did not want to embarrass Wiley.
And Wiley sat, head down, saying only that he did not want to talk.
Nine hours after the race-off, Wiley was still glum.
"It hurts to come this far and not compete," he said.
"But I knew that I had to prove myself here."
Pipkins was restrained, too.
He felt bad for Wiley, his roommate on the World Cup circuit.
Fair, but Unfortunate
"Was this a reasonable way to settle this?" Pipkins said.
"Well, it's fair, but it's unfortunate."
It was unfortunate for Wiley, not for Pipkins.
"I guess everything's pretty much gone my way," Pipkins said.
"Every step of the way, everything has worked out, and I qualified for the team.
"Actually, I didn't know I was going to race off until a few days ago. I kind of thought I was already on the team, and then they told us we had to race off. I said, 'Oh, well.' I'm just glad everything worked out.
"I imagined I could get to this level, but no, not this quickly. I was aiming for 1994."
Pipkins is a Drexel University sophomore, majoring in architectural engineering.
He remembers when he was 4 years old and sliding in his red plastic toboggan down the Silver Lake hills in Staten Island.
When he was 14 years old, his mother asked him if he would like to try luge.
Swimming, Tap Dancing and Ballet
He had done swimming, tap dancing and ballet, but he had no idea what luge was or whether it was even a winter or summer sport.
When he saw it was high-speed sledding down a long, steep chute, he loved it on first attempt.
He improved dramatically this winter.
But in the United States Olympic trials, after leading after the first weekend, he crashed on the second weekend and placed 10th over all.
Still, the coaches placed him on the Olympic team because he seemed to show promise in a sport in which the United States has never won an Olympic medal.
The coaches then decided on the runoff.
They took the times of the second of Wednesday's two training runs and both of today's runs, with the slowest time for each man thrown out.
As it turned out, each man's slowest run came on Wednesday.
The track was faster and colder today, and the luck of the draw had the seven American singles and doubles riders slide first, when the track was in its best condition.
The day was not perfect for Pipkins.
On his first run, he hit the wall on the 10th turn and bruised an ankle.
Still, his time was the 10th best of the run.
"On the second run," he said, "I didn't hit one thing. I had a little skid on curve 15, but I can't complain. If I had that in a race, I'd be happy."
In a pressure situation, Pipkins thrived.
"I try not to pressure myself," he said, "but obviously, I'd like to do well. It's not enough just to go to the Olympics. The pressure's on me as much as some other people here. But I'm not expected to win or anything like that. It makes it a little easier."
Nevertheless, his performance today must have given him hopes of winning a medal here.
"No," he said coolly.
"I'm not going to win a medal here. But I'm looking forward to the 1994 Olympics."


American Express Replies to Criticism
The American Express Company has fired back at the International Olympic Committee in the intensifying battle over so-called ambush marketing at the Winter Olympics.
In a strongly worded statement yesterday, three executives of an American Express subsidiary, the American Express Travel Related Services Company, took issue with remarks made on Wednesday in France by Richard Pound, an Olympic committee marketing official.


Brady Backs More Modest Banking Bills
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady today all but abandoned the Bush Administration's sweeping recommendations to overhaul the nation's banking system by throwing his support behind the more modest approach taken by several measures now before Congress.
At a news conference on Capitol Hill, Mr.
Brady urged lawmakers to adopt any of the competing proposals that would ease restrictions on interstate banking.
He thus acknowledged that there was little chance for passage of the Administration's broader package, which was reintroduced this week.
That measure would also permit commercial banks to affiliate more easily with investment banks and be owned by industrial enterprises, like General Motors and I.B.M.


Maxwell's Racing Paper Shuts Down
The Racing Times, the newspaper started by Robert Maxwell less than 10 months ago to challenge The Daily Racing Form, was closed yesterday after no buyer emerged to rescue it from the financial upheaval that has torn apart the Maxwell media empire.
The Racing Form, long rumored to be a possible buyer of The Racing Times, agreed to purchase only some assets of its rival, particularly computer equipment and software.


Orion Deal With New Line
The Orion Pictures Corporation said yesterday that its board had approved a deal to sell control of the struggling film company to the New Line Cinema Corporation.
Under the terms of the complex deal, New Line would emerge with a 46 percent stake in Orion, which would remain a publicly traded company.
Metromedia Inc., which has a 70 percent stake in Orion, would emerge with an 11 percent stake in New Line, plus options to purchase additional New Line stock.
Metromedia would also retain a 7.5 percent stake in the restructured Orion.


Treasuries Dip Ahead of Job Data
Prices of Treasury securities dipped and interest rates moved modestly higher yesterday, as dealers and their clients turned cautious in advance of the January employment report, which is scheduled to be released today.
"We have had a few clients ask us to lighten up positions in front of the number," one government securities trader said, "because they are very uncertain about what the number will be and how the market will react to it."


3 Mets and a Yankee Reach Accord for '92
The Mets won one and settled two in arbitration yesterday, but relief pitcher JEFF INNIS, who lost his case, came out ahead anyway.
Innis didn't get the $650,000 salary he sought, but the $355,000 he was awarded is more than double his 1991 salary of $155,000.
He was 0-2 with no saves and a 2.66 earned run average in 84 innings last season.


Review/Film; Starting in the Mind, Moving Down
Phil Joanou's "Final Analysis" is an entertaining exercise in psychological suspense up to a point.
Then the ghost that has been pleasurably haunting it, that of Alfred Hitchcock's "Vertigo," turns out to be an illusion, and the real villain is revealed as that implacably clear-eyed monster, demon logic.
It begins very well with the opening credits: lushly photographed close-ups of flowers crosscut with seemingly random objects that include the collected works of Freud, each image briefly illuminated as if by the passing sweep of a lighthouse beam.


Knicks Chalk Up 30th Victory Going Into Break
In their final quarter before the All-Star Game break, the Knicks reached down and found a finishing kick last night at Madison Square Garden, running off 9 straight points midway through the period to secure a 102-85 victory over Houston.
Mark Jackson ran the offense relentlessly, finishing with a career-high 19 assists, and the Knicks made crucial baskets when they had to, while their intense defense prevented the Rockets from doing the same.


Region's Quick-Cash Frauds Snare Desperate Consumers
After losing her job as a computer operator -- with no savings, no credit and few prospects -- a 25-year-old Morris County woman found a classified ad in a national magazine offering fast, guaranteed personal loans of as much as $25,000.
Early last year she sent the Florida-based company $500, borrowed from her mother, as a fee to secure a $5,000 loan.
She has not had any response.


A Cherubini Opera
The French Institute/Alliance Francaise and L'Opera Francais de New York will present a concert performance of Cherubini's three-act opera "Medee," tonight at 8 at Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street in Manhattan.
The performance, conducted by Yves Abel, is to feature Susan von Reichenbach, a soprano, in the title role, and a Canadian choir, the Elora Festival Singers.
Tickets are $22.
Information: (212) 355-6160.


CBS Completes Sale Of Olympics Time
As in the case of Super Bowl XXVI, for which CBS finished selling commercial time two days before the game, the network yesterday completed selling the last of the commercial time for the 1992 Winter Olympics, which begin on Saturday in Albertville, France.
"It was not a distress sale," said George Schweitzer, senior vice president of CBS marketing and communications, responding to extensive reports in trade publications of steep price cuts and other deals that CBS made to sell all of the hundreds of spots to be run during the games.


Senate Backs Faster Protection Of Ozone Layer as Bush Relents
The Bush Administration, in a surprise reversal of its public position, today supported a Senate action to phase out much faster the chemicals that damage the protective ozone layer high in the atmosphere.
A proposal to cease production of the chemicals as fast as possible passed the Senate today by 96 to 0, a vote that would have been unthinkable without the change of attitude at the White House.
Only three months ago the measure was prevented from even reaching the floor by Republican senators acting on behalf of the White House.


CHRONICLE
KATHLEEN BROWN, California's state treasurer, came to New York this week to meet with officials of bond-rating agencies, financiers, bankers and Wall Street executives, shuttling from one discussion of the fiscal status of her state to another.
But while she was talking about California's economy, she was also meeting and greeting people who might be instrumental in political forays.
Her appearance seemed a breath of fresh political air to a group of executive and financial women who gathered yesterday morning in Ellen Chesler's apartment at the Dakota.


Dispute Over Seized Islands Delays Tokyo Aid to Russia
fter decades of failed efforts to settle its territorial dispute and conclude a peace treaty with the Soviet Union, Japan has found to its dismay that Russia appears even less willing or able to make concessions demanded by Tokyo on this issue, Japanese officials say.
As a result, they say, prospects for large-scale economic aid to halt Russia's economic slide remain elusive.
And Japanese diplomats acknowledge that this situation again places Tokyo out of step with the United States and European countries that are working more and more closely with Moscow.


TV Weekend; Another Side of Mortimer's Paradise
Leslie Titmuss is back, as aggressively sour as ever.
Introduced five years ago in the John Mortimer mini-series "Paradise Postponed," the rather monstrous Englishman is the resentful working-class boy who grew up to be a Tory politician in Margaret Thatcher's Conservative Party.
Now, in Mr.
Mortimer's "Titmuss Regained," he has risen to the Cabinet rank of Minister of Housing, Ecological Affairs and Planning, sporting the curiously appropriate acronym HEAP.
The three-part series begins its run on "Masterpiece Theater" on Sunday at 9 P.M. on Channel 13.
The author clearly despises Titmuss but, as might be expected from the creator of "Rumpole of the Bailey," is shrewd enough to make him the kind of villain you love to hate.
And Mr.
Mortimer receives enormous assistance in the performance of David Threlfall (Smike in "Nicholas Nickleby"), whose Titmuss is a symphony of sneering and dissonant haughtiness.
Mr.
Threlfall seems to have devised the most offended nose in the history of British television, and that does indeed take some devising.


Review/Film; Conscience In a Time Of Madness
Among the great understatements included in "The Restless Conscience," Hava Kohav Beller's forceful and important study of anti-Hitler resistance within Nazi Germany, this one stands out: "To swim against public opinion in your own country, in the time of victory, is a difficult thing to do." The extraordinary difficulties faced by the individuals described here cannot be underestimated, nor can their courage.
"I think it was a terrific loss for Germany to have killed him," it is said of one such man, by one of the many friends and colleagues and widows Ms.
Beller has assembled to give testimony.
The understatement with which its subjects express themselves gives this film a very special grace.
"The Restless Conscience," which opens today at the Walter Reade theater, relies on archival film clipsand talking heads to reconstruct the quiet history of German resistance.
It's a method that might seem arid if the subject were not so gripping or so relatively unexplored.
Spanning the period from 1933 to 1945, Ms.
Beller charts the diminishing hope of those Germans who initially thought the Third Reich might be assailable, only to find the possibility of resistance growing ever more remote.


Irish Pick New Prime Minister; Economy Gets Priority
Albert Reynolds became Prime Minister-designate of Ireland this afternoon after a healthy majority of his party in Parliament chose him to replace Charles J. Haughey as their leader.
Mr.
Reynolds, a 56-year-old country-and-western music fan who was Mr.
Haughey's Finance Minister until last autumn, when he made his first move to try to replace Mr.
Haughey, is expected to succeed him as Prime Minister on Tuesday.


Stocks Flat in Tokyo
Stocks were virtually flat today in Tokyo.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues ended the week at 22,107.12, up 2.20 points, or one-hundredth of 1 percent.
For the week, it gained 84.07 points, or four-tenths of 1 percent.


Committee Rejected Plan Allowing Foreign Owners
Major league baseball club owners, under fire because of their threat to reject the purchase of the Seattle Mariners by a Japanese-dominated group, adopted the policy that bans foreign ownership after rejecting a proposal that would have allowed as much as 37 percent ownership in a team by foreign investors.
A four-man committee chaired by Peter O'Malley of the Los Angeles Dodgers, a longtime supporter of Japanese baseball, vetoed the 37 percent proposal and opted for the stance that was approved at a meeting of all of the owners two months ago.
That policy states that for at least this year baseball will not "process or deal favorably with" any sale to owners outside the United States and Canada.


Transit Agency Faulted as Lax
The New York City Transit Authority routinely failed to administer drug and alcohol tests to employees after they were involved in subway collisions, derailments or other questionable incidents in the 20 months before last August's fatal subway crash, a report released yesterday by the Inspector General of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said.
The report makes clear that subway workers who had alcohol problems could easily go undetected, as did the motorman who has been accused of being drunk when his train crashed near the Union Square station last August, killing five people and injuring more than 200.


For Black History Month
Here is a sampling of events planned for this weekend as part of Black History Month.
Tomorrow
"TEXTILES AS IMPROVISATION," American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
A lecture by Jack Gilfoy, professor of music at Indiana University, based on the exhibition "African Improvisation: Textiles From the Indianapolis Museum of Art." Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Admission: $10, including museum admission.
The exhibition will be up through April 19.
Information: (212) 956-3535.
"AFRICAN CARVING: A DOGON KANAGA MASK" and "DRAWING FROM LIFE: CHARLES WHITE," Studio Museum in Harlem, 144 West 125th Street, Manhattan.
A screening of two short films.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $3 ($1 under age 12, $1.50 for the elderly).
On view through June 7 is "Africa and the Diaspora," artifacts dating from the fifth century A.D. to the present, from the museum's permanent collection.
Weekend hours: today, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, 1 to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 864-4500.
"THE BLACK NEW WAVE," American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
A film series featuring works by black directors, through Feb. 23.
Films to be shown tomorrow are "Symbiopsychotaxiplasm: Take One" (1967), by William Greaves, who will introduce the film (tomorrow at 2 P.M.), and "To Sleep With Anger" (1990), by Charles Burnett (tomorrow at 4:30 P.M.).
Admission is free with museum admission of $5 ($4 for the elderly, $2.50 for students and the elderly).
Information: (718) 784-0077.
Sunday
"THE ROOTS OF GOSPEL MUSIC: AFRICAN-AMERICAN SACRED QUARTETS IN NEW YORK CITY," Abigail Adams Smith Museum, 421 East 61st Street, Manhattan.
A lecture by Dr.
Ray Allen, author of "Singing in the Spirit: African-American Sacred Quartets in New York City," followed by a performance by the Heavenly Tones, an a cappella gospel group.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $2 ($1 for students and the elderly; free for children 12 and under).
Information: (212) 838-6878.
"JUBA, JUKIN AND JAZZIN," American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West and 79th Street, Manhattan.
A jazz performance by Mickey D and Friends, a group of musicians and dancers.
Sunday at 2 and 4 P.M.
Admission: $5 ($2.50 for those 12 and under).
Information: (212) 769-5315.


Furor on Memo At World Bank
A memo by Lawrence H. Summers, the World Bank's chief economist, has angered environmentalists by arguing that many developing countries are underpolluted and that dirty industries should be encouraged to move to them.
Mr.
Summers has said the memo was meant to be sarcastic.
"A given amount of health-impairing pollution should be done in the country with the lowest cost, which will be the country with the lowest wages," said the memo, which was obtained from a critic of the World Bank's environmental record.
"I think the economic logic behind dumping a load of toxic waste in the lowest-wage country is impeccable and we should face up to that."


Tailor Loses Part of Right Hand When Shoved In Subway's Path
A Manhattan tailor lost part of his right hand when a man shoved him in front of an approaching subway train Wednesday night as two rookie transit police officers watched helplessly from across the tracks, the transit police said yesterday.
"This crazy man pulled down his blue cap and ran toward me and pushed me down," said Enocensio Tapia, 38 years old, as he lay in a Bellevue Hospital Center bed yesterday afternoon recovering from six hours of surgery.
"The whole thing is crazy," he said through an interpreter, his cousin Gilbert Marmolejos.


Order on the Court
Say what you will, but when you hire ELDRIDGE WYATT as a security guard, don't expect him to stand there with his hands on his hips when he spots a flagrant breach of the peace.
That became apparent on Tuesday night when Wyatt, an off-duty Oklahoma City police officer hired to provide security at a high school basketball game, witnessed what he believed was assaultive behavior, and right there on the court, too.


Settling a Subway Art Dispute, Artfully
It took a long letter from her lawyer, an appeal to the First Amendment, countless conversations among countless lawyers and a three-page agreement with 10 detailed conditions, but Jenny Marketou finally got her seven large photographs of Greek-Americans reinstalled yesterday on the walls of a subway station in Jamaica, Queens.
The exhibit, part of a broad program of art in the subways run by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, was removed in December, only seven days after it went up, because some black New Yorkers who use the station found it offensive.


Paez Pulls Out of Bout
JORGE PAEZ of Mexico, the former International Boxing Federation featherweight champion, who was scheduled to face JOSE LUIS VASQUEZ in Monday night's main event at the Forum in Inglewood, Calif., is ill and has been scratched from the card.
Paez caught the flu late last month and has been under a doctor's treatment since, JOHN BEYROOTY, a Forum boxing spokesman, said yesterday. (AP)


Angry Federal Judge Says He May Move Gotti Trial
After three tumultuous weeks of jury selection, Judge I. Leo Glasser lost his temper and threatened to move the trial of John Gotti out of New York City.
Mr.
Gotti responded by calling the judge names.
The judge, upset over a New York Post headline asserting that potential jurors were "petrified" of serving, had thundered, "I am giving very serious thought of moving the trial to another venue if this kind of media coverage and poisoning of the jury pool continues."


Mattel Doubles Its Earnings
Mattel Inc. said today that its fourth-quarter earnings doubled on the strength of Barbie dolls and other toys.
Mattel said its earnings were so strong that the company was able to retire $162 million in high-cost debt during 1991.


At the Movies
Busy Becomes Busier
Jeremy Irons's life isn't Kafkaesque. It's just busy.
Not only is he currently starring in Steven Soderbergh's "Kafka," but he has also completed a feature film and a television project and, in a week or so, he will begin work under the direction of Louis Malle in "Damage."


Drug Traffickers Are Reopening Old Routes in Texas Badlands
The Big Bend of the Rio Grande has been outlaw country for a long time, and now it is drug smugglers who increasingly find the terrain a useful ally.
In their time, Comanche raiders, train robbers and Mexican bandits all found impenetrable camouflage in this desert that is thick with cactus, laced with arroyos and empty of people.
Scattered mountains offered easy hiding places.


Where Entertaiment Industry Is Leading Us; Go After the Profiteers
To the Editor:
In "Movies Don't Cause Crime" (Op-Ed, Jan. 17), the entertainermagician Teller attacks legislation to provide victims of violent sex crimes, whose offenders were incited by obscenity or child pornography, with a civil cause of action against the materials' producers and purveyors.
The legislation is Senate 1521, the pornography victims' compensation bill, introduced by Senators Mitch McConnell, Charles Grassley and myself.
It will be considered by the Senate Judiciary Committee this year.


On Stage, and Off
Victim of Shakespeare
What's in a name?
Well, if it's Shakespearean and the title of a play, it can be box office poison.
Indeed, in the case of Richard Nelson's "Two Shakespearean Actors," which is to close on Sunday at the Cort Theater after 33 previews and 29 performances, there is much speculation in the theater industry as to whether its title contributed to its demise, since the play received nine favorable, four mixed and only three negative reviews.
"It sounds like a high school course," says Jack Viertel, the creative director of Jujamcyn Theaters.
Judging from sales at the TKTS half-price ticket booth for the play in the weeks before its official opening on Jan. 16, it would seem that assessment is accurate.
One theater executive who spoke on condition of anonymity says the play, set against the 1849 Astor Place theater riots, sold relatively few tickets during its previews, including the traditionally high-volume Christmas week.
The executive says that in the same weeks, the only other nonmusical Broadway play that was at TKTS consistently, "Park Your Car in Harvard Yard," outsold "Two Shakespearean Actors" 4 to 1.
The reason, he says, is that given the choice, people will buy anything but Shakespeare.
After the reviews of "Two Shakespearean Actors" came out on Jan. 17, sales increased, but not enough to insure the play's run.


I.O.C. Looks at Use of Blood Tests
Olympic officials are ready to begin trials of a new blood test that could show whether athletes are engaging in blood doping to enhance their performance, the head of the International Olympic Committee's medical committee said today.
"It's a good test," Prince Alexandre de Merode said.
If the trials prove successful, he said he would ask the committee's executive board to authorize use of the test at Olympic Games.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  TAKING AIM AT HUSSEIN
President Bush has sent the Director of Central Intelligence on an unpublicized mission to talk with leaders in Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
The goal: hasten the downfall of the Iraqi President.
A1  FOREIGN POLICY DOUGHNUT
Containment of Communism was the guiding principle of United States foreign policy for more than 40 years.
Now, with the cold war over, there is no core issue, prompting one expert to compare United States foreign policy to a doughnut -- "lots of peripheral interests, but nothing at the center." A1  PREACHING, NOT PRACTICING
The United States urges Japan and other countries to open their markets to American goods, but at the same time it puts up many barriers to imports.
A1  A WARNING FROM YELTSIN
The President of Russia, appealing for Western aid on a visit to France, said dictatorship would return to Russia if his economic program did not succeed.
A8  Prices have increased in Moscow but supplies haven't.
A8  Four former Soviet republics give details on disarmament.
A9  The United States names ambassadors to five former republics.
A9  CROATIA SAYS YES TO U.N.
The President of Croatia agreed to accept a United Nations peace plan, but the leader of a Serbian enclave rejects the proposal.
A3  BOUNCING BACK IN CARACAS
Laughing heartily despite the bullet holes in the window behind his desk, the President of Venezuela appears to have quickly recovered from a coup attempt.
A3  TOUGH TALK FOR ISRAEL
A key Democratic Senator says he supports the Bush Administration's plan to make a halt to new Israeli settlement building in the occupied territories a condition for loan guarantees.
A11  MORE MISERY IN BANGLADESH
A nation that endures chronic poverty and deadly cyclones is being swamped by a tide of Muslim refugees from Myanmar.
A6  IRELAND'S NEW LEADER
Albert Reynolds, a former Finance Minister, became Prime Minister-designate after a majority of his party chose him to replace Charles J. Haughey, who is resigning.
A7  National A12-17  WHITE HOUSE REVERSAL ON OZONE
With the backing of an Administration that had previously opposed it, a proposal that calls for speeding the phase-out of chemicals that damage the earth's ozone layer cleared the Senate, 96 to 0.
A1  THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE PLAN
Mr.
Bush became the last of the major Presidential candidates to join the national debate on health care, formally proposing several tax incentives and other changes that he said would make quality care affordable to every American.
A1  News analysis: The gaps in the President's proposal.
A15  A NEW HEADACHE FOR CLINTON
A report in The Wall Street Journal suggested that as a young man, Governor Clinton manipulated the military draft process to avoid serving during the Vietnam War.
The Governor denied the account, but the issue dogged him during a day of campaigning in New Hampshire.
A16  Senator Harkin, the populist with a piece of the pie.
A16  Political Memo: The candidates' ads are a snapshot of strategy.
A16  PLANE CRASHES INTO MOTEL
At least 16 people were killed in Evansville, Ind., when an Air National Guard transport plane crashed into a motel filled with visitors attending a convention.
A12  BADLANDS ON THE BORDER
The Big Bend of the Rio Grande has been outlaw country for a long time, and now it is drug smugglers who increasingly find the terrain a useful ally.
A12  REPORT ON C.I.A.
ANALYSES
A C.I.A. task force appointed in the aftermath of Robert M. Gates's grueling confirmation hearings last fall has rejected the assertion that the agency systematically slanted intelligence over the years.
The findings, included in a classified report recently submitted to Mr.
Gates for his approval, largely blame poor management and the inexperience of some analysts for allowing the perception of purposely slanted intelligence to flourish.
A13  IN A WORD, UNEXPECTED
Washington at Work: When Bob Woodward set out last year to learn everything he could about Vice President Quayle, the Capital awaited bombshells.
But there weren't any when The Washington Post last month published the resulting series on Mr.
Quayle, by Mr.
Woodward and David Broder.
The ensuingcriticism from journalists left Mr.
Woodward puzzled and the Vice President's aides gleeful.
A14  Washington Talk: Of tax writing, cynicism and special pleading.
A13  Pittsburgh Journal: The emergence of a horror-film capital.
A12  Law Page B6  The legal profession steps up recruitment of homosexual lawyers.
New research on the reliability of DNA fingerprinting.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 HOMELESS AND HOTELS
As New York struggles toward new ways of sheltering the homeless, a failed tourist hotel near Kennedy International Airport is about to re-open as a homeless hotel -- a revival of what critics called the worst of the old ways.
A1  HARD TIMES, NASTY SCHEMES
Fueled by a lingering recession that has made credit tight and people desperate, loan frauds that dangle the prospect of quick cash for an upfront fee are the fastest-growing category of consumer complaints throughout the metropolitan area, consumer agency officials said.
A1  Neediest Cases B4  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-30  Amsterdam Ave., divine amid dowdy.
C1  Athletes as the stuff of art.
C1  Down-to-earth dining in Brooklyn.
C1  Obituaries A19  Harding Bancroft, an executive at The Times and a diplomat.
Sports B8-17  Basketball: Magic Johnson's All-Star presence causing jitters.
B9  Knicks Defeat Rockets B9  Olympics: Pipkins get berth in luge after runoff.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials A28  Bush on health.
No demons in Central Asia.
End the fetal research ban.
Connecticut's pain.
Letters A28  A. M. Rosenthal: The California story.
A29  Leslie H. Gelb: 1932 and 1992.
A29  Robert F. Kennedy Jr.: Drinking from sewers.A29  Fritz Stern: Bush treats us like children.
A29  David A. Ridenour: The wrong way to health care.
A29


Review/Film; Connery As a Doctor In the Jungle
"You found the cure for cancer and all you can say is, 'I know?' " shrieks brassy Dr.
Rae Crane (Lorraine Bracco) at brilliant, eccentric, ponytailed Dr.
Robert Campbell (Sean Connery).
"Medicine Man," a rain forest romp about the less-than-sparkling adventures of this twosome, does indeed hinge on the discovery of an anticancer serum.
But it suggests that other maladies, like cute casting and glib, wisecrack-laden writing, are beyond the reach of medical science.
"Medicine Man" transports a lot of Hollywood-style hot air to the remote jungle outpost where Dr.
Campbell has accidentally stumbled upon a cancer-reversing formula.
Unfortunately, he cannot duplicate that formula at will.
And even more unfortunately, he now has the newly arrived Dr.
Crane breathing down his neck and telling him his research is "major league." Dispatched by the pharmaceutical company sponsoring this research project, the Bronx-accented Dr.
Crane is meant to seem charmingly out of place, but her charm is as elusive as the magical elixir.
She complains constantly and speaks in all-too-fluent screenwriterese. (Upon arriving in the jungle: "I'm tired!  I'm hungry! And I've been in these clothes for more than one dance.")


Art in Review
Elizabeth Newman  Galerie Lelong 20 West 57th Street Through Feb. 15


When Athletes Are the Stuff of Art
JOE NAMATH, when he was the long arm of the Jets, lived in a duplex apartment on 82d Street, about half a block from the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
He was once asked if he visited the museum.
"No," he said, with a note of regret in his voice, "I've always meant to, but I've just never found the time."
Without attempting to apply too broad a brush stroke, it is nonetheless true that most of the athletes I've covered as a sportswriter have felt about the same in regard to art as Namath did.
It might, however, have been enough for them, or it just might have taken all their available intellectual and physical energy at the time, to be performing artists on the field, which many, including and especially Joe Namath, have been.


Venezuela's Chief Promises Normalcy
A tight cluster of bullet holes marred a French window behind his desk chair, but Venezuela's President greeted a visit to his office today with his trademark bounce.
"Safe and sound," the 69-year-old leader, Carlos Andres Perez, exclaimed with a hearty laugh.


As U.S. Urges Free Markets, Its Trade Barriers Are Many
President Bush and Democrats both want Japan and other countries to open their markets to American goods, but in the international trade debate, the United States does not come to the table with clean hands.
In comparison with Japan and America's other major trading partners, the United States is less protectionist -- but many barriers to imports remain.
Quotas double the price of sugar in morning coffee and limit imports per American to no more than seven peanuts, a pound of dairy cheese and a lick of ice cream each year.
Fresh cream and milk are banned; frozen cream may be purchased only from New Zealand.
And the Customs Service recently turned back a shipment of buttered croissants from France because it violated a quota on French butter shipments.


Art in Review
Hermann Nitsch  David Nolan Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Feb. 29


Puzzle of Moscow Milk: Price Soars; Still Scarce
Four weeks after Russia threw itself on the free market, Moscow's central milk-processing concern is paying its suppliers eight times more for milk than it did before.
Yet, in a paradox that is both maddening and typical of the first month of economic shock therapy, higher prices so far have had almost no effect on supplies.
In fact, Moscow today is receiving about 1,220 tons of milk a day, less than half of the average for January 1989, the last time milk supplies for this city of nine million people could be considered "normal," according to Mikhail V. Nabatnikov, general director of the milk company, which has the no-nonsense name of Milk.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Patrick McEnroe Wins  Patrick McEnroe provided the upset of the day yesterday in the indoor tournament in Milan, Italy, which in its first two rounds has lost its top seven seeded players.
McEnroe eliminated second-seeded Guy Forget, 7-6 (7-4), 2-6, 7-6 (7-4), in a second-round match, No. 3-seeded Emilio Sanchez was upset by Stefano Pescosolido, 6-4, 3-6, 6-3, and the fourth-seeded Petr Korda was beaten by Goren Prpic, 7-6 (7-1), 6-1.
Sergi Bruguera, seeded No. 7, lost to Javier Sanchez, 0-6, 6-0, 6-2.
Top-seeded Ivan Lendl was lost Wednesday in the first round to a qualifier, Arne Thoms of Germany.
Fifth-seeded Karel Novacek and sixth-seeded Andre Agassi were also beaten in the first round.
Eighth-seeded Goran Ivanisevic of Croatia is the highest-ranked player left.
He defeated Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands, 6-4, 6-3, today. (AP) Seles and Fernandez Advance: Top-seeded Monica Seles and second-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez won their second-round matches at the Nokia tournament.
Seles, the defending champion, overcame minor errors to beat unseeded Angela Kerek of Germany with her powerful two-handed groundstrokes, 6-2, 6-2, in 51 minutes.
Fernandez was solid from the baseline in defeating Claudia Porwik of Germany, 6-3, 6-3, in 1 hour 26 minutes. (AP) Faber Upsets Hack: Donna Faber of the United States upset second-seeded Sabine Hack of Germany, 7-5, 3-6, 6-0, yesterday to advance to the quarterfinals of the Fernleaf Classic in Wellington, New Zealand.
Hack's exit left sixth-seeded Ann Grossman of the United States as the only seeded player remaining in the tournament.
Grossman beat Anna Smashnova of Israel, 6-4, 4-6, 6-1, in another second-round match.
In other matches, Claudine Toleafoa of New Zealand defeated Patti O'Reilly of the United States, 3-6, 6-3, 7-5, and Noelle van Lottum of France beat Stacey Martin of the United States, 6-2, 6-2. (AP) Courier Turns Back Woodforde: Jim Courier inched closer to the top of the tennis world and the game's No. 1 ranking Wednesday night with a hard-fought 7-6, 5-7, 7-5 victory over Mark Woodforde of Australia in the first round of the Volvo San Francisco.
No. 2 in the world and the tournament's top-seeded player, Courier can overtake top-ranked Stefan Edberg of Sweden and become the first American in six and a half years to reach No. 1 by reaching the tournament's final.
The 21-year-old American fell behind by 5-1 in the first set, but came back to force a tie breaker.
He fell behind by 6-3 in the tie breaker, saved three set points, and won that, too.
In the third set, Courier fell behind early before winning the last three games of the match. (AP)


Review/Ballet; Faint Heart Again Fails To Win Fair Maid
On the surface, little happens in Jerome Robbins's "Afternoon of a Faun." While rehearsing in a studio, a young male dancer meets a young woman, presumably, a member of the company with which he performs or a student at the ballet school he attends.
Each is drawn to the other.
But because the shy young man does not know how to cope with his feelings or express them, no passions burst into flames.
The encounter ends as quietly as its accompanying score by Debussy.
Since the ballet's premiere in 1953, its simple dramatic situation has inspired a multitude of interpretations.
One extraordinarily convincing account of the piece was given by the New York City Ballet on Sunday night at the New York State Theater when Damian Woetzel made his debut as the young man and Kyra Nichols was the woman.


All-Stars to Give Magic a Nervous Embrace
"How do you feel about playing against Magic in the All-Star Game?" Phil Jackson asked a player, one he will be coaching on the East team in Sunday's game in Orlando, Fla.
"For the record, or do you want my honest opinion?" asked the player.


Arabs Protest Killing of West Bank Prisoner


Harding Bancroft, 81, Executive At The Times and Diplomat, Dies
Harding Foster Bancroft, a retired vice chairman of The New York Times, former diplomat and lawyer whose counsel helped shape The Times's decision to publish the Pentagon Papers in 1971, died yesterday at Sarasota Memorial Hospital, near his Boca Grande, Fla., winter home.
He was 81 years old and also lived on a farm in Millbrook, N.Y.
Tall, blond and tweedy, Mr.
Bancroft joined The Times in 1956 as assistant secretary and associate counsel.
He was promoted to secretary the next year and then served as executive vice president from 1963 to 1973, when he became vice chairman.
He stepped down at the end of 1975 under the company's policy of mandatory retirement for executives at the age of 65.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Student Loan Marketing Association, Washington, which is known as Sallie Mae, sold $150 million in notes, due in 1995, through Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable notes, which were priced at par, yield 5.70 percent.
Preferred Stock  *
BankAmerica Corp., San Francisco, sold 14.6 million shares of cumulative preferred stock, with a stated value of $25 a share and an 8 3/8 percent dividend, through Merrill Lynch.
Common Stock  *
Artisoft Inc., Tucson, Ariz., announced the secondary sale of 1.5 million shares of common stock at $31.50 a share through Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, with proceeds going to the selling stockholders.
The company makes software and hardware products for local area networks of I.B.M. and I.B.M.-compatible personal computers.
*
Sun Television and Appliances Inc., Columbus, Ohio, has filed for an offering of 1.5 million shares, including 750,000 shares to be offered by the selling stockholders.
Montgomery Securities is the lead underwriter.
Ratings  *
Empire of America Consumer Finance Corp. has received a rating of Aaa from Moody's Investors Service, up from Aa1.
Moody's said it had received favorable additional information on the amount of collateral available to cover any losses.
The rating applies to $354.8 million in class B 9.15 percent asset-backed certificates partly backed by Credit Suisse.


Olympic High Notes


Even Bleak Bangladesh Is a Haven to Muslims Fleeing the Burmese Arm
Bangladesh, which has endured chronic poverty and murderous cyclones, is now being lashed by a tide of tens of thousands of Muslim refugees fleeing in panic from Myanmar.
In the southeast corner of this crowded country, the scenes in what pass for refugee camps are chilling even to people for whom hunger and suffering are no strangers.


Head of Senate Foreign Aid Panel Backs Curb on Israeli Settlements
Senator Patrick J. Leahy, chairman of the Senate committee overseeing foreign aid, today endorsed the Bush Administration's plans to insist on a halt to new Israeli settlement building in the occupied territories as a condition for loan guarantees.
He said that if the Israelis think they can get an easier deal from Congress, they should "forget it."
The tough remarks by Mr.
Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who heads the Senate Foreign Operations Subcommittee, came on the eve of the second round of talks between the Israeli Ambassador, Zalman Shoval, and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d on the conditions Washington intends to impose on the request for $10 billion in loan guarantees to help Israel resettle Jews from the former Soviet Union.


Added Task for CBS Is Appearing Lively
As the prime-time hosts for the Winter Olympics on CBS, Paula Zahn and Tim McCarver will be the most visible symbols of the network's $243 million financial commitment to the Albertville Games, the flesh-and-blood gauges for how the 16-day broadcast will be judged.
Their performances will be measured, as surely as those of skier Alberto Tomba, figure skater Kristi Yamaguchi and speed skater Bonnie Blair.


Military Transport Plane Crashes Into a Motel, Killing at Least 16
At least 16 people were killed here today in a fiery explosion when a four-engine military aircraft crashed into a busy restaurant and motel complex.
The Air National Guard C-130 transport plane was apparently practicing routine landings and takeoff drills when, witnesses said, it lost power after a takeoff.
It struck the buildings, setting off an enormous explosion.
A huge column of smoke was visible as far as 35 miles away.


Accuser Flirted With Tyson, Witnesses Say
INDIANAPOLIS, Feb. 6 -- When Mike Tyson's accuser first met the former heavyweight champion at a beauty pageant last July, she was "star-struck," flirted with him and was soon talking about his money, four witnesses testified today in his rape trial.
One of the witnesses, Madelyn D. Whittington, a college senior from Ohio, testified that minutes after the 23 contestants in the Miss Black America pageant were introduced to Tyson, the accuser told her of plans to go out with him.


Money Fund Assets Fall
The assets of the nation's 587 money market mutual funds decreased by $1.52 billion, to $508.23 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 217 institutional funds decreased by $1.53 billion, to $178.84 billion.
The assets of the 281 general-purpose funds were down by $503.5 million, to $179.76 billion.
The 89 broker-dealer funds increased by $520.1 million, to $149.61 billion, the institute said.


GATES, IN MIDEAST, IS SAID TO DISCUSS OUSTER OF HUSSEIN
President Bush has dispatched Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, on an unpublicized mission to consult with leaders in Egypt and Saudi Arabia on United States efforts to hasten the downfall of President Saddam Hussein, Administration officials said today.
Some officials insisted that Mr.
Gates's trip, which began on Tuesday with a stop in Cairo, was an inaugural tour of C.I.A. posts in Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Israel and an opportunity for the director to develop "liaison relationships" with allied intelligence chiefs.


Diner's Journal
The Changing Scene
NEW MENUS: Azzurro, the Italian restaurant at 245 East 84th Street, Manhattan, is offering a late-night supper menu Monday through Saturday, with live jazz on Monday nights.
The late menu and the music are available from 10:30 P.M. until 1 A.M.
Telephone: (212) 517-7068. . . .
The Supper Club, a restaurant with music and dancing at 240 West 47th Street, Manhattan, has begun a $27 pre-theater dinner from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M.
Tuesday to Saturday.
Telephone: (212) 921-1940.
OPEN: Silver Swan, an inexpensive German-American restaurant at 41 East 20th Street, Manhattan, (212) 254-3611. . . .
Allegria, a trattoria at 1350 Avenue of the Americas (entrance on 55th Street), (212) 956-7755. . . .
Bouchon, a bistro at 1338 First Avenue, at 72d Street, Manhattan, (212) 472-6946.
The chef is Jean-Claude Teulade, formerly of Chez Josephine on West 42d Street and of Tapis Rouge, now defunct, on Duane Street, both in Manhattan. . . .
Zoe, a contemporary American restaurant at 90 Prince Street, SoHo, (212) 966-6722.  . .
Gian Marino on the Park, an Italian restaurant, at 150 Central Park South, (212) 956-6205.
The restaurant was formerly on East 58th Street. . . .
Seafood Palace, a Chinese restaurant at 50 Mott Street, Manhattan, (212) 233-8898.


C.I.A. Panel Rejects View That Reports Were Slanted
A Central Intelligence Agency task force apppointed in the aftermath of the grueling confirmation hearings of Robert M. Gates as the country's espionage chief rejects the assertion that the agency has systematically slanted intelligence over the years, C.I.A. officials said today.
The findings, included in a classified report recently submitted to Mr.
Gates for his approval, largely blame poor management and the inexperience of some analysts for allowing the perception of purposely slanted intelligence to flourish, a view articulated by Mr.
Gates during his confirmation hearing last November.


Bush on Health: Smart, Gutless
The health care plan President Bush presented yesterday in Cleveland strides in the right direction.
It outlines creative ways to insure all poor families in the nation, promote group coverage and strip away legal obstacles to an efficient system of managed care.
The plan also sets forth a vision of how costs could be controlled.
Yet this plan won't work.
At decisive junctures, Mr.
Bush cowers.
He would cover the poor, but nearly strand the near-poor.
He calls for consumers to choose cost-conscious insurance policies, but backs away from the single step that would make that happen.
And he would encourage small firms to form large insurance pools, but fails to force their participation.


Police Commissioner in Suffolk Quits After Spat
Three days after a bitter confrontation with county legislators, the Suffolk County Police Commissioner submitted his resignation today in a letter that advised the County Executive, "Don't lose your sense of humor."
In his letter, Commissioner Daniel P. Guido made no mention of the confrontation with legislators, which began as a dispute over budget cuts and ended with the Commissioner and the presiding officer of the legislature calling each other liars.


Doctor Says Johnson Has Shown No Deterioration
On the eve of the National Basketball Association All-Star Game weekend, with rumors circulating about the physical condition of Magic Johnson, one of Johnson's doctors says that the player's condition has not deteriorated.
"He is still great physically, working out and playing ball for fun," said Dr.
David Ho, an AIDS expert in New York City who has been involved in the care of the player, who is infected with the virus that causes AIDS.


Foreign Affairs; 1932 and 1992
Nineteen ninety-two could be as seminal a political year as 1932.
Perhaps more than the Presidential hopefuls realize, Americans fear the future and are open to profound change -- far more than in pivotal election years like 1960 and 1980.
The candidate who catches and defines today's shapeless and plastic anxieties could harness a force as strong as the one that carried Franklin Roosevelt to the White House 60 years ago.
"Something weird is going on out there -- fear, anger, ugliness," said Roger Ailes, a Republican strategist.


S.E.C. Chief and Congressman Bicker Over Market Rules
A hearing on the Administration's plan to overhaul the $2.2 trillion government securities market degenerated into personal bickering today between the chairman of the House Banking Committee and the head of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The testy exchanges, in which Representative Henry B. Gonzalez called chairman Richard C. Breeden "egregiously pompous and arrogant," came over the S.E.C.'s proposal to remove the securities-law exemptions of two Government-created companies that provide hundreds of billions of dollars of loans to homeowners.


Critic's Choice/Performance Art; Carrying On at P.S. 122 to Help P.S. 122 Carry On
Performance Space 122, that hectic but lovable downtown center for the newest in dance, music and theater, needs money to continue its programs.
So it is giving a series of fund-raising parties for itself tonight and tomorrow night.
But don't expect the downtown equivalent of a potluck supper.
"More Artists," as the benefit series is called, will be the cultural equivalent of steak and expensive Champagne -- some meat-and-potatoes performers and some rarefied vintage types who will seem to have wandered in from other planets.
Altogether, the four shows also promise to serve as a quick guide to the new arts of the time.
Sixty or so solo performers and groups are appearing in "More Artists," with special guests and star hosts.
Each has been asked to present a new piece of 3 minutes or less, in 4 shows with 12 to 15 acts in each.
Tonight's 8 o'clock show, whose host is Penny Arcade, the performance artist, includes Ann Carlson, Dance Noise and Elizabeth Streb, representing dance; Quentin Crisp, the raconteur; Carlos Gutierrez-Solana, Judith Jackson and Danny Mydlack, performance artists, and Sekou Sundiata, who will read from his writing.
Among the acts appearing in the 11 P.M. show, with the comedian Reno as host, will be Blue Man Group; Zeena Parkins, a harpist; Everett Quinton, the actor; Eileen Myles, poet and Presidential candidate; Bob Telson, a composer, and Reza Abdoh, an Iranian performance artist.
Bob Holman, a poet, will be the host of the 8 P.M. show tomorrow, which includes John Kelly, Ain Gordon and Dan Hurlin, performance artists; David Cale, who will perform a monologue, and Doug Elkins, a dancer.
And it all ends with a bang tomorrow night at 11 in a show, whose host is Lisa Kron, a performance artist, that includes Afro-Ditee, Richard Elovich and Paul Zaloom, also performance artists, and Syd Straw, a singer.


Czechoslovakia Indicts Communist in Fraud
A leading member of Czechoslovakia's former hard-line Communist Government has been indicted on charges of illegally sending to the Soviet Union $10 million in cash belonging to Czechoslovakia.
The money was reportedly used to aid Communist movements in the West and the third world.


Psychiatrist Testifies That Dahmer Was Sick but Not Insane During Killings


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article in Business Day yesterday about CBS Inc.'s purchase of several television and radio stations referred incorrectly in some editions to the financial condition of the seller, Midwest Communications Inc.
It has not filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from creditors; another company, the Midwest Communications Corporation, is in bankruptcy.


Bush Is Vague on Health Plan's Details
The same political concerns that compelled President Bush to announce a "comprehensive health reform program" today also obliged him to be vague about many details.
But the details may be less important than the fact that Mr.
Bush has finally joined the national debate on overhauling the health-care system, a debate from which he had been conspicuously absent.


Magic Johnson's Ad Career Is Still in a Wait-and-See Phase
THREE months after Magic Johnson's announcement that he had tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS, advertisers with whom he had signed lucrative endorsement agreements are still struggling to define their relationships with him.
Some are rewriting the rules of advertising by continuing to use him to sell their products.
Some are taking a more conservative tack, turning him into the centerpiece of public-service programs that emphasize the fight against AIDS.
And some are hiding behind their contract expiration dates, hoping they will not have to confront their link to a spokesman with H.I.V., a condition that evokes feelings of pity and terror for many.


Weicker Sees New Issue And Hunts New Friends
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. succeeded last year in overhauling Connecticut's revenue system and imposing an income tax by forging a coalition of liberal Democrats and Republicans.
This year, in seeking to overhaul the spending system, Mr.
Weicker has shuffled the political cards: new issue, new allies, new coalition.
The budget plan that he proposed on Wednesday would cut $1.1 billion from current spending and restructure welfare, local aid and state employee benefit formulas -- all elements taken directly from the wish list of the same conservative Republicans who vilified Mr.
Weicker last year as the very symbol of grasping liberal tax thievery.


Economic Scene; Can Capitalism Save the Ozone?
CREATING free markets in Russia and other poor countries may do more to slow global warming than any measures that rich countries are likely to adopt in the 1990's, a World Bank study has found.
The study is helping to forge a consensus among economists in advance of a 100-nation conference on global warning, scheduled for Rio de Janeiro in June.
Third-world economic reform, not foreign aid for pollution-abatement programs, should be the top priority, they say.


Accuser Flirted With Tyson, Witnesses Say
INDIANAPOLIS, Feb. 6 -- When Mike Tyson's accuser first met the former heavyweight champion at a beauty pageant last July, she was "star-struck," flirted with him and was soon talking about his money, four witnesses testified today in his rape trial.
One of the witnesses, Madelyn D. Whittington, a college senior from Ohio, testified that minutes after the 23 contestants in the Miss Black America pageant were introduced to Tyson, the accuser told her of plans to go out with him.


Hotel in Queens Is Focus of Shift On the Homeless
As New York City struggles toward a better way of sheltering the homeless, a failed tourist hotel hard by the runways of Kennedy International Airport is at the center of a dispute that symbolizes at once the failures of past policy and how difficult it is to overcome them.
Sometime in the coming weeks, with the arrival of 150 homeless families, the Kennedy Inn will become the largest for-profit welfare hotel in a city that not long ago had pledged it would stop using welfare hotels.
That prospect has ignited a furious uproar among advocates for the homeless, as well as elected officials and residents of neighborhoods near the Queens airports, where an isolated hotel world of the homeless has grown quietly in the last few years.


Art in Review
Edouard Denis Baldus and Suzanne Opton  Lowinsky Gallery 575 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through March 28


INSIDE
Indiana Crash Kills 16
At least 16 people were killed in Evansville, Ind., when an Air National Guard transport plane lost power and crashed into a motel.
Page A12.
New Headache for Clinton
A news account suggested that Gov.
Bill Clinton had manipulated the draft process to avoid Vietnam-era service.
He denied it.
Page A16.
Holtzman's Quest
Elizabeth Holtzman has a single driving ambition: to unseat Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York.
And her tone is bitter.
Page B1.


Berenice Abbott Service
A memorial service for the photographer Berenice Abbott will be held at 11 A.M. tomorrow at the main branch of the New York Public Library, Celeste Bartos Forum, Fifth Avenue and 42d Street.
She died on Dec. 10 at the age of 93.


Art in Review
Edouard Boubat  Witkin Gallery 415 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Feb. 29


New Orleans Weakens Mardi Gras Bias Law
The City Council today softened a Mardi Gras anti-discrimination ordinance that has deepened racial animosity in New Orleans.
The original ordinance, approved Dec. 19, denied parade permits beginning in 1994 to any carnival organizations, called krewes, that have membership barriers based on race, sex, national origin, religion or sexual preference.


Cancer Patients Risk Penalties for Marijuana
To the Editor:
It was fascinating to read Jane E. Brody's recommendation of marijuana for the relief of the inevitable nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy (Personal Health column, Jan. 22).


Holmes Is Facing His First Real Test
He is 42 years old, has two grandchildren and, for the first time in a long time, Larry Holmes is about to fight a real fight.
Forget the five bouts, all victories, he had last year in his first year of activity since January 1988, when Mike Tyson, then the heavyweight champion, knocked him out in four rounds.
That fight ended Holmes's other comeback, the one he made nearly two years after announcing his retirement in 1986.


Brown's 'Last Stop' Is Job With Clippers
Larry Brown's traveling road show, an odyssey that has had six coaching stops since 1972, landed here today when the troubled Los Angeles Clippers made him their seventh coach in the last 11 seasons.
The 51-year-old Brown, rumored for several days to be the successor to the dismissed Mike Schuler, was introduced at a morning news conference and said he intended for this to be the final stop in his coaching career.


Sounds Around Town
Brazilian Season
Rosa Maria, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Manhattan, (212) 244-3005.
A lusty jazz and blues belter from Brazil, Rosa Maria has been a star since the mid-1960's.
Her musical-theater credits include lead roles in the Brazilian productions of "Hair" and "Nunsense." Her Ballroom show, which is part of the club's second annual Brazilian season, features songs by a range of Brazilian songwriters, including Ivan Lins and Caetano Veloso, augmented with English-language versions of 1960's hits like "Respect" and "California Dreamin'." The high-spirited singer is more comfortable performing in Portuguese than in English.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11:15; there is a $15 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.
Sounds of India
Steve Gorn and David Trasoff with Kinnar Kumar Seen, Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street, Manhattan, (212) 545-7536.
Steve Gorn and David Trasoff are among the few Americans who have achieved recognition for their performances of classical Indian music.
Mr.
Gorn plays the bansuri, a bamboo flute that is capable of a three-octave range, and Mr.
Trasoff the sarod, a 25-string lute known for its lyrical beauty and rhythmic intensity.
Each artist will be accompanied on the tabla by Kinnar Kumar Seen.
Show time is tonight at 8; tickets are $12.


Continental Plan to End Bankruptcy
Continental Airlines Holdings Inc. filed a bankruptcy reorganization plan yesterday in which its major unsecured creditors agreed to reduce the carrier's debt and interest costs sharply.
In return, the creditors would get stock, making them owners of the airline.
If the plan is approved by the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Wilmington, Del., analysts say, it will greatly help the company survive the current slump and fare cutting in the airline business and enable it to become profitable in a recovery.


Dow Loses 2 but Broader Market Holds Up
Stocks were mixed again yesterday in heavy and choppy trading as blue-chip issues retreated a bit but with more records set in the broader market.
The Dow Jones industrial average ended at 3,255.59, down 2.01 points.
Some investors stayed out of the market ahead of today's unemployment report, while others shifted their money from large-capitalization stocks to secondary issues, traders said.


Falling Tax Would Lift All Yachts
The nation's luxury-boat builders, many clinging to their businesses after two years of plunging sales, finally got some good news last week.
President Bush, in his budget proposals, asked Congress to repeal the 10 percent luxury tax on yachts priced at more than $100,000 (and also on private planes that cost more than $250,000).
The repeal, which Congress is likely to approve, would be retroactive to Feb. 1.


Angry Protests Follow Killing In Brooklyn
A 38-year-old Hasidic woman was found stabbed to death in her Crown Heights home yesterday afternoon, setting off a protest for greater police protection that escalated into rock- and bottle-throwing last night between Hasidim and blacks and Hispanic residents of the racially troubled Brooklyn neighborhood.
The woman, Phyllis Lapine, was stabbed more than 30 times, mostly in the chest, by an intruder who surprised her when she returned home carrying bags of groceries, the police said.


Pippen to Replace Bird
SCOTTIE PIPPEN of the Chicago Bulls will start in place of Boston's injured LARRY BIRD in Sunday's National Basketball Association All-Star Game, Eastern Conference Coach PHIL JACKSON said yesterday.
Bird was voted to the starting lineup but can't play because of a back injury.
NBA Commissioner DAVID STERN named Washington guard MICHAEL ADAMS to fill Bird's roster spot, but league rules allow All-Star coaches to choose a new starter.


Extension Asked on Queens Hospital Pact
New York City officials have asked Long Island Jewish Hospital to extend its affiliation agreement with Queens Hospital Center, warning that there is not enough time to prepare for the loss of 365 doctors when the contract expires June 30.
Dr.
James R. Dumpson, president of the Health and Hospitals Corporation, which runs the city's 11 municipal hospitals, said yesterday that even if a successor for Long Island Jewish is found immediately there is not enough time to put a new system in place.


Finance Board Questions Payment to Dinkins Fund
New York City election officials said yesterday that they would consider $50,000 wired to Mayor David N. Dinkins's re-election campaign to be an illegal contribution unless the campaign can identify its source and prove that the money was meant specifically to pay back funds taken by the its former treasurer.
Mayor Dinkins and his top campaign officials said yesterday that they still did not know who had put up the funds on behalf of Arnold I. Biegen, the former campaign finance director who is accused of stealing more than $158,000 from the campaign last summer and fall.


Review/Theater; Strindberg's Vengeance And a Dance Of Debt
Jealousy and mistrust surround the seaside resort that is the setting for Strindberg's "Creditors," as the play's characters damage one another with a diabolical fury.
As Carey Perloff's taut production at the CSC Theater reminds one, the play is a tragi-comedy.
Written in 1888, the same year as "Miss Julie," "Creditors" derives from the author's early naturalistic phase.
But beneath the tangible surface are symbolic undercurrents about diseased marriage and the distortions of various creative acts.
Two of the three characters are artists: a painter turned sculptor and his wife, who is a writer.
The third, mysterious figure is an artist with words, which he uses to intrude into the couple's relationship.
When the wife is away, this stranger (Zach Grenier) insinuates himself and becomes the husband's first friend outside of his marriage.
Then he tortures him into self-doubt about his role as artist and husband.


Senate Votes to Simplify Nuclear-Plant Licensing
The Senate voted today to streamline licensing procedures for new nuclear power plants, approving a measure meant to help the flagging nuclear industry.
The amendment to the energy bill would end the current system by which the Nuclear Regulatory Commission separately licenses construction and then operation of plants and replace it with a single review procedure.
Backers of the measure said it could reduce regulatory delays by up to 10 years, although its prospects in the House remain highly uncertain.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Better-than-expected January sales were reported by the nation's largest store chains, but the results stood out against extremely low sales a year earlier.  [ D1. ]
Treasury Secretary Brady all but abandoned the Administration's recommendations to overhaul the banking system by throwing his support behind a more modest approach.  [ D1. ]


One Day to Albertville; Killy Is Big Star of Downsized Rehearsal
In the inky blackness of the Alpine night, 15,000 of Jean-Claude Killy's friends roared their appreciation tonight for their Olympics.
Oh, sure, it hasn't actually started yet. But that was just a formality.
Killy, the man from nearby Val d'Isere, is the hero hereabouts.
He won the three men's Alpine gold medals in the 1968 Olympics at Grenoble, and was the mastermind behind bringing the Winter Games to Albertville.
He serves as the co-chairman of the organizing committee.


U.S. NAMES ENVOYS TO FIVE REPUBLICS
The Bush Administration has selected candidates to be United States ambassadors to five of the newly independent republics of the former Soviet Union.
The State Department has been scrambling to establish diplomatic relations with the 11 republics that emerged, along with Russia, from the final collapse of the Soviet Union in December.
Some of the new capitals had even been off limits to American officials when they were part of the Soviet Union.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Wednesday about John Sununu's plan to appear on the CNN program "Crossfire" misidentified Michael Kinsley.
He is a senior editor of The New Republic.


For Children
Plays for children, including shows with child actors, are in abundance this month.
"Cinderella," a musical with adult actors presented by the Riverside Shakespeare Company, gives youngsters a chance to witness an English panto at work.
Another production, "Runaway," is performed by children who have been enrolled in the City Lights Theater Company in New York City.
Here is a look at five musicals in Manhattan for families.  'Cinderella'
Playhouse 91  316 East 91st Street  (212) 369-BARD  Recommended ages: 7 and up  Through March 8


Yanji Journal; In China, the Koreans Shine ('It's Our Custom')
A glint of enthusiastic agreement filled Shen Sheng zhu's eyes when a visitor suggested that Koreans in China, unlike many ethnic minorities here, seem to have plenty of self-confidence.
"That's right," said Mr.
Shen, a businessman in this Korean nook in the northeast of China.
"I'm a Korean, and I figure that the Koreans are rather smart and industrious. We're also quite capable and very hygienic. And very polite."


On My Mind; The California Story
Somewhere in this state, somewhere between the Mexican and Canadian borders, there must be Californians so interested in how the New Hampshire primary will go that it will influence their own thinking or voting.
There must be.
The press, TV and politicians keep hammering it into our heads that New Hampshire voting is hugely important and will affect the nation, so pay paralyzed attention.


Leo C. Maitland, 64, Harlem Surgeon, Dies
Leo C. Maitland, a prominent surgeon in Harlem, died last Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 64 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Drinking From Sewers
A decade ago, New York City enjoyed the champagne of drinking water and had suffered only one serious water shortage in the previous 30 years.
Today, as New Yorkers face their fourth drought in 10 years, and the decline in water quality is depriving us of full use of our upstate reservoirs, stringent steps are needed to assure safe and bountiful water for city residents and to avoid financial ruin.
With the city's demand for water approaching the limits of supply, the critical relationship between water quality and quantity must be examined.
Consider the following:


Commerce Nominee Lists Some Conflicts of Interest
Barbara H. Franklin, President Bush's nominee to become Commerce Secretary, announced today at her Senate confirmation hearing that a conflict of interest would prevent her from overseeing policies on auto and aircraft parts and domestic insurance.
Ms.
Franklin said in a statement before the Commerce Committee hearing began that she would recuse herself from decisions on the auto and aircraft parts industries because her husband's family business, the Barnes Group, is a manufacturer of car and aircraft parts.
Ms.
Franklin's husband, Wallace Barnes, also serves on the board of the Aetna Life and Casualty Company and holds stock in it, forcing the recusal on domestic insurance issues.
An Important Issue
Imports of car parts from Japan rank among the nation's most controversial trade issues in the wake of the President's trip last month to Japan, and represent one of the few trade policies over which the Commerce Department has not lost its leading role to the Office of the United States Trade Representative.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about an agreement among House Democrats to press for a middle-class tax cut misidentified the home state of Representative Robert T. Matsui.
It is California.


METRO DIGEST
PREYING ON THE DESPERATE
Fueled by a lingering recession that has made credit tight and people desperate, consumer-protection agencies throughout the New York metropolitan area say they have been inundated with complaints about schemes that target individuals stretched to the financial limit.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  HOMELESS DISPUTE AT AIRPORT HOTEL
As New York City struggles toward a better way of sheltering the homeless, a failed tourist hotel hard by the runways of Kennedy International Airport is at the center of a dispute that symbolizes at once the failures of past policy and how difficult it is to overcome them.
A1.
DIVISION, NOT CONSENSUS
The commission that Mayor Dinkins appointed to help relieve pressure on his administration and build political consensus for dealing with the daunting problem of the homeless has instead wound up putting highly public pressure on the Mayor and dividing his own advisers.
News analysis, B2.
T.A.
MONITORING CRITICIZED
The Transit Authority routinely failed to administer drug and alcohol tests to employees after they were involved in subway collisions, derailments or other questionable incidents in the 20 months before last August's fatal subway crash, according to a new report.
B3.
GOTTI AND JUDGE BOTH ANGRY
Angry at a newspaper headline, Judge I. Leo Glasser threatened to move the trial of John Gotti out of New York City.
Mr.
Gotti responded by calling the judge and prosecutor names.
B3.
SUBWAY ARTIST TRIUMPHANT
It took a long letter from her lawyer, an appeal to the First Amendment, countless conversations among countless lawyers and a three-page agreement with 10 detailed conditions, but Jenny Marketou came out on top.
She finally got her seven large photographs of Greek-Americans reinstalled on the walls of a subway station in Jamaica, Queens.
B3.
THAT MYSTERIOUS $50,000
New York City election officials said that they would consider $50,000 wired to Mayor Dinkins's re-election campaign to be an illegal contribution unless the campaign identifies its source and prove that the money was meant specifically to pay back funds taken by the campaign's former treasurer.
B4.
REGION  POINT, COUNTERPOINT
A captain in the Teaneck Police Department contradicted a significant detail in an officer's testimony about the fatal shooting of a black teen-ager as two white officers chased him on April 10, 1990.
B5.
SHUFFLING THE CARDS IN HARTFORD
Governor Weicker succeeded last year in overhauling Connecticut's revenue system and imposing an income tax by forging a coalition of liberal Democrats and Republicans.
This year, in seeking to overhaul the spending system, Mr.
Weicker has shuffled the political cards: new issue, new allies, new coalition.
B5.
POLICE COMMISSIONER RESIGNS
Three days after a bitter confrontation with county legislators, the Suffolk County Police Commissioner submitted his resignation in a letter that advised the County Executive, "Don't lose your sense of humor." B5.
Neediest Cases B4  Our Towns B5


Gaining the World and Losing the Soul
The Goat once said, "For every Michael Jordan, there's an Earl Manigault. I didn't hurt anybody but myself."
Michael Jordan, emperor of the air, lost a night's pay ($40,000) this week after being suspended and fined ($5,000) for bumping a referee.
Then he flew in his private jet to Orlando, Fla., site of the National Basketball Association's All-Star Game, the hottest ticket for the rap stars and New Jack drug dealers whose style informs the sport.


Rethinking Foreign Affairs: Are They Still a U.S. Affair?
When the editors of Foreign Affairs magazine talk about the foreign policy article they would most like to publish today, they dream of "X."
That was the pseudonym George F. Kennan used for his classic Foreign Affairs article published in July 1947.
In one word, it set the American foreign policy agenda for the next four decades, through the cold war.
The word was containment.


Restaurants
It's a paradigm of a little Greenwich Village Italian restaurant around the corner.
With a step-down dining room, a snug bar near the entrance, pine-green walls and neighborly tables, the Grand Ticino looks like the kind of place where you would be tempted to open a house account.
That is, if the food lived up to the image.
The Grand Ticino is owned by the Bitici brothers -- Sergio, Michael, John and Joseph -- who also operate Minetta Tavern (113 Macdougal Street in the Village) and Chelsea Trattoria Italiana (Eighth Avenue near 16th Street), and until it folded last year, they also ran Toscana (on East 54th Street).
The menu at the Grand Ticino echoes that of Chelsea Trattoria Italiana, that is, traditional, garlic-suffused Northern fare dispensed in homey portions.


House Reaches Compromise On Steam Locomotive Park
The House Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs has voted to raise the cap on development costs by $14 million on a national park memorial to the bygone days of the steam locomotive.
Initial plans for the park, the Steamtown National Historic Site, in Scranton, Pa., had called for $73 million in spending.
But the decision this week, to spending to $67 million, was called an acceptable compromise by both sides.


Sports of The Times; The Alps' 55-Seat Bobsled
BONJOUR.
My name is Jean-Marie and I am your Olympic guide on this bus tour of the venues for the XVI Winter Games that open tomorrow here in the Savoy.
For you Americans, that's pronounced Sav-wa, as in sav-wa-fare.
Here in Albertville where you don't pronounce the T, you can see the stadium where tomorrow's opening ceremony will be held, as well as the rink for figure skating and the outdoor oval for speed skating.
But before the driver turns onto the main road to the mountain venues, I must inform you of the event that is new to these Winter Olympics: the 55-seat bobsled.


Yeltsin, Annoyed at Delay, Urgently Asks for Aid
Apparently disappointed over the results of his visit to the United States last week, President Boris N. Yeltsin issued an urgent new appeal for Western aid today and warned that dictatorship could return to Russia if his economic program collapses.
"I have faith in these reforms; they are irreversible," he said during a three-day state visit to France.
"But if they fail, I can already feel the breath of the red shirts and brown shirts on our necks."


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon.
Closing This Weekend
"DER FLIEGENDE HOLLANDER," by Wagner, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance of the season tonight at 8.
Tickets: $20 to $110.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
"ELLEN DRISCOLL: THE LOOPHOLE OF RETREAT," an installation inspired by the story of Harriet Jacobs, a fugitive slave from North Carolina in the 1830's, at the Whitney Museum of American Art at Philip Morris, 120 Park Avenue, at 42d Street, Manhattan.
Through tomorrow.
Today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 878-2453.
"FIDELIO," by Beethoven, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance of the season tomorrow at 1:30 P.M.
Sold out.
Information on returns and standing room: (212) 362-6000.
HELEN FRANKENTHALER, a display of 34 Color Field prints by the Abstract Expressionist from the period 1964 to 1991, at Associated American Artists, 20 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
Through tomorrow.
Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 399-5510.
"BELLA, BELLE OF BYELORUSSIA," a satirical comedy about life in the Soviet Union in 1989, by Jeffrey Essmann and directed by Christopher Ashley, at the WPA Theater, 519 West 23d Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $26.
Information: (212) 206-0523.
"DENNIS OPPENHEIM: AND THE MIND GREW FINGERS," a survey of the artist's work from 1967 to 1991, at the P.S. 1 Museum, 46-01 21st Street, Long Island City, Queens.
Through Sunday.
Today through Sunday, from noon to 6 P.M.
Admission: $2.
Information: (718) 784-2084.
"KAFKA: FATHER AND SON," a drama by Mark Rozovsky based on Franz Kafka's letters to his father, at La Mama, 74 East Fourth Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Today through Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12.
Information: (212) 475-7710.
"MAN, WOMAN, DINOSAUR," a drama by Regina M. Porter about a man who sells handmade dinosaurs, at Playwrights Horizons Studio, 416 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $5.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
NIKOLAIS AND MURRAY LOUIS DANCE, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
TWYLA THARP AND DANCERS, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $40.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
Closing Next Weekend
"TURANDOT," by Puccini.
Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance of the season, next Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $110.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
"DOCUMENTS OF DISSENT," the New York Public Library, Edith Barnes Salomon Room, Fifth Avenue and 42d Street, Manhattan.
An exhibition of books, posters and other items relating to censorship in the United States, Europe and Asia.
Through Feb. 15.
Tuesday and Wednesday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 221-7676.
DAVID STALLER, Oak Room, Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Mr.
Staller will sing songs by Noel Coward and Cole Porter.
Through Feb. 15.
Tuesday through Thursday, 9:30 P.M.; Friday through Sunday, 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.
There is a $25 cover, plus a $10 minimum.
Information: (212) 840-6800.
TWO PHOTOGRAPHY EXHIBITIONS, at International Center of Photography 1133 Avenue of the Americas, at 43d Street, Manhattan.
"The Legacy of W. Eugene Smith: 12 Photographers in the Humanistic Tradition" and "10,000 Eyes: American Society of Magazine Photographers' Celebration of the 150th Anniversary of Photography." Through Feb. 15.
Tuesday, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $3.50 ($2 for students and the elderly; $1 for those under 12).
Information: (212) 768-4680.
"THE UTOPIAN DREAM: PHOTOGRAPHY IN SOVIET RUSSIA, 1918-1939," Miller Gallery, 138 Spring Street, SoHo.
More than 40 vintage works by Soviet photographers.
Through Feb. 15.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 226-1220.
"LA INDIRECTA DIRECTA: TWO DECADES OF CHICANO AND PUERTO RICAN FILM AND VIDEO," Whitney Museum of American Art, Madison Avenue at 75th Street, Manhattan.
Through Feb. 16.
Last screening, Feb. 16 at 2 P.M.
Screenings are free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-0537.
"STUART DAVIS: AN AMERICAN PAINTER," Metropolitan Museum of Art.
An exhibition of his paintings.
Through Feb. 16.
Friday and Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Sunday and Tuesday through Thursday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.; closed Monday.
Admission: $6 ($3 for students and the elderly; free under age 12).
Information: (212) 879-5500 or 535-7710.
"WALT DISNEY'S WORLD ON ICE," Radio City Music Hall, 50th Street and Avenue of the Americas, Manhattan.
Last performances on Feb. 16 at 11 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $19.50.
Information: (212) 307-7171.


Digital Equipment Cuts PC Prices
The Digital Equipment Corporation slashed prices on its personal computers, matching cuts by Apple Computer and Dell Computer earlier in the week.
Digital, better known as a maker of big computer systems, said United States prices on its personal computers and related products would fall between 5 and 35 percent.


Steinbrenner 'Anxious' On Reinstatement Bid
Impatient about returning to baseball and stymied in his attempts to engineer the dropping of two lawsuits that would help open the door to his reinstatement, George Steinbrenner said Wednesday night that he would like to see his tangled situation solved soon so he can return to the Yankees.
Hours before he departed for Albertville, France, yesterday to attend the Winter Olympics, the owner of the Yankees conceded he was bothered by how long the lawsuits against baseball have lingered as obstacles to his possible return as managing general partner.
Commissioner Fay Vincent has said he would not negotiate with Steinbrenner about reinstatement until both lawsuits disappeared.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finance; The Harkin Family Climbs the Economic Ladder
If Senator Tom Harkin's populist oratory has been driven by the hardships he knew growing up here as a coal miner's son, so has his push for his own piece of the American pie.
Neighbors in this tiny town southwest of Des Moines tell of a boy who worked long hours baling hay to help his family make ends meet.
Now, by his own account, the Senator has earned a slice of the pie, and he seems determined to enjoy it.


5 People Are Killed in a Car-Bomb Attack in Madrid


Review/Art; Sensual Sculpture of Gaston Lachaise
"In Paris I met a young American person who immediately became the primary inspiration which awakened my vision and the leading influence that had directed my forces," reminisced the French-born sculptor Gaston Lachaise in 1928.
"Throughout my career as an artist, I refer to this person by the word 'Woman.' "
She was Isabel Nagle of Boston.
The 20-year-old Lachaise encountered her on a spring day in 1902 walking along the banks of the Seine, and fell so deeply in love that he followed her across the Atlantic and bided his time until 1917, when she finally divorced her husband and married him.
Lachaise gave up a promising career in Paris, then the indisputable center of the art world, for a life in the relative cultural backwater that was New York during the early years of this century.
In turn, he gained for himself a subject on which to base some of the most original American sculptures of this century.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Slogans, Stories and Strategy: The TV Campaign
For Bob Kerrey, politics is "a cause, not a career." (Subtext: He is not another blue suit from inside the Capital Beltway, even if he did take the Senate raise.)
Tom Harkin believes that "if you try to be all things to all people, you're nothing to anybody." (Subtext: He might sound awfully liberal, but he will never be accused of waffling -- like, oh, say, Bill Clinton.)


Review/Film; Dominating Teuton Meets Addled Island Toy Boy
"The Lunatic" is a contemporary Jamaican folk tale about the life and loves of Aloysius (Paul Campbell), a tall, lanky, irrepressibly good-humored young black man who is one of nature's own.
Aloysius chats up cows and receives sage advice from the ancient tree under which he sleeps.
The way to good health, the tree tells him, is through photosynthesis.
Aloysius doesn't work, but makes a few pennies here and there doing odd jobs for the tourists.


Trying to Turn Around the Clark Bar
Nine months ago, the Clark candy bar, a rich concoction of peanut butter, taffy and milk chocolate, seemed doomed.
A favorite in the Midwest and parts of the East, the Clark bar never had a national presence and its owner wanted to close its factory here.
That's when Michael P. Carlow, a 40-year-old Pittsburgh businessman who has made money in steel, glass, cement and the turnaround of Iron City beer, bought the D. L. Clark Company from Leaf Inc., the Chicago candy conglomerate.
Now, not only is the Clark bar still being produced and packaged in its eye-catching red-and-blue wrapper, there are some early signs that Mr.
Carlow may succeed where a candy giant stumbled.


From Ashes, an Acting Career and a Role on 'Roc'
By the time he was approaching the age of 40, Carl Gordon's life was a shambles.
His second marriage had just broken up, he had a dead-end job in a Brooklyn department store and his friends in Bedford-Stuyvesant were spending their time talking about their lost youth and what they should have done with their lives.
"One night I got so depressed I actually began to cry," Mr.
Gordon said.
"At that moment, some spirit inside of me said, 'Try acting.' "


3 Suspended For Clean Tests
Three of Germany's top track stars, including the double world sprint champion, Katrin Krabbe, were suspended from competition on suspicion of drug use yesterday, not because they tested positive for banned substances but because they did not.
In a strange twist, the athletes were suspended pending further investigation by German track authorities after chemical analyses of urine samples provided by the three women last month found no trace of illicit substances but indicated such a strikingly similar chemical composition as to suggest that the samples had come from the same person.


11 Reported Killed in Unrest in Algeria
Violent confrontations between fundamentalists and soldiers spread across the country today.
At least 11 people were reported killed in a significant escalation of a monthlong confrontation between the new military-backed Government and the Muslim fundamentalist opposition.
Riots broke out in Algiers today shortly after the noon prayers ended, with gunfire echoing throughout the city as security forces tried to disperse crowds in a handful of neighborhoods that are considered strongholds of the Islamic Salvation Front.
The police also used water cannons and tear gas in an attempt to squash the protest.


No Clues in Crash of Military Plane in Indiana


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; MTV Puts the Campaign on Fast Forward
The latest forum for the Presidential candidates includes rock, rap, reggae, fast forwards, slow motions and electronic special effects.
MTV has hit the campaign trail, mixing interviews and reports on the candidates into its 24 hours of music programming tailored to an audience of 25 million, mostly 18 to 24 years old.


Once Again, New York Shows Its Better Side
To the Editor:
People always knock New York but I have only just come back to live here and have already had an experience that shows it at its best.


Japan's Unlikely Bidder for U.S. Pastime
Perhaps the most striking fact about Hiroshi Yamauchi, the president of the Nintendo Company Ltd., is that he cannot bear to play video games.
"I really don't understand them," he said.
The second most striking fact about Mr.
Yamauchi, the first Japanese to bid for a controlling interest in an American major league baseball team, is that he has lived for 64 years in a nation obsessed with baseball and has never once gone to a game.
"Let me put it this way," Mr.
Yamauchi said the other day in a 90-minute conversation in his office here, "Baseball, well, baseball has never really interested me." In an Unlikely Position
Such studied detachment, friends say, is characteristic of a man who is Japan's most unlikely high-tech success story, as well as an unlikely figure to be at the center of an international dispute over baseball ownership.


Chatal Khaya Journal; Crimean Tatars, Exiled by Stalin, Return Home
On a cold and windy hill above the Black Sea resort of Yalta, about 35 families of Crimean Tatars are building this village with their own hands, returning to the land from which Stalin banished them nearly half a century ago.
In December the Government of Ukraine officially recognized the village, begun in 1990 by squatters under the Tatar name meaning "cleft hill." Ukraine's move ratified the Tatars' right to return from exile, a return for which the members of this Islamic minority had long struggled.
Protests Began in 1960's
In 1944, after the liberation of the Crimean Peninsula from Nazi control, Stalin accused the Tatars of collaboration with the German occupation forces and ordered all Tatars, estimated then to number 350,000, expelled to Central Asia, mainly to Uzbekistan.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire; Running for President, Kerrey Charts a Path of His Own
Facing a crowd of polite but impassive high school students, Senator Bob Kerrey was talking about the importance of knowing right from wrong.
To demonstrate his point, he offered the story of a fat young man named Thompson:
The year is 1967, and Mr.
Kerrey and a group of his friends have just completed underwater training for one of the Navy's elite units, the SEALs.
As they are about to be inducted into the unit and head for Vietnam, the commander offers the young men a last chance to change their minds.
Out of the group of 150, only one, Thompson, stands up and says that he wants out.


Uncle Sam Says 'Uncle' on Haiti
The criminal gang that now runs Haiti is all but dancing in the streets this weekend, celebrating two big signals that Washington is no longer pressing for a quick return to democratic rule.
By forcing Haitian refugees to return home, and then unilaterally relaxing a regional economic embargo, the Bush Administration has given Haiti's new rulers the impression that Washington concedes their hold on power.


Ex-Biogen Executive Heads T Cell Sciences
Alan W. Tuck, who resigned four months ago as vice president in charge of marketing and business development for Biogen Inc., did not have to go far to find a biotech company where he could run his own show.
T Cell Sciences Inc., which appointed Mr.
Tuck, 43 years old, as president and chief executive yesterday, is based in Cambridge, Mass., just half a mile away from Biogen.
"There's nothing out there as exciting as biotechnology," said Mr.
Tuck, who spent 13 years with the Cummins Engine Company and three more as a consultant with Bain &amp; Company before joining Biogen in 1987.
"There's no question that it will revolutionize medicine. The question is who's going to do it."


AN UNEASY CALM IN CROWN HEIGHTS
The day after the slaying of a Hasidic woman sent hundreds of Jewish demonstrators on a bitter protest march through the streets of Crown Heights, city officials, black and Jewish community leaders and the police tried yesterday to prevent the death from escalating into the kind of racial confrontation that racked the neighborhood last summer.
The police said they had no suspects in the killing and no indication that there was any racial element involved.
And while the streets in the frayed neighborhood stayed calm through early morning today, it was clear that racial tension still simmered beneath the surface of the community.


Donors Find Many Reasons To Remember the Neediest
Yesterday's mail to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund brought donations totaling $9,193.12, and letters attached to those gifts detailed almost as many reasons for giving.
"This donation is made in memory of Michelle Julien, 20 years old, who was tragically killed in a car accident on Jan. 25," explained a note attached to an anonymous donation of $200.
"This young girl had a loving and generous spirit, as well as a smile and a kind word for everyone. She was a talented writer and a good friend."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton the Front-Runner Is Also the Prey as the First Primary Nears
Sensing both that Gov.
Bill Clinton is vulnerable and that he remains the leader, his opponents are stepping up their attacks on him as the New Hampshire Presidential primary approaches.
"They're afraid that if he wins here he'll roll through the South in the March primaries there," said a senior Democratic Party official, who spoke on condition that he not be identified.
"So they figure if they're going to get him, now's the moment."


Judge Cites Possible Fraud in Tobacco Research
The tobacco industry's chief research arm for 40 years described its own mission as a "front" and a "shield" against potentially harmful Congressional hearings, lawsuits or scientific research about the health risks of smoking, according to a ruling by a Federal judge here who publicly quoted secret industry memorandums for the first time.
The judge, H. Lee Sarokin of Federal District Court, said on Thursday that a jury might reasonably assume that the industry's decades-old vow to disclose its research findings were "nothing but a public-relations ploy -- a fraud -- to deflect the growing evidence against the industry, to encourage smokers to continue and nonsmokers to begin, and to reassure the public that adverse information would be disclosed."


A No-Frills Airline Has Few Complaints
There's a simple way to tell when you're on a dinner flight on Southwest Airlines: it's the one that serves peanut-butter crackers.
The Dallas-based airline is known for its no-frills service.
The only food served on flights longer than 90 minutes are crackers or cookies; passengers on shorter flights get peanuts.
Beverages are served, of course, but there are other things Southwest does not do: assign seats or exchange baggage with other airlines.


Sports of The Times; Discarding High-Heeled Sneakers
Here it is, three months later, and Magic Johnson continues to dominate headlines.
Since Johnson announced his retirement from professional basketball on Nov. 7, the progression of angles has gone from safe sex to no sex, to how he contracted H.I.V., to whether he was straight or gay.
Now it's whether he should sit or play in the National Basketball Association All-Star Game.


An Arrest Divides the Generations
Outside an unassuming storefront in the hamlet of South Fallsburg hangs the traditional shingle for the law offices of "Joel M. Proyect, Esq." Several miles away, at the foot of a long twisting driveway, there is another sign, a weathered plank with white letters that reads "L'Avocat Sauvage." It means the wild lawyer.
This week, Mr. Proyect's wild side caught up with him.


Warring Somalia Factions Agree to Meet at U.N.
In a major effort to end the 10-week-old fighting in the Somali capital of Mogadishu, a senior United Nations official said here today that both sides in the conflict had agreed to attend a meeting in New York next Wednesday.
The official, Under Secretary General James O. C. Jonah, said an attempt would be made at the meeting to reach a cease-fire.
The United Nations estimates that more than 20,000 people, most of them women and children, have been killed or wounded in the battle for control of Mogadishu.


Every Painting Restoration Is Different
To the Editor:
As a professional paintings conservator for more than 30 years and a former chief conservator of the Brooklyn Museum, I must tell readers that "Go Gentle on Giving That Special Ancestor a Face Lift" (Consumer's World page, Jan. 11) may confuse more than it helps.


Review/Jazz; A Choir of Saxophones
The saxophonist Odean Pope brought a saxophone choir and a lot of expectations into the Knitting Factory on Sunday night.
Mr.
Pope has ambitions: the idea of convening nine saxophonists and a rhythm section not only is economically risky but also implies a type of intellectual reach that is rarely encountered at the club level.
And Mr.
Pope, who earned his reputation as a member of the hard-blowing Max Roach Quartet and as the author of expansive, eight-cylindered improvisations, has made a reputation as a progressive.
But something has either happened to the notion of progress or to Mr.
Pope's music; at least orchestrally, his work sometimes sank into the conventional, as if he'd been writing for a television movie instead of the Knitting Factory.
And neither he nor his other soloists could quite dispel the lethargy of the context.


Jewish Couple Is Beaten In Brooklyn Bias Incident
Shortly after hundreds of Hasidic protesters marched through the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, two black men beat and robbed a Jewish couple in the area early yesterday morning, the police said.
Because the men used ethnic slurs, the police classified the crime as a bias incident, said Lieut.
Raymond O'Donnell, a police spokesman.
Lieut.
Daniel E. Flynn of the 71st Precinct said he did not think the attack was related to the protest.


Gurkhas Can Solve The U.N.'s Problem
The idea of a U.N. standing force to intervene where fighting threatens isn't new.
It was included in the Charter in 1945 but was never carried out because of the cold war.
Now it is being cautiously revived but along the old lines of traditional military contributions from members.
The idea is still good, but today's circumstances show that a new approach is needed.
President Francois Mitterrand of France has offered to send 1,000 men on 48 hours' notice and 1,000 more with a week's notice.
That's helpful, but it's a piecemeal approach.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about Kurds in Iraq referred to them incorrectly.
The Kurds are not a Turkic ethnic group.


The Boss of Something
GEORGE STEINBRENNER, still on the outside looking in as far as running the Yankees goes, will be on the inside watching as the owner of New York's new entry in the Arena Football League, the league announced yesterday.
It will be one of two new franchises that will join the indoor league in 1993. (AP)


Miyazawa's Words
Following is the Japanese Foreign Ministry's translation of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa's full remarks in Parliament on Feb. 3 concerning the U.S. work ethic; they were made in response to a member's comments.
Portions of the Prime Minister's remarks, as reported, have been widely seen as America-bashing.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.93
4.00
6.27
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.72
3.80
5.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.75
3.86
5.89
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.76
6.81
7.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.75
7.76
7.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.84
8.88
9.17
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.74
6.74
7.18
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


France and Russia Sign a Cooperation Treaty


Let the Flames Begin: It's Time for the Torch
The quadrennial secret of the Winter Olympics' opening ceremony always is: Who will light the flame?
But Saturday's ceremonies may be the most theatrical of all the Olympics and so even the well-connected French sporting newspaper, L'Equipe, professed ignorance today of who that torchbearer will be.


Benjamin Shalleck Is Dead at 95; A Long-Serving Municipal Judge
Benjamin Shalleck, whose 38 years on the bench made him one of New York City's longest-serving judges, died Wednesday at the Palm Beach Gardens Medical Center in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
He was 95 years old and lived in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He died after suffering a stroke, his family said.


Classical Music in Review
Jupiter Symphony
Alice Tully Hall


All Aboard for Influence, Donations and Votes
Somewhere just outside Baltimore, Priscilla Anderson, a freshman Assemblywoman, squeezed and pushed her way through a knot of people in a smoke-filled railroad car and opened the door to the next car.
"Is this the last car?" the nearly exhausted Ms.
Anderson exhausted.
To her delight, it was.


Hostage Release Merits Looking Into
To the Editor:
Senator Mitch McConnell, by twice invoking my name in "Should Congress Investigate the 'October Surprise'?" (Op-Ed, Jan. 15), in which he opposes a probe of asserted Republican meddling in the 1980 hostage negotiations, gives the misleading impression that I support his position.


Please Don't Squeeze the Bar Code, Sir
President Bush, something of a stranger at the local A.&amp;P., was recently amazed by a trade-show exhibit of modern supermarket technology, with its laser scanners and electronically identifiable soup cans.
But the latest wrinkle in grocery buying might positively baffle the Consumer in Chief: shopperless supermarkets.
A new kind of telephone system, called Scanfone, lets harried shoppers buy groceries at home from a catalogue and have the purchases delivered at convenient times.
The catalogue lists the products and gives their bar codes, the identification stripes that most packaged goods now carry.
The phone has a light pen that reads the codes.


Turkey Makes Human Rights Progress
To the Editor:
"Torturing Children in Turkey" by Lois Whitman (Op-Ed, Jan. 3) harshly criticizes Turkey's human rights record.
Those who know Turkey must be appalled by its preconceptions and grave errors.


Digital Sets Plan to Build Its Own PC's
In an effort to increase its profit margins in the highly competitive personal computer market, the Digital Equipment Corporation is going to start building its own personal computers, possibly at manufacturing plants in the United States.
The move represents an abrupt turnabout from its strategy of selling only PC's manufactured by Tandy, Intel and Olivetti.
The move was a surprise to analysts because Digital had won praise for its resale strategy.
In addition, The company had built various PC's that failed in the market over the last decade.
The main difference now is that the machine it plans to build is a low-price I.B.M. clone similar to what it has been buying from others.


Review/Dance; Monkey King's Mad, Mad World
New Yorkers have few chances to enjoy simple, broadly comic folk art like "The Monkey King," presented by the New Generation Drama Association of Taipei on Thursday night at the Taipei Theater, 1221 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street.
The company performs there in "The Legend of the White Snake" this afternoon and in "The Monkey King" tonight and tomorrow afternoon.
This retelling of stories associated with the rascally Monkey King, an ancient folk hero whose exploits are celebrated in Beijing Opera productions, was lavishly costumed and ingeniously staged by the association, founded in 1989 to promote younger performers' participation in Chinese opera and folk arts.


Today, Games Start; Tomorrow, They Speed Up
It is difficult, from a United States perspective, not to keep all sun-squinting eyes trained on A. J. Kitt, especially when he concludes an otherwise excellent morning downhill training run on his back and follows that by failing to finish a combined downhill practice session in the afternoon.
After all, the 1992 Winter Olympics begin Saturday, with three hockey games and gala opening ceremonies in Albertville.
But the competition begins in earnest on Sunday, with the men's downhill leading the way, so the questions began here today.


I.O.C. May Recognize Former Soviet Republics
Twelve republics of the former Soviet Union are likely to be able to field their own Olympic teams in Games beginning after Jan. 1, 1993, the president of the International Olympic Committee said today.
For the republics to qualify, the I.O.C. must first officially recognize the national Olympic committees of the republics, said the I.O.C. leader, Juan Antonio Samaranch.
This could happen as soon as early March, when Olympic officials are scheduled to meet representatives of the national Olympic committees in Lausanne, Switzerland.


G.M. Has Begun to Plan Staff Revamping
Robert C. Stempel, the chairman of the General Motors Corporation, acknowledged today that the nation's leading auto company was in the midst of planning an extensive reorganization of its white-collar work force in North America.
Mr.
Stempel declined to elaborate, but several G.M. executives attending the annual Chicago Auto Show said they thought details of the changes would be announced by midyear.
Mr.
Stempel's acknowledgment was prompted by speculation raised by articles in The Detroit Free Press and The Wall Street Journal.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Now Buchanan Is Doing More Than Attacking
As his campaign to embarrass President Bush in New Hampshire enters the final days, Patrick J. Buchanan is trying the tricky pirouette that challengers to an incumbent President must often perform -- turning from a protest candidate to one seen as having his own program for the nation.
In speeches and in new radio commercials broadcast this week, the conservative commentator moved beyond just criticizing the President to sketching out his own plans for reviving the economy.


GEORGIA HARVESTER IS FINED $1 MILLION IN ALIEN SMUGGLING
A local peach harvester was fined $1.1 million today by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the largest fine in the agency's history, in an action that showed both how tough and how porous the nation's landmark 1986 immigration reform law can be.
Immigration officials said four employees of the harvester, the Lane Packing Company, had smuggled thousands of aliens into the country over the last two years and had employed many of them, keeping them in conditions akin to bondage while the aliens worked to pay off the fees charged by the smugglers.


Elizabeth Sarcka, 98; Aided the Mentally Ill
Elizabeth Man Sarcka, a founder of Spring Lake Ranch in Vermont, one of the earliest halfway houses for the mentally ill, died on Sunday at Hampshire House, a community care home in East Montpelier, Vt.
She was 98 years old and lived much of her life in Long Island City and Richmond Hill, Queens.
She died of a stroke, her family said.


Investigation In Allegation of Gay Bias
The Justice Department is investigating allegations that a Federal prosecutor and two Internal Revenue Agents systematically and illegally singled out homosexuals for arrest on drug charges, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, Otto G. Obermaier, said in court yesterday.
The allegations are that over the period of a year, at least half a dozen gay people were the subjects of drug investigations solely because they were gay.
In an affidavit filed yesterday in United States District Court in Manhattan, a lawyer for one of the defendants, Bruce Mailman, said he had been told that Mr.
Mailman "was indicted because he was gay and that the Government was interested in penetrating the gay community."


Haitians March in Manhattan to Protest Forced Repatriation of Refugees


Patents; A Booth in Which Someone Can Smoke
With cigarette smoking banned in a growing number of offices, stores, public buildings and homes, three engineers near Albuquerque, N.M., have patented a "smoker's booth" that could become a nicotine addict's refuge in the future.
The new invention looks like a partly enclosed telephone booth, but it provides what amounts to an air screen that allows smokers to satisfy their cravings without bothering nonsmokers in the same room with malodorous fumes.


Benjamin Newman Lawyer, 70
Benjamin Newman, a real-estate lawyer in Manhattan, died on Monday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 70 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He died of a cerebral hemorrhage, his family said.
Mr.
Newman was born in the Bronx.
He was a graduate of City College and the New York University Law School.
During World War II he served five years in the South Pacific as a lieutenant in the Navy.


CUNY Inquiry Finds History of Problems
An investigation into the deadly crush at a celebrity basketball game at City College has found a history of poor supervision of student-run social events and has determined that the problems at the game were not "isolated or unique."
The investigation, by the City University of New York, the college's parent organization, found that in the six months before the game, three other student functions at City College were marred by overcrowding, assaults and in one case, a killing.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a letter Feb. 2 by Shaun Breidbart on bank lending misstated that banks charge such borrowers as Chrysler Financial interest rates less than 1 percent.
What was meant was the bank's profit margin is less than 1 percent.


BankAmerica Proposal Upsets Washington State
Expressing concern that a combination of the two largest banks in the West would hurt consumers, a legislative committee in Washington state passed a bill today aimed at blocking BankAmerica's acquisition of Security Pacific.
"We've got significant concerns about competition, and we're going to be part of the process instead of an observer," said Michael Heavey, a Democrat from West Seattle who is chairman of the House Commerce and Labor Committee, which passed the bill by an 11-to-0 vote.


Haitians Sent Back but Others Arrive
On side-by-side piers at the American naval station here, 200 Haitian boat people were put aboard one Coast Guard cutter for a trip home while 156 Haitians just rescued from the seas prepared to come ashore to the Guatanamo refugee camp.
Despite the repatriation program that began a week ago, the number of new arrivals continues to run neck and neck with the number of departures, at least for the moment.
They arrive looking poor, frightened and confused, and they leave looking resigned, anxious and still poor, clutching small parcels of new clothes and saying they have no idea what the future holds.


7.1% Rate for Jobless Unchanged
In a report undermining recent signs of economic revival, the Government said today that business payrolls shrank by 91,000 in January and that the unemployment rate remained steady at 7.1 percent only because of a surge in part-time jobs.
The report on labor market conditions was the first comprehensive gauge of economic performance in 1992 and, in an election year, the most politically sensitive of reports.
It caused disappointment among private analysts and was seized upon by Congressional Democrats to point up what they saw as Administration failings.


Beth Mooney Has Wedding
Beth Ann Mooney, a daughter of Mrs.
William S. Webster of Riverside, Conn., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Longcope, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas M. Longcope of Essex, Conn.
The Rev.
Catherine F. Garlid, a Congregational minister, officiated at Dingletown Community Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Longcope, 34 years old, is the education manager at Sports Illustrated for Kids magazine in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a master's degree in teaching from Columbia University.
Her father, the late Robert P. Mooney, was an executive vice president of General Reassurance Corporation, a reinsurance company in Greenwich.


Retire? Connors?
JIMMY CONNORS, ousted by WALLY MASUR in the second round of the Volvo/San Francisco tournament on Thursday night, says that at 39 he isn't ready to retire to the 35-and-over circuit yet.


Weicker Divides the Poor by Family Size
The welfare law proposed this week by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. makes sharp distinctions between poor single parents with children, who would by and large be protected, and the growing numbers of impoverished single men and women, many of whom might simply be thrown out.
Local officials and social services experts said that against the backdrop of welfare legislation being considered across the country, Mr.
Weicker's proposals are very much a hybrid -- one part social engineering, one part plain old penny-pinching.


Capitals Too Much for Rangers, Again
All good streaks must come to an end and two did just that for the Rangers tonight when the Washington Capitals thoroughly outplayed them and won, 6-2, at the Capital Centre.
The verdict ended New York's winning streak at five games and its undefeated streak at eight and it left the first-place Rangers just 6 points ahead of the Capitals in the run for first place in the Patrick Division.


Rose Hirschman, 87, A Real-Estate Lawyer
Rose Korn Hirschman, a real-estate lawyer and volunteer at the United Nations and other organizations, died Jan. 24 at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of liver failure, her family said.


Tyson, on Stand, Denies That He Raped Woman
Describing his 18-year-old accuser as a willing participant in a late-night sexual encounter, Mike Tyson today strongly denied raping her during the Miss Black America pageant last summer.
Taking the stand for the first time in his rape trial here, Mr.
Tyson answered questions for nearly 80 minutes from his lawyer about his background, his decision to come here last July and his interactions with his accuser, who was a contestant in the pageant.


Theodore Blume, 75, Violinist With Krupa
Theodore (Teddy) Blume, a violinist, died Tuesday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 75 years old.
He died of emphysema, said his son, Robert.


Keep Pan Am Sign as Memorial to Air Pioneer
To the Editor:
Within a few months, Pan Am signs could possibly be removed from the Pan American Airways Building in New York City.


Must the Mayor Leave? 2 Judges Offer 2 Answers
One state judge ordered Mayor Gerald McCann, who has been convicted of fraud and tax evasion, to vacate his office today, but another granted him a temporary reprieve.
Judge Sylvia Pressler of the Appellate Division of Superior Court stayed until Tuesday an order signed a few hours earlier by Judge Arthur N. D'Italia of the Law Division that had directed Mr.
McCann to clean out his office in City Hall by 4 P.M. today


Madness at Wannsee
To the Editor:
The villa where the masters of Nazi Germany made the horrible, grotesque decision to solve the "Jewish question" by killing all the Jews has been made a place of remembrance and is called Wannsee, after its district in Berlin (front page, Jan. 20).


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Cray Research Inc., Minneapolis, said the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology had ordered two Cray Y-MP supercomputer systems. *
Graham-Field Health Products Inc., Hauppauge, L.I., agreed to acquire Diamond Medical Equipment Corp. and National Health Care Equipment Corp.
The price is about $11.5 million and the assumption of certain liabilities.


Classical Music in Review
Boston Symphony Orchestra Carnegie Hall


Observer; Do It Yourself
Devastated by news that I am taking a three-week vacation which will leave them bereft of comfort and wisdom until March, hordes are standing outside my office at this very moment sobbing and pleading for me not to go.
"How," they ask, "are we to survive this deprivation?"
Such is the selfishness of the multitude.
Not one thinks of my own need to flee the calamity called February and frolic in the hibiscus while all Florida kowtows to my mighty credit cards.


Holmes Defeats Mercer by Decision
Life begins at 42.
It did for Larry Holmes tonight.
He outslicked Ray Mercer over 12 rounds to win a convincing unanimous decision at the Convention Center.


Heavy Security in Jerusalem


Sports of The Times; Discarding High-Heeled Sneakers
Here it is, three months later, and Magic Johnson continues to dominate headlines.
Since Johnson announced his retirement from professional basketball on Nov. 7, the progression of angles has gone from safe sex to no sex, to how he contracted H.I.V., to whether he was straight or gay.
Now it's whether he should sit or play in the National Basketball Association All-Star Game.


Iowa, Its Economy Healthy, Scarcely Misses Caucus Blitz
Just days before the Iowa caucuses, there are no Presidential candidates kissing pigs or courting farmers, no telephone banks digging for supporters and no crowds at the bars.
For months, all has been quiet during what is normally a quadrennial bonanza that brings worldwide attention and tens of millions of dollars to the Iowa economy.
But this year, one of the state's Senators, Tom Harkin, is running for the Democratic nomination, so his party's caucuses on Monday are likely to be no contest.
The Republican meetings will not even express Presidential preferences.
Still, while the state may be feeling a psychological loss, the change has not been the economic blow that many leaders feared.


O'Sullivan Captures 5th Wanamaker Title
Marcus O'Sullivan won the Wanamaker Mile for a fifth time; Mark Everett erased the oldest record at the meet, and Jackie Joyner-Kersee returned to competition with a long jump that was way out there.
Those were among the highlights last night of the Snickers Millrose Games, the first of two indoor track and field meets at Madison Square Garden this season.
Everett, a lanky 23-year-old from Gainesville, Fla., set a new standard for the Mel Sheppard 600-yard run, an event that goes back several decades at these games and one named after a pre-World War I Olympian.


Lemieux Fined $1,000
Pittsburgh Penguins center MARIO LEMIEUX was fined $1,000 by the N.H.L. on Friday for publicly criticizing officials after a 6-4 loss to Washington on Jan. 26.
Lemieux, who met Friday with N.H.L.
President JOHN ZIEGLER, had said referee RON HOGGARTH "just can't keep up with us. . . . He's so bad. . . . It's a disgrace to this game. As long as we have people like that, the game's not going to go anywhere." (AP)


Defenders Open 2d Round
Both America's Cup defense teams have taken advantage of 13 days off between cup selection series to improve the performance of their boats.
But in the case of the America 3 syndicate, they have replaced one yacht entirely.
Round-robin racing is scheduled to resume today between William Koch's America 3 team, with two cup yachts, and Team Dennis Conner, with its original cup design, Stars &amp; Stripes.
America 3 sailed its new boat for the first time Tuesday in San Diego.
The yacht, named America 3, replaces Jayhawk, 0-6 in the first round.
Koch's second boat is Defiant, which beat Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes in every match in round one.
In the upcoming series, the match-race pairing will rotate among Stars &amp; Stripes, Defiant and America 3.


Fear, Anger and Funerals: Belfast's Troubles Mount
They buried Anne-Marie McFadden's brother Michael O'Dwyer in Milltown Cemetery at noon today, three days after he and two other men were shot to death by a demented Royal Ulster Constabulary policeman who later took his own life.
There will be four more Roman Catholic funerals on Saturday, and there were two others today, among the rites for the 12 victims of terrorist-related violence this week.
The carnage has left many people, Protestant and Catholic, feeling angry and afraid of one another in a province deeply divided by more than 20 years of it.


Dow Falls 30.19 as the Fed Stands Pat
Blue chips led a broad retreat of stock prices yesterday, as investors showed disappointment when the Federal Reserve, after a gloomy employment report, failed to signal any easing of interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average ended the week at 3,225.40, down 30.19 points for the day but up 2.01 for the week.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was heavy, at 231 million shares, down from 242 million on Thursday, as the Big Board composite declined 1.31 points, to 227.65, and declining issues forged ahead of gainers by 977 to 702.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE -- Suspended Gilberto Reyes, Montreal Expos catcher, for 60 days for violating his aftercare program and baseball's drug policy.
American League


Set the V.C.R.: Johnson Says This May Be His Last Game
Magic Johnson calmly faced international news media today, answered all questions and firmly stood by his decision to play in Sunday's National Basketball Association All-Star Game.
And though he continued to voice plans to play in the Olympics this summer and did not rule out a possible return to the N.B.A. next season, Johnson said he realized this could be his last appearance in a professional game.


Shoes for Outrunning the Abominable Snowman
Traditional snowshoes will take you over hill and dale in a winter whiteout.
But don't count on getting anywhere in a hurry.
The older designs, once used by Eskimos and American Indians, tend to have a wide oval shape and are cumbersome to use.
But now there are new snowshoe styles small enough and light enough to run in.
Redfeather Design Inc. of Aspen, Colo., has developed a snowshoe that can be used by runners and other endurance athletes for training in the snow.
It was developed by Bill Perkins, a triathlete from Leadville, Colo., who competes in winter events that include cross-country skiing, speed skating and snowshoeing.


U.N. Group Offers Plan to Control Pollution Through a Quota System
A group of experts sponsored by the United Nations is proposing cheaper and more efficient ways to control global air pollution by creating a worldwide market in pollution permits.
The plan is the most ambitious yet in the effort to control harmful emissions through the forces of the free market.
It would for the first time put a worldwide price on one or more of the pollutants blamed for global warming.


Concert of Jewish Music
"Paths of Exile," a concert commemorating the 500th anniversary of the Jews' expulsion from Spain, is to take place at 8 tonight at the Town and Village Synagogue, 334 East 14th Street, Manhattan.
The concert by Voice of the Turtle, a folk-music group, will include Ladino and Hebrew music from Mediterranean and Middle Eastern countries as well as the New World.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (800) 222-6228, extension 137.


Architecture Lecture
A lecture to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the first architectural exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art will be given by Kenneth Frampton, a professor of architecture at Columbia University, on Monday at 6:30 P.M. at the museum.
The curators for the 1932 exhibition, commonly called the International Style show, were Philip Johnson and Henry-Russell Hitchcock Jr.
It included works by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Walter Gropius, Frank Lloyd Wright and others.
Tickets are $10 ($5 for students).
Information: (212) 708-9480.


Queens Dairy Owner Sent Money to Dinkins Fund
The president of a large Queens dairy company said yesterday that he was the source of $50,000 that was wired anonymously to the re-election campaign of Mayor David N. Dinkins in partial repayment of $158,000 that a former campaign aide has been accused of stealing.
Martin Schanback, president of Friendship Food Products Inc., of Maspeth, said the $50,000 was a loan to the former aide, Arnold I. Biegen, who has been charged by state and Federal authorities with writing fraudulent checks to himself out of campaign funds last summer and fall.
Mr.
Biegen, a lawyer and longtime Dinkins confidant, has denied wrongdoing.


Affirmative Action Looks Like Favoritism
To the Editor:
"The Great White Myth" by Anna Quindlen (column, Jan. 15) misses the target on affirmative action in the workplace.
Clearly, she lacks the firsthand experience of those who have lived with goals and timetables, supported their intent and witnessed the consequences.
I have been involved with affirmative action as an executive and a consultant.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Economic Scene column in Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to the nature of global warming.
Carbon emissions from fossil fuels, a principal cause of global warming, trap heat in the atmosphere but do not deplete the ozone; the ozone is destroyed by industrial chemicals.
Ozone loss and global warming are essentially separate phenomena.


U.S. To Offer Plan To Keep Scientists At Work In Russia; Agency Seeking Soviet Advances For 'Star Wars'
Leaders of the United States anti-missile research program, or "Star Wars," are pressing to buy critical technologies from the counterpart program in the former Soviet Union.
The officials believe that this will significantly speed up deployment of the limited anti-missile defense system now planned by the United States.
Their statements have been made in interviews and in Congressional testimony and quoted in an aerospace magazine.


Reyes Suspended
Montreal Expos backup catcher GILBERTO REYES was suspended for 60 days yesterday by Commissioner FAY VINCENT for violating his aftercare program and baseball's drug policy.
The suspension begins April 6, the first day of the 1992 season.


Patents; Microbes That Deliver the Goods
Seizing on new insights about the intimate partnership between plants and bacteria, biologists at Stanford University have found a way to use genetically engineered microbes to deliver pesticides or nutrients with the precision of a laser-guided missile.
Although their discovery is not yet being used in practical applications, the inventors say the technology could allow biologists to customize microbes that produce a fertilizer or pesticide only when they come in contact with a plant's roots.


INSIDE
Jobless Rate Still 7.1%
The unemployment rate managed to remain steady at 7.1 percent in January only because of a surge in part-time jobs, while business payrolls shrank by 91,000.
Page 35.
Haiti Tide Flows Both Ways
Arrivals keep pace with departures at Guantanamo Bay, as Haitians are sent back on boats while new refugees are rescued at sea.
Page 3.
Clashes Widen in Algeria
Fighting between the military and Islamic fundamentalists spread beyond Algiers to outlying cities as the number of deaths mounted.
Page 3.
Tyson Takes the Stand
Mike Tyson testified at his trial that his accuser consented to having sex with him, and he strongly denied having raped her.
Page 29.


Ukraine Rejects Demand on Crimea
The Ukrainian Parliament has overwhelmingly adopted a resolution rejecting a Russian demand to open the question of returning the Crimean peninsula to Russia.
In 1954, the Soviet leader Nikita S. Khrushchev summarily detached the peninsula from the Russian republic and presented it to Ukraine in a gesture that was intended to mark the 300th anniversary of Ukrainian union with Russia and strengthen the unity of the two peoples.


Two Men Killed by Shots
Two men were killed early yesterday afternoon in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan in what appeared to be a drug-related incident, the police said.
Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman, said that one man was shot in the head in a third-floor apartment at 504 West 159th Street, near Amsterdam Avenue, about 12:40 P.M.
The second victim was found in the six-story building's rear yard with a single bullet wound in his stomach and a .380-caliber semiautomatic handgun lying next to him, the officer said.
The two men both appeared to be in their early 20's and were not identified


Pakistan Has A-Bomb Ability
For the first time, Pakistan openly acknowledged that it has the technology to build an atomic bomb, but said it had no plans to do so.
Page 5.


Fire Halts Subways In Brooklyn Station
An electrical fire late yesterday night closed down the Clark Street subway station in Brooklyn, the site of an electrical fire a year ago that left two passengers dead and more than 100 injured.
Termaine Garden, a transit authority spokesman, said early this morning that service on the 2 and 3 IRT line had been stopped for at least an hour and that no one had been injured.
He said the fire started about 11:45 P.M. in an electrical supply room, where cables and other electrical parts were stored.
The cause was not known.


Review/Opera; Substitute and a Debut at the Met
The season's first performance of "Tannhauser" at the Metropolitan Opera on Thursday night was not the sort of event that would cause wooden walking sticks to miraculously sprout greenery.
It also didn't exactly lure one into the orgiastic world of the Venusberg (which Ernest Newman once called a "mountain of ill repute").
Nor did it lead one to have devout respect for the divine eroticism that leads both the sinning knight and his saintly love into a sort of unconsummated love-death.
All these elements of Wagner's drama were there, of course.
But only occasionally, in individual characters, in isolated moments, did the obsessions of this work became plausible.
Such intermittent glimpses of musical power characterized the conducting of Christof Perick as well.
When faced with an expanse of music that had to make its own case, as in the overtures, Mr.
Perick was dutiful and dull, turning from one moment to the next just as he did last week leading "Fidelio." But when inspired by the stage events -- when leading the ensemble sections at the end of Act II or the melancholic prayers of Act III -- Mr.
Perick seemed a different conductor, attentively shaping a scene and the score.


Review/Dance; Extracting the Essence of Charles Ives
There is something so American about Charles Ives that it is startling to come upon a piece like Beppie Blankert's "Charles," presented by the Danspace Project on Sunday afternoon at St.
Mark's Church.
Miss Blankert is a Dutch modern-dance choreographer and an experimentalist at that.
But she has captured the essence of Ives and his music in all their gnarled and witty glory in "Charles," as have her four superb performers.
Several things happen in this 45 minutes of refreshingly civilized entertainment.
Gerard Bouwhuis plays Ives on the piano, the music echoing exuberantly through the small church.
Charles van Tassel, bluff and fresh, sings six songs by Ives.
During them and in between, John Taylor and Fabian Galama engage in terse, knotty duets and solos that are funny, dreamy and acrobatic.


Corrections
An obituary on Jan. 24 about Edward Yorio, a professor at the Fordham University Law School, misidentified the firm where he once worked as a tax lawyer.
It is White &amp; Case.
The obituary also misstated the location of the law school.
It is in Manhattan.


Time Difference Makes CBS Gamble on Tape Delay
The marquee event of the first full day of Winter Olympics competition tomorrow will be the men's downhill.
Barring the blizzard currently forecast, the skiers will start down the course at 12:15 P.M., French time, or 6:15 A.M.
Eastern time -- early enough to appear on CBS's first two Olympic broadcasts of the day, from 9 A.M. to noon and 2 to 6 P.M.


Treasury Securities Rise in Erratic Session
Prices of Treasury securities rose and interest rates fell in thin, erratic trading yesterday, as traders positioned themselves for another cut in interest rates by the Federal Reserve Board.
After the Labor Department released weak employment data for January, market participants were expecting the Fed to move soon to lower interest rates.


Your Taxes; Elite Gathering Opens Up a Little
With taxes suddenly elevated to the top of the legislative agenda, a dozen senior Treasury and I.R.S. officials and Congressional staff members will convene in private for a candid discussion of the issues with an elite group of academics and private tax practitioners.
But this clubby gathering has its critics, like Jonathan Barry Forman, a former Senate aide who is now a professor of law at the University of Oklahoma.
He says these sessions give lawyers and academics who also serve as consultants "inside information from Treasury that they may be using to benefit their clients."


Russia Outlines a Program To Sell State-Owned Shops
The Russian Government, still feeling the effects of its first bout with free prices, today outlined a crash program to sell off state-owned shops, factories and other property, the next move in its gamble with economic reform.
The chairman of the state property committee, Anatoli B. Chubais, told reporters he expected 25 percent of state property to be auctioned off by the end of 1992, under a system that will reserve 25 percent of shares in individual enterprises for current employees.
He predicted that proceeds from this year's sales will amount to 92 billion rubles, a sum equal to about $840 million at the current rate of exchange.


The Band Shell Cannot Play On
To renovate or to preserve?
That's the question facing New York City's Art Commission about the Naumburg Bandshell in Central Park, a 69-year-old dome at the center of an emotional argument about its fate.
Parks Commissioner Betsy Gotbaum and the Central Park Conservancy want to demolish the band shell.
Others, including many nostalgic New Yorkers, preservationists and dismayed descendants of its donor, want to save it.
They make a plausible, if sentimental, case for keeping a lime stoned touch of the past, but those who would raze it have more logic on their side.


A Quieter O'Neal Is Facing Duke
Christian Laettner and Shaquille O'Neal may see eye to eye on the court, almost, but they have different views of Saturday's game between Duke and Louisiana State.
"This is a game that a lot of people are looking forward, too," said Laettner, Duke's 6-foot-11-inch senior center.
"They can't wait to watch it. I feel the same way. I can't wait for the game."


Religion Notes
Anti-War, Now Anti-Abortion
The Rev.
Daniel F. Berrigan has been associated with the anti-war movement for so long that it came as something of a surprise when he was recently arrested outside a Planned Parenthood office in Rochester in an anti-abortion protest.


Vincent Ferrara, 76, Judge in Family Court
Vincent Ferrara, a judge in New York State Family Court for 27 years, died Tuesday at Mountainside Hospital in Glen Ridge, N.J.
He was 76 years old and lived in Upper Montclair, N.J.
He died of heart failure, a family member said.


News Summary
International 2-5 SOVIET SCIENTISTS FOR SALE . . .
To keep scientists from the former Soviet Union from selling their expertise elsewhere, Secretary of State Baker will propose a clearinghouse to match the experts with jobs.  1


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Corporate payrolls shrank by 91,000 in January and the unemployment rate remained steady at 7.1 percent only because of a surge in part-time jobs, the Government said, in a report undermining recent signs of economic revival.
The report caused disappointment among private analysts and was seized on by Congressional Democrats to point up what they called Administration failings.
The figures also increased the chances, economists said, that the Federal Reserve would decide shortly on another round of interest-rate cuts.  [ Page 35. ]


Continental and Northwest Report Improved Results
Two of the nation's leading airlines showed improved results for the fourth quarter of last year but were still caught in the squeeze of low traffic and fare cuts.
Continental Airline Holdings Inc. said that better business conditions helped it earn $4.4 million, or 3 cents a share, compared with a loss of $2.2 billion in the corresponding 1990 quarter, when the company filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


Robert W. Hovda, 71, A Priest and Writer
The Rev.
Robert W. Hovda, a leader in the movement to revise the Roman Catholic liturgy during and after the Second Vatican Council, died on Wednesday in his Manhattan apartment.
He was 71 years old and died of heart failure, funeral home officials said.
From 1965 to 1978, Father Hovda worked full time as an editor and writer for the Liturgical Conference in Washington, writing a monthly newsletter, Living Worship, three books and many articles for religious journals on scripture and ritual.
His publications and lectures were influential during a time when the language of the Catholic liturgy was being changed from Latin to English and other contemporary languages and the rites altered to allow more congregational participation.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Issues; Democrats All Agree Bush's Plan Fails to Meet Health-Care Needs
In New Hampshire and in Congress, President Bush's Democratic opponents are offering much more ambitious plans for overhauling the nation's medical-care system than the one he unveiled on Thursday.
Although no consensus exists on a particular plan, the Democrats are united in advocating more Government involvement in providing universal insurance coverage and restraining health-care costs.


Sports of The Times; Discarding High-Heeled Sneakers
Here it is, three months later, and Magic Johnson continues to dominate headlines.
Since Johnson announced his retirement from professional basketball on Nov. 7, the progression of angles has gone from safe sex to no sex, to how he contracted H.I.V., to whether he was straight or gay.
Now it's whether he should sit or play in the National Basketball Association All-Star Game.


Another Dixon Millrose Victory


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY CROWN HEIGHTS: THE DAY AFTER
The day after the murder of a Hasidic woman sent hundreds of Jewish demonstrators on an angry protest march through the streets of Crown Heights, city officials, black and Jewish community leaders and the police tried to prevent the death from escalating into the kind of racial conflagration that erupted last summer.
Throughout the day, the streets in the frayed neighborhood stayed calm, although it was also clear that racial tension still simmered beneath the surface.
Pages 1 and 24.
INVESTIGATING A PROSECUTOR
The Justice Department is investigating allegations that a Federal prosecutor and two Internal Revenue Service agents systematically and illegally singled out homosexuals for arrest on drug charges, according to the United States Attorney in Manhattan.
Page 25.
MEDICAID CUTS PROTESTED
Nearly 20,000 hospital workers and their supporters, including John Cardinal O'Connor, rallied in protest against a proposal by Governor Cuomo that would cut more than $1 billion in Medicaid payments to hospitals.
The proposed cuts, the speakers said, would be "Draconian" and "unfair." Page 25.
EVANESCENT ART
The chainsaws were buzzing, the planers were planing away the rough spots, the measuring tapes were measuring.
Finally, after a week of mishaps, 35 Chinese ice sculptors were stacking and shaping their giant see-through bricks into two giant, melting phoenixes.
Page 25.
Businessman says he sent mysterious $50,000 to Dinkins's campaign.
Page 27.
REGION  A RITE OF POLITICS In a political rite unique to New Jersey, about 1,400 politicians, business people and lobbyists opened the state's political season Thursday by riding a train from Newark to Washington, then joining the state's Congressional delegation for dinner.
To the travelers, who spend most of the trip on their feet, prowling the crowded aisles, shaking hands and trying to wangle favors, the "walk to Washington" has become indispensable.
Page 26.
TESTIMONY ENDS IN TEANECK TRIAL
The testimony in the trial of Gary Spath, a white Teaneck police officer accused of killing a black teen-ager, ended abruptly, after the state dropped plans to continue attacking the defense account of the shooting.
Page 26.
DIGGING IN AT CITY HALL
One state judge ordered Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City, who has been convicted of fraud and tax evasion, to vacate his office, but another granted him a temporary reprieve.
Page 26.
A HYBRID WELFARE PLAN
The Connecticut welfare law proposed this week by Governor Weicker makes sharp distinctions between poor single parents with children, who would by and large be protected, and the growing numbers of impoverished single men and women, many of whom might simply be thrown out cold.
Local officials and social services experts said that against the backdrop of welfare legislation being considered across the country, Mr.
Weicker's proposals are very much a hybrid -- one part social engineering, one part plain old penny-pinching.
Page 26.
Neediest Cases 26  About New York 25


CHRONICLE
BRENDAN GILL, the architecture critic for The New Yorker, says the award the Municipal Art Society will give to Senator DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN tomorrow evening is long overdue.
"Pat Moynihan has done more than any other single person in the United States Senate for architecture and it is high time that we honor him," Mr.
Gill said yesterday.


Proposed Medicaid Cuts Are Noisily Denounced


Corrections
The De Gustibus column in The Living Section on Wednesday, about Arthur Schwartz's radio program "Food Talk," misidentified Mr.
Schwartz's new book.
It is "What to Cook When You Think There's Nothing in the House to Eat" (HarperCollins, 1992).


Walter Thompson Ash, Actor and Stage Manager, 78
Walter Thompson Ash, an actor and stage manager who was a member of Orson Welles's Mercury Theater, died on Feb. 1 at the Cohler Memorial Hospital on Roosevelt Island.
He was 78 years old and lived on Roosevelt Island.
He died of pneumonia, said his sister, Doris Malvicini of Patchogue, L.I.


Cadaret and 8 Others Settle Contracts
The Yankees reached agreement with Greg Cadaret on a $1.19 million salary for the coming season, but that was the only the seventh highest salary gained by the nine players who settled their arbitration cases yesterday.
Roberto Alomar got the biggest contract, a three-year deal worth $14 million that can easily become four years for $18.5 million.
The contract gave the Toronto Blue Jays All-Star three distinctions: It is the richest ever for a second baseman, for a player with only four years in the major leagues and for someone as young as 24 years old.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Harding Foster Bancroft, a retired vice chairman of The New York Times, lawyer and former diplomat, omitted the name of his first wife, who died in 1984.
She was Jane Northrop Bancroft.
Mr.
Bancroft is survived by his second wife, the former Edith Hall.


20,000 Rally To Protest Cuomo Plan On Medicaid
Nearly 20,000 hospital workers and their supporters, including John Cardinal O'Connor, rallied in protest yesterday against a proposal by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo that would result in cuts of more than $1 billion in Medicaid payments to New York State hospitals.
The parade of marchers began at 53d Street and Seventh Avenue and ended at Columbus Circle, where religious leaders and health care union officials described the proposed cuts as "Draconian" and "unfair."


A Pianist at 80
In celebration of his 80th birthday, the pianist Rudolf Firkusny is to perform the Dvorak Piano Concerto in G minor (Op. 33) with the New York Chamber Symphony, at 8 tonight and at 3 P.M. tomorrow at the Tisch Center for the Arts, 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
Gerard Schwarz is to conduct the orchestra in a program that also includes Ravel's "Tombeau de Couperin" and the premiere of Stephen Albert's "Distant Hills," with Juliana Gondek, soprano, and Mark Bleeke, tenor.
Tickets are $25 and $30.
Information: (212) 415-5440.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Links Rivals' Plan to Socialism
Now that Moscow has abandoned all claim to the mantle of socialism, President Bush tried hard today to drape it over his Democratic rivals in Congress as he campaigned for his newly announced health care program.
The President, who proposes the use of new tax breaks to persuade people to buy private health insurance, used much of a speech today to tar one Democratic alternative to his proposal as "socialized medicine," a term that has been applied to national health plans in Britain and elsewhere but that has been out of fashion lately.


Guidepost; For Winter Feet
Whether you walk on the streets of New York or go ice-fishing in Vermont, a waterproof boot provides the best protection against the cold and damp.
Waffle-treaded boots are best for hiking and walking in deep snow.
For walking in rain, a flat, rubber-soled boot with a tread helps avoid slips.
Here is a list of popular boots and liners.
Rubber Boots: Convenient because they can be slipped on easily but are bulky and heavy.
Rubber also conducts cold and makes feet feel colder.
Leather Boots: Waterproofed leather resists salt damage, water stains and wear and tear.
With a little care, it lasts longer than other materials boots are made of.
Gore-Tex: A waterproof rubberlike synthetic boot lining that keeps water and wind out but does not hold warmth.
Thermal Insulation: A thin layer of synthetic cloth that insulates a boot to keep feet warm without bulk.
It is not waterproof.
(Source: Boot and Shoe Association of New York.)


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Cigna Corp., Philadelphia, named Lawrence P. English president of its employee benefits division. *
Coastal Corp., Houston, named Jose J. Iglesias senior vice president-international product supply and trading.


Russian String Quartets
The Borodin Quartet is to present a concert of 20th-century Russian string quartets at 2 P.M. tomorrow at Alice Tully Hall.
On the program are Prokofiev's Quartet No. 2 in F (Op. 92), Schnittke's Quartet No. 3 and Shostakovich's Quartet No. 15 in E flat minor (Op. 144).
Tickets are $22.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


ISRAEL INFORMS U.S. OF STAND ON LOANS
The Israeli Ambassador, Zalman Shoval, today presented Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d with his country's counterproposals to American conditions for granting loan guarantees, but the two sides failed to narrow their differences, Israeli and American officials said.
"There is agreement on some points," Mr.
Shoval told reporters after the meeting at the State Department.
"There is not agreement on some other points."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Dec. 20 about proposals to speed drug approvals by the Food and Drug Administration misstated the level of opposition to the changes from leading F.D.A. staff members.
A majority of those who responded to a survey said they opposed the changes.
This correction was delayed by editing lapses.


Quote of the Day
"We are all human beings. We are all flesh and blood and I don't know how all these things are happening. It could happen to me." CARMEN FRANCE of Crown Heights, Brooklyn. --  [ 24:3. ]


Brickowski Is Guilty
Milwaukee Bucks forward FRANK BRICKOWSKI pleaded guilty Friday to a Federal charge of possessing an ounce of marijuana, which authorities said was delivered to his Montana ranch last September.
Brickowski, 32, appeared before U.S.
Magistrate BART ERICKSON in Missoula, and cursed a news photographer who took his picture outside the building.
Prosecutors recommended Brickowski pay a $1,000 fine and serve no jail time.
Sentencing is scheduled for May 18 in Missoula.


Review/Dance; A Dalton-Hartel Debut, With Goethe as Inspiration
Austin Hartel and Lisa Dalton have performed with Pilobolus, and the dances they presented on Sunday night at the Mulberry Street Theater bear the influence of that company.
There was an acrobatic flow to much of the dance: in the kind of rebounding partnering that made Mr.
Hartel's "Bicuspid" so invigorating and in the arcs and other patterns their bodies assumed in most of the six pieces on the program.
But Mr.
Hartel and Ms.
Dalton have made the style their own, in work distinctive for its intimacy, darkness and literary coloring.
The premiere on the program, which marked the New York debut of Dalton-Hartel Dance, was typical.
"The Second Circle," conceived by the two dancers and Kaulana Kasparovitch, a performer of traditional Hawaiian dance and music, takes as its inspiration two lines from Dante's "Inferno." Unfolding in a dark, tightly circumscribed stage space, the new work had Ms.
Dalton and Mr.
Hartel twisting up from the floor and straining toward each other, curling into their own and each other's bodies claustrophobically.
The duet powerfully communicated the feeling of circling and turning in a confined space and, at the same time, crawling across chasms.


Gas Price War Lures Drivers to New Jersey
The customers line up early and late at Nick and George Kambitsis's Raceway gas station here, drivers in everything from Jaguars to old pickup trucks.
They are waiting patiently to cash in on an early harbinger of spring, the old-fashioned gasoline price war, which has pushed regular unleaded down to 89 cents a gallon at some stations here and to less than a dollar at most others.
These are the state's lowest gas prices in five years, according to the New Jersey Petroleum Council, and up and down State Highway 18, sellers of such major brands as Exxon, Sunoco and Texaco have similarly, and angrily, pushed their prices down.
The big names are chasing Raceway and other independent retailers who are taking advantage of a glut, caused by the recession and mild weather, that promises to last into the summer.


Affirmative Action Looks Like Favoritism; Unfortunate Myth
To the Editor:
"The Great White Myth," Anna Quindlen's compellingly argued Jan. 15 column, casts the welcome light of reason on the issue of affirmative action, a subject too often highlighted by the leaping flames of passion.


This Man Has Long Chats With Mass Murderers
People often ask Dr.
Robert H. Berger how he stands the stresses of his job.
How, for instance, can he stand being in the same room with a man who has cut off a woman's head, lopped off her breasts, then tossed the assorted body parts out the window?
"You have to keep a sense of humor," he answers, in part.


Classical Music in Review
Musica Sacra Alice Tully Hall


Howe Pleads Not Guilty
Steve Howe, the New York Yankees relief pitcher who was arrested two months ago near here on charges of possession of cocaine, pleaded not guilty today to two Federal drug charges.
His trial will begin March 30, about a week before the Yankees' first game.
Howe will be tried in District Court here on two Federal misdemeanor counts of substance abuse: attempted possession of one gram of cocaine Dec. 19 in Kalispell, Mont., and possession of two grams of cocaine sometime between Nov. 23 and Dec. 19 in Whitefish, Mont.
Howe lives in Whitefish, a small town about 135 miles north of here, during baseball's off season.


An Auto Backup Light That Beeps, Too
Mark Gottlieb, a product design engineer, knows about driveway danger.
As a child, he was backed over by his father.
"It isn't something you forget," said Mr.
Gottlieb, who was not seriously hurt.
Now he has designed Back-Up Alert, a replacement automobile backup light that contains a loud beeper.
Each year more than 200 people are killed, several thousand are injured and untold numbers of pets are hit by cars backing up.
Mr.
Gottlieb said his Back-Up Alert is loud enough to warn a child or a pet, but not loud enough to wake the neighbors on a Saturday morning.
The device can be installed in 2 to 15 minutes, he said; only one backup light is affected.


Janney to Blues, Oates to Bruins
The Boston Bruins, in need of more point production with the loss of CAM NEELY to knee surgery, traded center CRAIG JANNEY and defenseman STEPHANE QUINTAL to St.
Louis yesterday for center ADAM OATES, who leads the National Hockey League in assists but had been bogged down in a contract dispute with the Blues
The keys to the trade are Janney and Oates, two players known for setting up their teams' top goal scorers -- Janney, with passes to Neely, and Oates, with passes to BRETT HULL.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Ivanisevic Stays in Hunt


Pakistan Tells of Its A-Bomb Capacity
A top Pakistani Foreign Ministry official visiting the United States has issued his Government's first formal acknowledgement that it has the capacity for making an atomic bomb.
But the official, Foreign Secretary Shahryar Khan, insisted that Pakistan had not built such a bomb and did not intend to, and that it would not transfer the nuclear technology it has developed to any other country.


Tyson, on Stand, Denies That He Raped Woman
Describing his 18-year-old accuser as a willing participant in a late-night sexual encounter, Mike Tyson today strongly denied raping her during the Miss Black America pageant last summer.
Taking the stand for the first time in his rape trial here, Mr.
Tyson answered questions for nearly 80 minutes from his lawyer about his background, his decision to come here last July and his interactions with his accuser, who was a contestant in the pageant.


Music Notes; Composers Orchestra Defies the Conventional
The American Composers Orchestra contradicted two points of conventional wisdom when it announced some ambitious plans for its 1992-93 season.
Although the orchestra's specialty, 20th-century American music, is widely considered the province of the new-music fringe, Jesse Rosen, the orchestra's executive director, said that the ensemble's ticket sales had tripled since 1985.
And although many organizations have concluded that the prudent thing to do in a recession is cut back on performances, the American Composer's Orchestra is expanding its schedule to five concerts, up from four this season.
The orchestra has also just appointed its first music director, Dennis Russell Davies.
Mr.
Davies, who is 47 years old, was not a surprise choice.
He was one of the orchestra's founders (with the composers Francis Thorne and Nicolas Roussakis and the conductor Paul Lustig Dunkel, all of whom are still involved with the group), and he has been principal conductor since 1977.
His new contract begins this season and runs for three years.


CHRONICLE
Commenting that Senator Moynihan came to prominence as a policy adviser and a diplomat rather than through standard politics, Mr.
Gill said:
"He has the intellectual and statesman's view of architecture. His is a lofty view from a lofty man."


Tyson, on Stand, Denies That He Raped Woman
Describing his 18-year-old accuser as a willing participant in a late-night sexual encounter, Mike Tyson today strongly denied raping her during the Miss Black America pageant last summer.
Taking the stand for the first time in his rape trial here, Mr.
Tyson answered questions for nearly 80 minutes from his lawyer about his background, his decision to come here last July and his interactions with his accuser, who was a contestant in the pageant.


Law Is Softened To Quell Furor Over Mardi Gras
After months of growing animosity over a new Mardis Gras anti-bias ordinance, the City Council has acted to ease tensions and protect the city's leading tourist attraction by removing much of the law's teeth.
The Council's action, taken on Thursday after hours of debate, may be enough to prevent further withdrawals from this year's Mardi Gras by the city's oldest and most tradition-conscious parade-sponsoring clubs, many of them exclusively white.


First Signs of Healing, Then Another Wound
In the six months since Crown Heights convulsed in three nights of racially charged violence, a few, small signs appeared that maybe some things had changed between blacks and Hasidim in the neighborhood.
There were basketball games, community forums, sidewalk encounters that strove to be, if nothing else, cordial.
But on the morning after the killing of a 38-year-old Hasidic woman and the angry protest that followed, residents wondered how deep those changes were and whether they could survive another round of bitter animosity and tension.


Bridge
Going from beginner to winner in a weekend is a rare and memorable experience, particularly when you are 11 years old.
It happened last month to Jamie Feagin of Atlanta, a girl from a bridge-playing family.
Her parents, Jack and Claudia, were about to compete in a sectional tournament near home, and she asked to play.
Her first effort was not a success: She played four deals in a knockout event and passed throughout because she had not had time to learn how to bid.
This is reminiscent of the story about the chess player in a simultaneous exhibition against a grandmaster who only moved pawns because he had not yet learned the moves of the other chessmen.


U.S. To Offer Plan To Keep Scientists At Work In Russia
The United States plans to propose to Russia the formation of a Western-financed clearinghouse intended to find jobs for thousands of Soviet nuclear scientists who might otherwise sell their expertise to hostile countries, Administration officials said today.
The clearinghouse would pair the talents of the estimated 2,000 to 3,000 scientists who have the most advanced nuclear knowledge with the needs of foreign investors, universities, private research organizations or governments willing to pay for commercial nuclear research.


Israel Appears to Stiffen On Palestinian Self-Rule
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir suggested in a published interview today that Israel's position in continuing peace talks had changed on the kind of autonomy it is prepared to offer Palestinians living in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
While Mr.
Shamir did not specify what changes he had in mind, some Israeli politicians and press commentators said he seemed to be alluding to the future role of the Israeli Army in the territories and to the police force that Palestinians may form if self-rule does indeed come about through the Middle East peace talks.


Testimony Ends in Teaneck Case
The testimony in the trial of Gary Spath, a Teaneck police officer accused of killing a teen-ager, ended abruptly today after the state dropped plans to continue attacking the defense account of the shooting.
The chief prosecutor, Glenn D. Goldberg, said at the end of proceedings on Thursday that he wanted to call as many as five more rebuttal witnesses today to challenge Officer Wayne Blanco's account of Phillip Pannell's movements in the seconds before he was shot in the back and killed by Officer Spath on April 10, 1990.


Minolta Told It Must Pay Honeywell
In a decision that could prove costly for the Japanese camera industry, a Federal jury in Newark found today that the Minolta Camera Company of Japan had infringed patents for autofocus technology held by Honeywell Inc. of Minneapolis and ordered Minolta to pay $96 million in back royalties.
Honeywell officials announced that they would pursue identical claims against 15 other large camera companies, including Canon USA, the Olympus Corporation, Nikon Inc. and the Pentax Corporation.
In addition to camera equipment, Honeywell contends that its autofocus technology is employed by a wide range of other equipment, from camcorders to copying machines.


The New Olympics
Prediction: No gold this time for the two countries that won the most, by far, at the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary.
The winter games that start today in Albertville, France, have no teams from the U.S.S.R. and East Germany, Nos. 1 and 2 four years ago.
Nations no longer, they have dismantled their medal-winning sports machines.


Pittsburgh Food Critic's Suicide Leaves a Trail of Suspicions
Mike Kalina, a 49-year-old restaurant critic and travel writer for The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, was well on his way to becoming a national television celebrity when his health and career began crumbling in the last two months.
He committed suicide a week ago, leaving behind no explanation, only a trail of suspicions that he was involved in unethical and possibly criminal business dealings.
Friends and colleagues said this week that they found incomprehensible the accusations that are nonetheless the subject of a Federal investigation.


Mopping Up the CUNY Slush
It took an embarrassing scandal to make officials at the City University of New York pay attention.
But there's finally hope the university will crack down on its runaway student senate.
The senate's $350,000 annual budget is financed by an 85-cent activity fee levied on students each semester.
An audit triggered by news reports last fall confirmed a pattern of abusive spending by the organization's chairman, Jean LaMarre, and other senate leaders.


Killy Completes A Unique Return
As a youngster, Jean-Claude Killy would sometimes skip his catechism class to ski with his friends in the mountain snow of Val d'Isere, where his father owned a ski shop and where the men's downhill of the 1992 Winter Games will be run Sunday.
"One time," he has often said with a smile, "the priest came after us on skis, his black robes flowing."


O'Brien Has Everything, Except Pact
In a conference that reaches a consensus about as often as the sun is in total eclipse, there is a widespread amazement among Big East coaches and administrators that Jim O'Brien's future as coach at Boston College has not yet been happily chiseled in stone.
In the midst of Boston College's most exciting basketball season in years, O'Brien's future officially extends no further than this year, the final season of his contract.


Art Slips on Thin Ice
The chainsaws were buzzing, the planers were planing away the rough spots, the measuring tapes were measuring.
Finally, a week late, 35 Chinese ice sculptors were stacking and shaping their giant see-through bricks into two giant melting phoenixes.
Creating a pair of birds like the one in ancient Egyptian mythology that consumed itself in fire only to rise from its own ashes, was somehow the right metaphor for a group of artists whose uncertain path to Central Park had been paved with a series of "if onlys": If only the import-export company in New York that promised to pay their way had not gone out of business.
If only their tools had not been impounded by customs agents at Kennedy International Airport.
And if only it hadn't been so unbearably warm yesterday in Central Park.


Official at Cathay Pacific Named Chief of Dan-Air
Dan-Air of Denmark, Europe's 12th-largest airline, yesterday named John Olsen, a longtime executive of Cathay Pacific, to become its chief executive, effective in April.
Mr.
Olsen, who is 49 years old, has been with Cathay, a long-haul airline based in Hong Kong, for 25 years, the last three as general manager of European operations.


House Call Doesn't End Mystery on Fly So Free
Dr.
Douglas Byers of Kentucky, a veterinarian who makes house calls, flew to Florida the other day and made one on Fly So Free, the champion colt who was withdrawn from what was to be his season's debut, the Donn Handicap last Saturday, because of an elusive bacterial infection.
The doctor spent two days examining Fly So Free at Hialeah Park, where he has been resting and working out this winter, and reported that the colt was mending and seemed sound and strong.
But he also reported that the precise nature of the infection was still a mystery.
So, when he left for Lexington, Ky., on Wednesday, he took some blood samples from the 4-year-old horse for more sophisticated testing in Kentucky.


'Just One Thing to End All Wanting'
THE LOST FATHER
By Mona Simpson. 506 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.


Saving Ourselves
EARTH IN THE BALANCE
Ecology and the Human Spirit.
By Al Gore.
Illustrated. 407 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.


How to Warm a Post-Modernist's Heart
A story, perhaps apocryphal, is told about Picasso at the end of World War II.
An American G.I. complained to the artist that he could not understand why he painted women with their eyes going off in one direction and their noses in another.
"Because that's the way I see them," said the painter, who then asked whether the soldier had a photograph of his girlfriend.
He did.
Picasso looked at it.
"You like her so small?" he said.
The camera is such an efficient means of identification -- where would passports and drivers' licenses and wanted posters be without it? -- that its built-in distortions are seldom remarked.
But once artists began raising questions about the conventions of photographic representation and the rumor went abroad that reality had been replaced by images, photographers were soon merrily subverting the accepted codes of identification.
It would warm the heart of any good post-modernist to derail the camera's potential for re-presentation, and many do.


At Work; Endangered: Retiree Health Benefits
IT would be perfectly understandable if Harold S. Share expressed some bitterness about nearly being done out of his retirement health benefits by the bankruptcy of the Federated-Allied department stores.
"There is no shortage of villains," said Mr.
Share, a former vice president at an Allied Stern's store in Paramus, N.J., but he said his place of employment was not among them.
"It was the excess of the 80's manifesting itself. It was Campeau and the people who provided him money," Mr.
Share said, a bit of heat creeping into his voice when he referred to Robert Campeau, the quintessential financial buccaneer of the 1980's who at one point owned Federated and Allied.
"It was not the management of the stores."


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
The "permit but discourage" formula that your author espouses is being used successfully already.
Two examples immediately come to mind: smoking and the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
ALBERT A. WIRTZBAUM
New York, N.Y.


The Public and Private Lives of Joan Collins
They came with their binoculars, lips pursed, arms crossed, smelling blood.
"Fifty-two? She's only 52?"


In the Early Years of American Modernism
ALFRED MAURER and Guy Pene du Bois were both at work during the early years of American Modernism.
Yet the two are seldom mentioned in the same critical breath and not, it seems, because they were a generation apart in age.
Now they are sharing the same space at Nardin Fine Arts, in Yellow Monkey Village in Cross River, and the contrast is instructive.
Maurer (1868-1932) was one of the first Americans to pursue Modernism in Paris.
An alumnus of the National Academy of Design in Manhattan, he started his career in the late 1890's, painting in a Whistlerian style and exhibiting at the Paris Salon as well as in those of the Carnegie Art Institute, the Art Institute of Chicago and other academies.
The Post-Impressionism he saw in Paris began taking effect around 1904 and, in 1909, he had his first show as a fauve at Stieglitz's 291 Gallery.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
What Rosenblatt proposes is that abortion be permitted but discouraged -- except that he stops short of telling us
how
.
His only explicit suggestion mandates sex education, which doesn't sound like a very powerful discouragement to me.
What about those who won't or can't take advantage of such social programs.
Indeed, we're seeing evidence every day that many people are willing to risk death (from AIDS) rather than change their preferred (or compulsive) sexual habits.
If everyone had a strong sense of personal responsibility, Rosenblatt's solution would work. (If nothing else, his article tells me that he's a nice guy, with an idealistic outlook on life.)


UP AND COMING: Laura Linney; Thinking About Not Thinking About the Audience
There are several tantalizing mysteries in "Sight Unseen," Donald Margulies's new play at the Manhattan Theater Club Stage II about greed and self-loathing in the art world, and chief among them is Grete, a sleek German journalist who can administer a hostile interview with the best of them.
As she tugs ineffectually at her short short skirt and rearranges her long long legs, she cross-examines the main character, wielding her accent like a blunt instrument.
But is she in fact anti-Semitic, Frank Rich asked in his review in The Times, in which he described the play as "superbly acted." Or, he wondered, does Jonathan, her Jewish target, make the charge to deflect her legitimate attacks on his work?
The playwright, Mr.
Rich decided, answers yes to both questions.


Jessica Procario Is Engaged
Lydia and Saverio Procario of Valhalla, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jessica Maria Procario to Christopher Benjamin Nardi, a son of Thea and Dr.
John Nardi of Potomac, Md.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Procario is 24 years old, as is her fiance.
She graduated from Fordham University, where she is studying for a master's degree in English literature.
She writes and edits the Northeast regional newsletter of the Comptroller of the Currency.
Her father is the director of Fordham University Press in the Bronx.
Her mother is a public relations consultant in Valhalla.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Chappaqua, N.Y. 530,000
62 Douglas Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 92-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, family room, screened porch, greenhouse, 1.6 acres; taxes $8,855.
Hartsdale, N.Y. 280,000
7 Cornell Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old split-level; family room, eat-in kitchen, slate patio, 2-car garage; taxes $7,808.
Yorktown Heights, N.Y. 262,500
3175 Ronit Court  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old contemporary; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $8,371.
Fairfield Conn. 126,000
382 Knapps Highway  2-bedrom, 1 1/2-bath, 15-yer-old town-house condominum; new kitchen counters/flooring, monthly charges $88.32; taxes $2060.
New Canaan, Conn. 1.75 million
91 Four Winds Lane  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; master bedroom w/fireplace, cathedral ceilings, 2 acres; taxes $15,456.
Southington, Conn. 142,000
251 Woodruff Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old Cape Cod; updated kitchen, 3-zone heat, 0.75 acre; taxes $1,541.
OTHER AREAS Massapequa, L.I. 370,000
95 Fairfax Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $8,200.
Matinecock, L.I. 1.05 million
Linden Farms Road
4- bedroom, 4-bath, new brick ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room,; taxes $14,000.
Waldwick, N.J. 172,500
83 Highwood Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old Cape Cod; skylight, new bath, playroom; taxes $3,597.


BEST SELLERS: February 9, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
HIDEAWAY, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
2
2
18
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
3
4
7
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
4
3
3
LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $21.95.) The fifth volume of "The Corps" tells of an attempt to rescue marines during World War II.
5
6
4
BLINDSIGHT, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $21.95.) A physician investigates a series of strange deaths.
6
9
3
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $21.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware to the rescue of an actress menaced by a man recently released from prison.
7
5
17
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
8
7
12
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the life of Edwina Winfield.
9
8
25
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
10
15
2
McNALLY'S SECRET, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $21.95.) The sleuth Archy McNally's pursuit of a stolen block of priceless stamps uncovers scandals on Florida's Gold Coast.
11
11
2
SUCH DEVOTED SISTERS, by Eileen Goudge. (Viking, $22.) Jealousy, betrayal, vengeance and love mold the lives of four sisters.
12
10
97
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
13
1
FUGITIVE NIGHTS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $22.) Three people on the trail of a dangerous fugitive, through the glamour spots and desert areas of Palm Springs, Calif.
14
12
19
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II. (LP)
15
2
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $16.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
16 *
14
7
LILA, by Robert M. Pirsig. (Bantam, $22.50.) On a sailboat cruise down the Hudson, a philosopher reflects on the nature of our society.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
7
2
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on her own and other women's struggles to achieve self-esteem.
2
1
17
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
3
2
10
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
4
6
12
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5
5
4
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers Group West, $22.95.) A lawyer's presentation of the case for believing that the C.I.A. was involved in the death of John F. Kennedy.
6
3
10
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A reporter's account of an N.B.A. championship season spent with Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls.
7
4
21
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
8
10
13
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
9
15
14
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel, with his view of the Iran-contra affair.
10
8
24
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Thoughts on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
11
11
6
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning from the 19th-century American Indian.
12
9
8
THE WORLD IS MY HOME, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) The autobiography of the popular novelist. (LP)
13
13
62
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
14 *
14
7
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) The story of an Auschwitz survivor in the Catskills, told in comic-book form.
15
12
34
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
3
10
THE BEST TREATMENT, by Isadore Rosenfeld. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Advice from a physician on a host of medical problems.
2
2
5
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
3
1
10
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
4
4
6
THE CARBOHYDRATE ADDICT'S DIET, by Rachael F. Heller and Richard F. Heller. (Dutton, $19.95.) How to cope with an addiction to carbohydrate-rich food.
5
3
FRENCH FOR CATS, by Henry Beard and John Boswell. (Boswell/Villard, $9.95.) A cat's life, told in French, English and pictures.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE OVERWORKED AMERICAN: The Unexpected Decline of Leisure, by Juliet B. Schor. (Basic Books, $21.) Since about 1970 the American workweek has been increasing, according to Ms.
Schor, who perceives a "structural crisis of time" in our lives.
HIGH COTTON, by Darryl Pinckney. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) A rich, dense first novel whose wordy, alienated narrator, a black fourth-generation college graduate, is obsessed with racial scenarios but will not conform to any of them.
WHO WAS DAVID WEISER? by Pawel Huelle. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.) Mr.
Huelle's beautifully written first novel is an elegy for the ancient port city of Gdansk in Poland and for a group of 12-year-old boys.
AFTER GREAT PAIN: A New Life Emerges, by Diane Cole. (Summit, $20.) A personal account of the courageous -- and finally triumphant -- reconstruction of one woman's life after an almost unimaginable run of grief and misfortune.
FOR A COWBOY HAS TO SING, by Jim Bob Tinsley. (University of Central Florida, $39.95.) A collection of 60 cowboy songs from the golden age -- 1905-57 -- with brisk, witty, informative introductions to the songs and their composers in Brooklyn, Cleveland, Dublin, Hollywood and other homes on the range.
A CASE OF CURIOSITIES, by Allen Kurzweil. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) Mr.
Kurzweil's first novel sets a 20th-century narrator in quest of an 18th-century mechanical genius; the result is a witty, curious and studied account of a mentally lively age.
VIOLENCE, by Richard Bausch. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A masterly novel that explores public and private forms of violence with persistence and sensitivity.


An English Connoisseur of Unlikely Conjunctions
One of the best (and one of the more invisible) painters in England is Michael Andrews, who this year turns 63 and has been known to contemporaries and collectors in England and Scotland for exactly 40 years.
A famously slow and ruminative worker, he can count his solo shows on the fingers of one hand and hardly get to the thumb.
He has never been seen in the United States except in a group show at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven in 1981-82.


Melissa Riemer Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Burton A. Riemer of Marblehead, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Melissa Wendy Riemer to Paul Andrew Bunis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Bunis of Maplewood, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Riemer, 27 years old, is the catering sales manager of the Guest Quarters Suite Hotel in Waltham, Mass.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father retired as a general manager in the aircraft engine division of General Electric in Lynn, Mass.


Making a Difference; Canada's Mr. Fix-It
"Run it past Maz," they say when anyone wants to get anything done in Ottawa.
Maz is Donald Mazankowski, the Finance Minister, Deputy Prime Minister and chief operating officer of the Tory Government -- the man now charged with energizing a palsied Canadian economy.
Although his hands are tied by weak tax revenues and rising bills for welfare and the unemployed, the 56-year-old Minister of Everything -- as he is also sometimes known -- showed a little of his stuff last week when he and his like-minded boss, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, approved a sharp cut in minimum down payments for first-time home buyers.


IN THIS CORNER
Michael Specter's insightful article on Lowell Weicker provides an interesting look at the personality and background of Connecticut's Governor ("In This Corner," Dec. 15).
An analysis of Weicker's numbers probably was outside the scope of the article, but certain misconceptions about Connecticut's new taxes should not go unmentioned.
The first is that Weicker cut the sales tax.
The rate of the sales tax was cut from 8 percent to 6 percent, but it is now applied to a host of new categories, from newspapers to professional services to clothing over $50.
The result for most people is an increase in the amount of sales tax they pay.


CORRECTION
An article on Jan. 19 about hotels in Connecticut misstated Pratt &amp; Whitney's relationship with the Radisson and Sheraton chains.
James W. Walsh, a Pratt &amp; Whitney spokesman, said his company tried to spread its business among as many hotels as possible; it has not moved its account from one to another.


Bush's Policies and I.R.S. At Odds Over Health Care
President Bush says he wants millions of Americans to join health maintenance organizations because they provide superior care at low cost.
But the Internal Revenue Service has indicated that it will deny tax-exempt status to many such nonprofit groups on the ground that they provide no discernible benefit to the community.
A major goal of Mr.
Bush's "comprehensive health reform program," announced on Thursday, is to encourage the growth of such group health plans, which offer a wide range of medical services in return for a fixed monthly premium that is set in advance.
The White House extolled the virtues of health maintenance organizations, saying they save money, increase the use of preventive care and reduce hospitalizations.


Attacks on Immigrants Raise Concern in Italy
As they recall it, Lazhar Mellouhi and Laasad Dridi ate their handout supper from the church soup-kitchen and then headed out to the Colosseum to join other North African immigrants sleeping nearby.
Then, by accounts from the men and from the police, around 20 Italian youths -- one of them female, one only 14 years old, and some armed with knives -- fell upon them, beating and stabbing them.


What Feminists Learn From Hillary Clinton; 'A Long Way, Mister'
To the Editor:
In "Macho Feminism, R.I.P." (column, Jan. 27) William Safire applauds Hillary Rodham, classmate of Bill Clinton at Yale Law School, for abandoning her birth name for "Mrs. Clinton." He admires the "steely and well-trained intellect" of Marilyn Quayle, who stands behind her Vice President husband.


John deLaittre, 84, Prominent Banker And a Civic Leader
John deLaittre, a retired bank president, Federal regulator and spokesman for the banking and mortgage industry, died Tuesday at Abbott Northwestern Hospital in Minneapolis.
He was 84 years old and lived in Minneapolis.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Debt and Mild Winters Afflict Ski Areas
The empty chair lifts were swaying silently against a wintry sky -- skeletal reminders of headier days vibrant with the sounds of skiers riding up the mountain.
Along the edges the neat rows of vacant condominiums stood like wooden sentries over the abandoned slopes.
Like several others, the 750-acre Mount Ascutney ski resort here, closed since last April, was brought down by excessive debts from speculative slopeside condominium development coupled with unseasonably warm winters.
The shutdown has been particularly hard on the buyers of individual units, many of whom cannot even use their units pending a resolution with creditors.


Ms. Edwards to Wed Gideon Schein
Amber Stevens Edwards, a television producer, and Gideon Y. Schein, a producer and director, both in New York, plan to marry in May.
Ms.
Edwards, 31 years old, is the host and producer of "State of the Arts" on the New Jersey Network, the public television network in Trenton.
She is a producer of the documentary "The Dancing Man: Peg Leg Bates," which is to be broadcast this month on PBS.
She graduated from Yale University.


Britain's Low-Profile Publishing Giant
Ask securities analysts what they think of Reed International P.L.C. and many quickly say they like what the British company is not: a publishing giant dominated by one person.
That is understandable, given the collapse of Robert Maxwell's empire and the dire financial straits from which Rupert Murdoch's conglomerate is now emerging.
Reed has spent more than $4 billion in the last six years on more than 100 acquisitions of consumer magazine, book, giveaway newspaper and information companies to become one of the world's largest publishers.
While it often paid what seemed like high prices, it has not suffered from indigestion, let alone choked on the meal, despite recessions in its main markets, Britain and the United States.


Rypien Hopes His Super Season Leads to Superstar-Style Contract
Since his contract expired on Feb. 1, Redskins quarterback Mark Rypien, Super Bowl XXVI's most valuable player, can now get in line for his chance to play break the bank.
The only problem is that he's going to have to zig-zag his way past Charley Casserly, Washington's general manager, before he can get to the doors of the vault.
Last season, Rypien signed a one-year deal that paid him $1.25 million.
In 1990, Rypien earned just $275,000, the legacy of being a sixth-round pick out of Washington State in 1986.
But since guiding the Redskins to pro football's best record and a convincing victory over Buffalo in the Super Bowl, Rypien could double or nearly triple his salary of last season.


Sue Bruskin to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Stan Bruskin of Edison, N.J., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Sue Ann Bruskin, and Arthur James Clarke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur S. Clarke of Old Brookville, L.I.
Ms.
Bruskin, 29 years old, is an associate editor at Bride's magazine in New York.
Mr.
Clarke, 31, is an associate at the law firm of Hannoch, Weisman in Roseland, N.J.


Bumping Employees In and Out of Acceptability
To the Editor:
The employee rating system at the International Business Machines Corporation ("Take This Job and Love It," Jan. 26) with a scale of 1 to 4, with 10 percent of employees required to receive an unsatisfactory 4, is similar to a system used at General Electric's astrospace division a few years ago.
G.E. first-line managers were required to rate 15 percent of their employees in the bottom rung. (Three was considered unacceptable.) Since this organization was involved in highly technical work, and recruiting was extremely selective, there were virtually no unacceptable performers.


For Neediest, a Haven From Danger
In a city where guns and knives sometimes seem to have replaced Barbie dolls and G.I.
Joes as the toys of choice, the list of serious infractions posted on the bulletin board at the Children's Aid Society's East Harlem Center seems quaintly irrelevant.
"Throwing of objects; profanity; failure to remove hats; destruction of property or writing on walls; trespassing."


MANCHURIA SHOWS ECONOMIC DECAY
Ice-covered old Russian and Japanese buildings are a constant reminder of the foreign intrigues played out here in Manchuria, during past decades when Moscow and Tokyo coveted this vast region in Northeast China.
Looking at Manchuria these days, one wonders why they wanted it.


Bridge
After years of campaigning in Spain, the veterans of the British Army went home after the Duke of Wellington led them to a famous victory over Napoleon at a small Belgian village named Waterloo.
It was 1815, and a few of the officers returned to London and joined a new club named the Stratford, where they could play whist.
The club still survives and has become the world's longest-lasting card club.
The name lasted only for 10 years because of an unusual problem: The club rules did not provide for the expulsion of an unpopular member, so a general meeting dissolved the club.
All but one of the members were accepted in a new club, the Portland, which has been a byword for card conservatism ever since.
Wellington would have approved.


Testimony By Tyson Wraps Up
The prosecutor in Mike Tyson's rape trial tried repeatedly today to challenge the former heavyweight champion's contention that he made a sexually explicit proposition to his 18-year-old accuser in their first meeting last July and that she readily accepted.
In his second and last day on the witness stand, Mr.
Tyson endured a steady stream of questions from the prosecutor, J. Gregory Garrison, who tried to convince the jury that Mr.
Tyson was lying in his testimony the day before.


Dollar Drops Against Europe
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
125.28
125.70
127.78
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5584
1.6125
1.4558
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1778
1.1745
1.1583
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.8390
1.7858
1.9885
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$354.50
$356.75
$369.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Miss Wadhams To Marry in '93
Thomas E. W. Wadhams of Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, England, and Janet Harper of Hale, Cumbria, England, have announced the engagement of their daughter Michelle L. Wadhams to Andrew D. Stern, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger D. Stern of New York.
A June 1993 wedding is planned.
Miss Wadhams, 26 years old, is a registered nurse and a graduate of Kettering College of Nursing in Kettering, Northamptonshire, England.
Her father is a salesman for Diesel Parts Inc., a Nottingham manufacturing concern.
Her mother is a nurse in Lancaster, England.


At Home Abroad; Alarm in Cairo
The most acute concern in the Egyptian Government today is not what outsiders might expect: not the Algerian crisis over Islamic fundamentalism, not the dragging Arab-Israeli peace process.
It is the possibility of a military attack by the United States on Libya.
That is the agitated subject that comes up in conversation with officials.
The Government is worried -- alarmed is not too strong a word -- about such an American strike.


1992 CAMPAIGN: Players; For Buchanan Aide, Genetic Conservatism
Winston Churchill believed that a person acquires conservative principles through the passage of time.
For L. Brent Bozell 3d, the finance chairman for Patrick J. Buchanan's campaign, it may have been little more than the passage of chromosomes.
"That's probably fair to say," said Mr.
Bozell, 36 years old, when a reporter suggested that he was born to be a conservative.
After all, his mother, Patricia Buckley Bozell, is the sister of William F. Buckley Jr., the conservative columnist.
Mr.
Bozell's father is a writer who collaborated with Barry Goldwater on his book, "The Conscience of a Conservative."


When the J-51 Bubble Bursts . . .
IN 1980, after the transformation of 100 Hudson Street from an office building into a co-op apartment house, the 46 shareholders who bought into the building got a tax break under New York City's J-51 program that cut their first-year tax bill to zero.
Twelve years later, when the building's tax exemptions and abatements under the program expired, the assessment nearly tripled to about $3.4 million and the tax bill jumped from to $85,762 in 1990-91 to $332,665 in 1991-92.


Mosques of Istanbul's Great Builder
DOMES and minarets in great profusion against a bright blue sky: that, for centuries, has been the best-known image of Istanbul.
Today still, the city, seen from across the Golden Horn, looks like an architect's dream, a place where gravity has been temporarily suspended and vast masonry balloons soar carelessly into a welcoming heaven.
Seen at close range, though, some of these mosques lose their magic.
Too large, too small, too wide, too heavy, they can seem more like a catalogue of errors than triumphs of design.
Luckily, though, others are just as stunning as we had hoped, and the chances are that, in virtually every case, they will turn out to be the work of Mimar Sinan.
Architecture, on the whole, has not been one of Turkey's artistic achievements.
Starting with imitations of Byzantine buildings, the Turks went on, at the end of the 18th century, to copy Western styles.
There is, of course, the occasional pavilion made glorious by a decor of Iznik tiles, but that has more to do with faience than with structure.
And so it is particularly gratifying when we come across an architect of genius.


Headliners; Mater Love
The biography of Willie E. Gary has grist enough for two or three Horatio Alger tales.
Born one of 11 children in a migrant farm worker family, he took his empty pockets and thirsty mind to several Florida colleges in the late 1960's hoping to win a football scholarship.
He found no takers for his 5-foot-7 frame until he used his last few dollars for a bus to Shaw University in Raleigh, N.C.
No spots there, either, but he hung around, sleeping on a couch, eating handout meals and voluntarily cleaning up the locker room.
They made him water boy, until the day he subbed for an injured player and won a spot on the team -- and an athletic scholarship.
Now one of the most successful malpractice and personal injury lawyers in the South, the 44-year-old Mr.
Gary announced last week that he would give Shaw $10 million over the next five years.
It is the largest gift ever for the historically black school.
Mr.
Gary, who is chairman of the university's board, called it "a very small payment on the very big debt I owe Shaw."


ONE STATE AGENCY ON ADDICTION CARE
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has proposed merging the state's agencies that provide care for New Yorkers with drug-abuse and alcohol-abuse problems.
The two agencies, with tens of thousands of clients, would be consolidated under the leadership of Marguerite T. Saunders, the current director of the State Division of Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse.
Under the proposal, the alcoholism agency would be merged with the Division of Substance Abuse Services to create a new entity, the Office of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse.


Most-Favored-Grape-Status
Jancis Robinson calls it a minx.
To Robert M. Parker Jr. it is fickle.
Alexis Bespaloff finds it both distinguished and fragile, while Serena Sutcliffe calls it tantalizing.
Hugh Johnson -- no one is faster with a mot juste -- throws up his hands and pronounces it simply "beyond the reach of my vocabulary."
And to what do these folks, prominent wine chroniclers all, refer?
Why, to one of the two most famous red wine grapes in the world -- not cabernet sauvignon but the principal constituent of most Champagne and the only legitimate source of great Burgundy: the elusive pinot noir.


Ms. Spongberg to Wed in May
Dr. and Mrs.
Andrew K. Spongberg of South Dartmouth, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sarah Lyerly Spongberg, to E. Winchester Peniston, the son of Eric W. Peniston and Mrs.
Eustace de Cordova Jr., both of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Spongberg, 23 years old and known as Lyerly, is a junior interior designer at Peter Marino Architects in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is an otolaryngologist in private practice in New Bedford, Mass.
Her mother, Sarah Benham, is a photographer.


Of Cabals and Coups
HONORABLE TREACHERY
A History of U.S.
Intelligence, Espionage and Covert Action From the American Revolution to the C.I.A.
By G. J. A. O'Toole.
Illustrated. 591 pp.
New York: A Morgan Entrekin Book/ The Atlantic Monthly Press.


Linda Gowell Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
David C. Gowell of Marblehead, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Linda Harriett Gowell, to John Pierce Nelson, a son of Suzette G. Angelus of New York and John W. Nelson of Farmington, Mich.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Gowell, 26 years old, is the employment services director at the Partnership for the Homeless in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College and has a master's degree in psychological counseling from Columbia University.
Her father owns Gowell Securities, an investment company in Boston, and is a member and governor of the Boston Stock Exchange.


Style Makers; Pat Hill, Jewelry Maker
You might say it was inevitable that Pat Ciner would go into the jewelry business.
Her father and uncle ran the costume jewelry company that her grandfather founded in New York City as a fine jewelry concern in 1892, and she worked there while at college.
But it wasn't until her husband, David Hill, took over in 1978 after her father retired that she decided to carry on the family tradition.


What Feminists Learn From Hillary Clinton
To the Editor:
William Safire, in "Macho Feminism, R.I.P." (column, Jan. 27) uses Hillary Clinton's politically pressured change of name (from Rodham to husband's) to banish feminism to the ashcan of history by declaring that "womanism" -- a movement that "wants to strike a natural balance in today's man-woman relationship" -- is the movement of the future.
Mr.
Safire dismisses feminism by calling it "anti-male, anti-child, anti-family, anti-feminine." He would have us believe that he is replacing feminism with a new empowering movement for women.


Anne M. Davis Has a Wedding
Anne Meredith Davis, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Solon E. Davis 3d of East Millstone, N.J., was married yesterday to Harry Clabaugh Lamberton 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lamberton of Washington.
The Rev.
Wallace M. Alston Jr. officiated at the Nassau Presbyterian Church in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Lamberton, 23 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a co-director of perinatology at Morristown (N.J.) Memorial Hospital.
Her mother, Dr.
Anne Robinson Davis, is a policy analyst for the New Jersey Department of Health in Trenton.


Perspectives: Manhattan Rentals; Building for the 'Young Professional' Class
EVERYONE to his own niche.
The Brodsky Organization has found its niche on the West Side of Manhattan, where it has been building new residential buildings, often with office and retail space, for 10 years.
Beyond that, the Brodsky niche is in the apartment itself, a product priced to meet the lower end of the luxury housing market.
The locations are not suitable for superluxury housing, where prices are not only higher per square foot but apartments are also larger, with special features and fixtures, and service staffs are larger.
The price difference for a 1,000-square-foot apartment might be $700 a month or more.


Under the Dust, a New Luster for A. Lincoln, Esq.
Two legal documents from the 1850's have been discovered in dusty cardboard and tin boxes in an overlooked county records room and in an attic of a courthouse where A. Lincoln, Esq., practiced, enhancing his reputation as one of the leading trial and appeals lawyers of his era in Illinois.
Read together, the new finds serve to entomb the myth that Lincoln was simply a hick lawyer who handled only small-town, morally correct cases for his friends and neighbors in Springfield.


Emigres Who Want to Assimilate Pick Co-op City
Three years ago Sasha and Mikhael Bzelyansky were working at a hospital in the Russian city of St.
Petersburg.
Now they are living an unusual experiment in immigrants' assimilation in a sprawling high-rise complex in the northern Bronx.
Scorning the traditional path of generations of immigrants who have clustered together in rough approximations of home like the Chinese in Chinatown, Italians in Little Italy and Russians in Brighton Beach, the Bzelyanskys and 24 other Jewish families from the former Soviet Union have settled in the decidedly polyglot Co-op City.


Poor Translations, Poor Theater
To the Editor:
Joseph Horowitz's article advocating opera sung in English is a needed and useful corrective to the more frequent objections to opera in the vernacular.
We agree that "snobbish resistance" plays a big part in these objections.
Another factor, not discussed by Mr.
Horowitz, is the devastating effect bad translations have had on the receptivity of English-speaking performers and audiences to operas sung in English.


Joint Effort On St. Martin
Economic conditions have forced the two sides -- the French and the Dutch -- of the Caribbean island of St.
Martin (St. Maarten) to join forces in a bid to increase tourist business.
Hotel officials said that for the first time the French and Dutch Governments and the hotel associations of the two sectors are helping to finance a drive to promote the island as a single destination.
American Airlines, which flies to the island (to the Philipsburg airport on the Dutch side), and Gogo Tours are also contributing to the campaign.
Beginning in March, the promotion will center on seven nights for the price of five and four nights for the price of three.


1992 CAMPAIGN: Endorsements; Reagan Endorses Bush as 'Best Hope' for Nation
In his first comment on the 1992 Republican primary campaign, former President Ronald Reagan tonight endorsed the re-election of his successor, George Bush.
"Although we now face some hard times, I believe that experienced leadership of George Bush is our best hope to build a strong America," Mr.
Reagan said in a videotaped statement shown at a dinner sponsored by the New Hampshire Conservative Political Victory Fund, a political action committee.


Meet the Press: Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
In a broadcast that may have set a new standard for tastelessness, the syndicated tabloid television program "A Current Affair" interviewed Gennifer Flowers last week about the affair she says she had with Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
In the interview Ms.
Flowers was asked to rate the Presidential candidate as a lover on a scale of one to ten, which she earnestly did.
Then, to close the show, Ms.
Flowers, a sometime nightclub singer, warbled "Stand By Your Man," the Tammy Wynette song Mr.
Clinton's wife, Hillary, slighted when she defended her husband on "60 Minutes."


Ethiopia Gets $672 Million From Global Lenders to Rebuild
International aid organizations led by the World Bank have put together a $672 million program to help a struggling new Government in Ethiopia rebuild after nearly two decades of civil war and ideological mismanagment of the economy.
Ethiopia's minister for foreign economic relations, Abdul-Mejid Hussein, said that about $7 million in emergency medical aid would be available almost immediately, followed by help in building roads, bridges, schools and other basic structures over the next 30 months.
Mr.
Abdul-Mejid led a delegation from Ethiopia's seven-month-old Government in talks in Washington this week.


Women and Sex: A Muddle on the Screen
How did a director as smart as Lizzie Borden make a movie as confused as "Love Crimes"?
And why isn't the film called "Sex Crimes," which is, after all, what it's about?
Probably because most films about women don't know when to separate sex from love, or when to bring them together.
If recent movies offer any clues to cultural standards, then that nagging good-girl/ bad-girl stereotype (bad girls are sexual, while good girls are not) is alive and thriving where you least expect it.
"Love Crimes" means to be a provocative sexual thriller with a large, honest dose of political incorrectness.
An assistant district attorney, played lifelessly by Sean Young, goes undercover to catch a sex criminal who is masquerading as a famous photographer.
The man, who benefits on screen from Patrick Bergin's handsome looks and charm, lures women into posing nude, then has sex with them when they feel they have lost their will to resist -- sometimes because he has frightened them, sometimes because he has flattered them.
Emotionally, the involuntary sex is rape; legally, maybe not.


Halt in Family Planning Endangers Thousands
We are outraged at the suspension of outpatient family planning services and outpatient abortion services at the Nassau County Medical Center, Long Island's only public hospital.
What a glorious opportunity for Nassau County's anti-abortion administration not only to engineer the closing of both family planning services and abortion services, but to take credit for saving taxpayers $15 million by eliminating N.C.M.C.'s 1991 public subsidy, which had been used to underwrite all health-care services for patients unable to pay for them, the mission of every public hospital.


Layoffs Called No Big Threat To a Recovery
Although many of the country's biggest companies have announced plans to cut staggering numbers of employees, economists say the layoffs alone do not add up to a threat that could demolish the chances for an economic recovery this year.
What most people forget, the economists say, is that the sheer size of the overall United States labor market dwarfs even sweeping cuts planned by the I.B.M.'s, G.M.'s and Lockheeds.
No matter how devastating plant cutbacks and mass layoffs are for the communities and individuals directly affected, new research shows that surprisingly large job losses amount to business-as-usual for the flexible American economy even in the best of times.
Danger Is Psychological
The gravest danger the corporate cutbacks pose is psychological.
Layoff headlines could frighten those with jobs into thinking that they might be next and cause them to stop spending, a statistic measured as consumer confidence.
Policy makers from Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, on down have consistently underestimated the power of low consumer confidence in the last two years.
Collapsing confidence helped knock a sluggish economy into recession a year and a half ago, and another panic attack, prompted by the layoff surge, strangled the fledgling recovery last fall.


Jane A. Wiener, a Teacher, Is to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Joel H. Wiener of Teaneck, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jane Alexandra Wiener to Craig Alan Parish, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard I. Parish of Cranford, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wiener, 25 years old, teaches English at Ridgewood (N.J.) High School.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
Her father is a professor of history at City College in New York.
Her mother, Suzanne Wiener, is a special-education teacher at Thomas Jefferson Middle School in Teaneck.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
ON RONKONKOMA RANGE
WESTERN movies made Jean La Pierre Covone tingle.
Not the ones with John Wayne, but the ones with buffaloes.
"I have always loved buffaloes," Ms.
Covone said.
"And I always wanted to own one."


Friend or Foe?


Quotation of the Day
"I don't blame the Japanese or the Germans for working hard and shipping their cars over here. What I want to know is how and why we got to the point that we don't make so many of our own cars. Whose fault is this? Don't we need some new policies? Isn't it time we stopped this?" -- ART BENSLEY, a Baltimore steelworker.  [ 32:1. ]


Greens to Melons, Potatoes to Tomatoes
VEGETABLE garden planning is at its height.
Those who have grown their own for years know what does well.
Most important, they know what the family likes or what should be grown in quantity for preserving.
Some gardeners have huge plots and grow just about everything.
Others have just enough room for a few vegetables.
They delight in homegrown tomatoes or tossing a salad with greens just picked.


Round-the-World Balloon Flight Is Delayed
Hopes that the Earthwinds balloon could begin its planned round-the-world flight this weekend have been dashed by an unexpected change in high-altitude winds over Europe.
Larry Newman, the captain, said on Friday that it would be impossible to estimate a new departure date until after Wednesday.


Ms. Mendelson Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Mendelson of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Ann Cathleen Mendelson to Kevin Patrick Daly, the son of Gail Hargrave Daly of Bronxville, N.Y., and Bernard John Daly of North Palm Beach, Fla.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mendelson, 25 years old, graduated from Denison University and is the promotion projects manager for Allure magazine in New York.
She is known as Cathleen.
Her father is the president of Champlain Asset Management Ltd., an investment company in New York.
Her mother, Joan Egan Mendelson, owns Hilltop Interiors, an interior design company in Rye.


Topics of The Times; The Queen as Commoner
Britain's Queen Elizabeth is no ordinary mortal.
For starters, she's that nation's richest resident.
Yet she pays no taxes.
Her coffers, even in a recession, swell impressively year by year.
All that money rolling in allows her to keep a world-class stable, half a dozen castles and a yacht, the Britannia, with fake fireplaces.
Being royal, she carries no money; her ladies-in-waiting settle up later.
No one sits in her presence unless she gives the O.K., and no one speaks to her unless she initiates the conversation.
As first in the realm, she signs documents at the top of the page rather than the bottom.


Ms. Stark to Marry
May wedding plans have been announced for Caroline Stark, a daughter of William E. Stark of Hampton Bays, L.I., and Rosemary Stark of Woodstock, N.Y., and Barry Patrick Fitzsimmons, the son of Frank T. Fitzsimmons of San Francisco and Hilloah Fitzsimmons-Levy of Novato, Calif.
Ms.
Stark, 29 years old, is a fashion and beauty stylist in New York.
Mr.
Fitzsimmons, 30, is a writer and producer at WWOR-TV, in New York.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Starting Tarragon
Q.
I have heard that it is not possible to grow tarragon from seed.
If this is true, how is it started? -- Genevive
Hoffman, Riverdale, the Bronx.


Fears Grow for Iraqi Refugees in Saudi Arabia
Fears are growing for the safety of at least 35,000 Iraqi refugees and former prisoners of war who sought asylum in Saudi Arabia last year and whom the Saudis would like to send home.
Several hundred of them were forced back into Iraq at the end of December, according to the State Department and independent human rights and refugee organizations.
The Saudi Government has told representatives of international agencies that it deplores the decision to return the Iraqis forcibly, which was apparently made at a local level, and that it would investigate and punish those responsible.
The Saudis have also agreed to allow the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to open an office in Riyadh and station representatives in two refugee camps, a spokeswoman for the organization said.


Islamic Militance Along Russia's Rim Is Less Than a Sure Bet
Across the centuries of Russia's colonial dealings with Central Asia, there has never been a lack of alarm that somehow an "Islamic crescent" counterforce would coalesce, with all the intimations of Muslim fervor that can so easily seize the xenophobic imagination of outside observers.
The interesting thing in the latest version of that alarm is that it comes from the Bush Administration, not the Yeltsin Government here, and it is focused mainly on Washington's long-running preoccupation with Iran rather than on the plethora of different ethnic, religious and political subtleties that are now becoming apparent among the the Central Asian republics as they try to resurrect themselves from the ashes of Communism.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
SACRED ART
A complete copy of the papers of Marie-Alain Couturier, a Dominican priest, from the Couturier Archives in Paris, has been given to Yale by the Menil Foundation of Paris and Houston.
The collection, which fills the shelves of a 7- by 15-foot room with the contents of 18 boxes of photocopied material, will be available to scholars and the public, by appointment, beginning tomorrow.


Fashion's Best Feet Forward
Some fairly weird footwear appeared on the fashion runways here during the January haute couture shows.
Shoes at these collections rarely attract attention because they are usually classic high-heel pumps with delicate inserts of contrasting leather or silk to carry out the elegant well-bred look of made-to-order clothes.
In the past, they were varied for evening, with sandals made of spidery arrangements of metallic leather straps.


What the Developers Really Want
The problem with seizing on real-estate development as the engine to drive Long Island's economic recovery  [ "Gaffney Faces Growing Gap," Jan. 19 ]  goes deeper than land scarcity.
For months, Long Island real-estate developers have insisted that tight credit and environmental "Nimbyism" are the only roadblocks to a rosy economic future.
Their claims are meant to distract us from the real problems with their agenda.
With a 20 percent commercial-vacancy rate now, few businesses would jump at leasing new office complexes the developers want to build.
Coming off the worst Christmas shopping season in decades, retailers are scrambling to keep their heads above water.
Few could afford to open outlets in new malls.
And with consumers, many unemployed, pinching every penny, who would shop in these stores?
It doesn't add up to much economic growth.


CAMPUS LIFE: Parsons; In This Course, Students Learn A Golden Touch
Working to the drone of Gregorian chants and the glow of candlelight, some participants in an intensive gold-leaf gilding workshop at the Parsons School of Design said they felt heavens above nearby Union Square.
"You feel like there's an aura around yourself," said Judy Gilfillan, a 45-year-old decorative artist who lives in Landing, N.J., and who recently exchanged eight days of everyday life to learn the Renaissance technique of applying delicate gold leaves to parchment and panels, and polishing them into blazes of sunlight.


A New York Specialty: Politics of Resentment
It's tough to sell mosaics in New York City, even ones that purport to be gorgeous.
As Mayor David N. Dinkins himself might attest, a steadfast appeal to people's better instincts makes for slow going at best.


Camera
Two new books, both by authors with many years' experience as camera repairmen, take the reader inside the camera for a worthwhile view of the technical side of photography.
Though very different from each other in style and content, these quirky, sometimes difficult, books will challenge both the accomplished photographer and the beginner.
Norman Goldberg of Madison, Wis., went from camera repair to inventing, and his designs include a film winding motor for the Leica camera in the 1960's.
He then became chief of camera testing for Popular Photography magazine, creating its testing laboratories, and healso started writing.
His output included a column in Popular Photography.


Disputes Over Freight Charges Slowing U.S. Aid
As the Defense Department is about to begin airlifting emergency food to cities in the former Soviet republics, the main American food assistance program has been delayed for at least a week because of disputes over freight charges and over which republics would repay certain loans.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d is scheduled to fly to Germany on Sunday, where he is to oversee the beginning of a 54-flight military airlift of food.
But Administration officials acknowledge that the airlift, announced at last month's international aid conference here, is mainly symbolic, as the flights in total will carry just 2,250 tons of food.


Belting Out That Most Unfeminine Emotion
Susan Faludi, the author of "Backlash: The Undeclared War Against American Women," said recently in a magazine interview that "anger is not something that's an admirable trait in woman, whereas the angry young man is a hero." Rock music abounds with belligerent expressions of male fury.
But where are the angry female rockers?
For the most part, female rock musicians have voiced either forlorn vulnerability (10,000 Maniacs) or, at best, defiance and aloof autonomy (Sinead O'Connor).
There are exceptions: Kristin Hersh of Throwing Muses explores rage, aggression and mental chaos to mesmerizing effect.
Kim Gordon of Sonic Youth cultivates a tough, delinquent persona.
And Lydia Lunch has been an unruly presence in underground rock for more than a decade.
Nonetheless, there's never really been a female equivalent to the insurrectionary personas of Johnny Rotten (the Sex Pistols), Axl Rose (Guns 'n' Roses) or Kurt Cobain (Nirvana).


Karin Falcigno Wed
Karin Suzanne Falcigno, a daughter of Nancy S. Polk of Pacific Grove, Calif., and Richard Falcigno of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Daniel Janick Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Janick of Dallas.
The Rev.
Edward Owens performed the Roman Catholic service at Sacred Heart Church at the University of Notre Dame in Notre Dame, Ind.
Mrs.
Janick, 24 years old, graduated from Notre Dame, as did her husband.
She is a third-year student at Brooklyn Law School.
Mr.
Janick, 25, is an associate in investment banking at Dean Witter Reynolds in New York.


Stamps
Black History
As part of its effort to give stamp collecting clearer relevance, the United States Postal Service is offering a handsome book on black history that includes the biographies of 28 blacks who have been featured on United States stamps.


Review/Theater; The Innocent Erendira And a Ghastly Grandma
Gabriel Garcia Marquez's fiction is notoriously difficult to dramatize in any form, including film, but the Colombian director Jorge Ali Triana has transformed a novella by Mr.
Garcia Marquez into sumptuous magic realism on the stage.
His production of "La Candida Erendira" ("Innocent Erendira and her Heartless Grandmother") at the Repertorio Espanol tends -- as the best Latin American theater often does -- toward opera, combining drama, a memorable original score by German Arrieta and spectacular scenic and lighting design by Liliana Villegas and Robert Weber Federico.
Virtually everything about this production, including the simultaneous translation from Spanish, is pristine.


Don't Write Off Handley Yet
To the Sports Editor:
In "Just Suppose '93 Giants Need a Coach," (The Times, Jan. 19) Dave Anderson writes: "If only the Giants would not have a successful season, they could fire Handley, hire Bill Parcells, and return to the glory of the Super Bowl." There is no guarantee that Handley will be a successful coach, but he should be given a decent opportunity to prove himself.
To convict Handley of malfeasance in his job at this stage shows, at best, a total lack of sensitivity toward Handley and, at worst, is a call to the mob to begin asking for Handley's scalp after the first Giant loss of 1992.
MARSHALL H. BENNER Milwaukee


1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Harkin, in Iowa, Urges Support in Caucus Vote
Declaring that "Iowa still has the first shot that's going to be heard across the country," Senator Tom Harkin crisscrossed this state today, imploring Democrats to vote on Monday in the Iowa caucuses, the first electoral contest in the 1992 Presidential campaign.
Senator Harkin has been repeating a similar line to audiences in New Hampshire, which will hold the first primary a week later.
"The people of New Hampshire," he said the other day in Portsmouth, "are going to fire the shot heard around the world."


Making Chocolate Mousse Without Raw Eggs
RAW or undercooked eggs have become risky business, so risky, in fact, that the Health Department in New Jersey has ordered restaurants not to serve them soft boiled or over easy.
People who are worried about salmonella, especially from mass-produced supermarket eggs, and who pay attention to the advice to cook eggs beyond runny can now forget about some familiar dishes.
A soft-boiled egg in the morning may already be a victim of high cholesterol counts, but what about Caesar salad with its raw egg to bind the dressing?
Or something as simple as homemade mayonnaise?
Bottle dressings will now have to be used.
Eggs benedict is another casualty.


Sports of The Times; Flaps Over the Flag And Quayle's Visit
LAFAYETTE, we are here. As arrogantly American as ever.
As new national Olympic teams marched in yesterday's dazzling French festival, which opened a new Olympic era, Vice President Dan Quayle's visit to the athletes village stirred the Mayor of Brides-les-Bains to accuse the American delegation of "abusing their rights" by having too many people in a restaurant.


UConn Coach Juggles His Stellar Freshman
Even though his team was hopelessly beaten, Connecticut Coach Jim Calhoun saw no reason to clear his bench in the waning moments against St.
John's last Saturday at Madison Square Garden.
So when the Huskies' leading shot-blocker, the freshman Donyell Marshall, injured his left knee with only four seconds left in the game, the UConn coach knew he would be second-guessed.


The Great Pretenders
For 40 Years, they were mainly figments of their own imaginations, their thrones in Eastern Europe abolished and their kingdoms held in the iron grip of Communism.
But with Marxist rule a memory, the would-be monarchs have been stirring in their cocoons of exile in Geneva, Madrid, London and Paris.
If there were such a thing as a crown commodity exchange, futures in Eastern European monarchies would have fluctuated wildly over the past couple of years.
The Soviet Union is no more and what was Yugoslavia is destroying itself in civil war, but perhaps -- people in "the families" like to think -- Bulgaria and Romania could be spared a similar fate under constitutional monarchies.


Networking; Linking In the Laptops as the Nets Grow
The differences between the computational power and storage capacity of desktops and laptops is rapidly disappearing.
Lightweight laptops with all the speed, storage space and graphics capability of any high-end desktop are readily available, and their prices are falling, too.
Many companies are beginning to buy laptops as the primary executive computer, bypassing desktops altogether.


France Just Misses a Miracle in Meribel
The Olympic ice hockey competition began today with an early warning to all bullies who would grind small-boned opponents into the boards.
As oversized Canada discovered against host France during a 3-2 victory in the tournament opener, it will not be that easy.
There will be referees like Nikolai Morozov, and fleet mites like Stephane Barin, and disappointments like Eric Lindros.


Retirement Fund to Be Used for Teacher Bonuses
A major obstacle to negotiations on a contract for New York City teachers has been cleared by a plan that would use retirement funds to pay for teacher bonuses that had fallen victim to state budget cuts, city and union officials said yesterday.
The $24 million in bonuses -- $357 a year for each teacher, and $50 to $70 for paraprofessionals -- had been paid by New York State under its Excellence in Teaching Program.
But state budget cuts eliminated that program.


More Appreciation For Mantle's Feat
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson gets close ("When Mantle Had to Battle for a Raise," The Times, Jan. 26), but not quite there, when he writes: "In his triple crown season in 1956, the 25-year-old slugger led the American League with a .363 average, 52 homers and 130 runs batted in. . . ."


Review/Music; A Bill McClelland Melange
Is it possible to translate gory local news events into semi-classical music that doesn't seem pallid beside its subject?
That was the challenge posed by "The Ballad of Don and Dan," the most interesting piece to be presented in a showcase of music by a New Jersey-based composer, Bill McClelland, on Monday evening at Dance Theater Workshop.
With a text adapted by Ian Frazier from news items describing a bizarre murder in Montana in the mid-1980's, "The Ballad of Don and Dan" is scored for a rock quartet and chorus and structured around the repeated lines "It was an idea, a man had an idea." That dry commentary, especially the word "idea," seemed to catch in the throats of the 16-member Vassar College Madrigal Singers, led by William Appling, which delivered an otherwise smooth performance of the piece.


Making Chocolate Mousse Without Raw Eggs
RAW or undercooked eggs have become risky business, so risky, in fact, that the Health Department in New Jersey has ordered restaurants not to serve them soft boiled or over easy.
People who are worried about salmonella, especially from mass-produced supermarket eggs, and who pay attention to the advice to cook eggs beyond runny can now forget about some familiar dishes.
A soft-boiled egg in the morning may already be a victim of high cholesterol counts, but what about Caesar salad with its raw egg to bind the dressing?
Or something as simple as homemade mayonnaise?
Bottle dressings will now have to be used.
Eggs benedict is another casualty.


Tropical Plumage


Miss Ziegler, Banker, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John K. Ziegler of Chatham, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Elizabeth Ziegler to Michael David Kelly, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Kelly, also of Chatham.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Ziegler, 29 years old, graduated from Lafayette College and has an M.B.A. from Pace University.
She is a trust officer at Chemical Bank in New York.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Willcox &amp; Gibbs Inc., a national distributor of industrial products in New York.


Chile Train
To the Editor: The train trip from Santiago, Chile, to Puerto Montt in the south, is indeed a pleasant and interesting ride ("Riding the Night Train in Chile and Argentina," Travel, Oct. 20).
My trip a few years ago was given added excitement when the train derailed just before arriving in Puerto Montt.
It was making a sweeping right turn through a ravine when it ran off the tracks.
Fortunately, no one was hurt.
I was the first one to get to a nearby highway and was able to flag down a taxicab.
The bored driver, after learning what had happened, quickly speeded up and tore into town to discharge me and the others and to hurry back to cash in on the bonanza in extra fares.


Sarah Butler, Artist, to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Dudley Butler of Stonington, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sharon Louise Butler to Daniel Benno Curland, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Curland of Norwich, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Butler, 33 years old, is an artist and an art director at Clarke/Thompson Communication Development and Design, a graphic design company in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and the Massachusetts College of Art.
Her father is a vice president at Paine Webber Inc., in New London, Conn.


Amy Underberg to Marry C. G. Allen
Mr. and Mrs.
Alan J. Underberg of Rochester have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Elizabeth Underberg to Christopher George Allen, the son of Ted A. Allen of Vancouver, Wash., and Jeanette Allen of Laguna Niguel, Calif.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Underberg, 33 years old, is a regional account manager for the Orange County Register in Newport Beach, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Colorado.
Her father is the senior partner in the Rochester law firm of Underberg &amp; Kessler.
Her mother, Joyce W. Underberg, is chairman of the Center for Environmental Information, a nonprofit group in Rochester.


Steelers Pick Assistants
The new head coach of the Steelers, BILL COWHER, added two new assistants.
KENT STEPHENSON, a former Seattle Seahawks assistant, was named an offensive line coach, and the Cincinnati Bengals defensive coordinator, DICK LEBEAU, was picked to coach the defensive backs. (AP)


Dollars in Ireland
To the Editor: Travelers to the Republic of Ireland should be warned of difficulties that may be encountered in changing United States currency for Irish pounds.
While my wife and I were recently traveling through Ireland, we found ourselves late one afternoon in Monaghan Town and attempted to change United States currency but were told by the bank that they were not accepting it because of problems with counterfeit $100 bills.


Lucy C. Garrity To Wed in July
Ann M. Garrity of Cambridge, Mass., and Thomas J. Garrity of Conifer, Colo., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lucy Carroll Garrity to David McColl Young, a son of Jane Wedemeyer of Riverside, Conn., and Donald M. Young of West Stockbridge, Mass.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Garrity, 31 years old, graduated from Middlebury College and is studying for a master's degree in management from Yale University.
Her father, who is retired, was a lawyer in New York.
Her mother is a schoolteacher in Boston.


Mary Knecht, Law Student, to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
James W. Knecht of Ocean, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Elaine Knecht to Adam David Shepard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Shepard of Providence, R.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Knecht, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Chicago, as did her fiance, who was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and also received an M.B.A. from the university.
The future bride is a law student at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a surgeon in Neptune, N.J.


Only the Jailers Change
HUNGER TRILOGY
By Wang Ruowang.
Translated by Kyna Rubin with Ira Kasoff. 133 pp.
Armonk, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe Inc. $19.95


Travelers


Sticky Questions in Stamp Land
Elvis lives, at least in the mail.
But, ponders the United States Postal Service, which Elvis should grace a commemorative stamp -- the svelte young heartthrob or the older, debauched blimp?
The Postmaster General is turning over the question to fans, who will be able to vote (by mail, what else?) for the mug they would rather lick.


On Viewing Labor as an Asset, Not an Expense
To the Editor:
I was disturbed to hear today of yet another major American company announcing large layoffs, presumably, like so many others, to improve productivity and competitiveness in the new, global economy.
The new, lean management style for the 1990's is beginning to sound more and more like good old American management methods -- from the 1890's.


April Wedding For Ms. Hamer
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Hamer of Teaneck, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Denise R. Hamer to Neil Stuart Page, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold A. Page of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Boca Raton, Fla.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hamer, 31 years old, is a lawyer for Societe Generale, a French bank, in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a master's degree in English from the University of California at Los Angeles and a law degree from the University of California Hastings College of the Law.
Her father is a founder and the executive vice president of Long Lake Energy, an energy development company in New York.
Her mother, Dina Hamer, is an art and antiques consultant in New York.


Queens Drug Dealer Pleads Guilty In 1985 Killing of Parole Officer
The Fat Cat and law-enforcement authorities settled their accounts last week.
Lorenzo Nichols, known as Fat Cat in the murderous world of southeast Queens drug trafficking -- a world in which he was once described as the dominant power -- pleaded guilty on Thursday to state murder charges in the 1985 killing of his parole officer.


Trial Nears for Ex-China Aide, Held 2 1/2 Years
For more than two and a half years, Bao Tong has sat alone in a cell in Qincheng Prison, his stomach troubles worsening and his white blood cell count dropping, as the nation's leadership struggled to decide what to do with him.
Now the regime is finally preparing to put Mr.
Bao on trial, in a case that will be perhaps the most sensitive of any held since the crushing of the 1989 Tiananmen democracy movement.
Mr.
Bao is not a student firebrand or worker organizer, but a 59-year-old member of Communist Party Central Committee who until 1989 was the political secretary to the Standing Committee of the Politburo.


Becoming Rare Species: The American Trapper
Before dawn the other day, Gerald Leggieri Jr. set out to inspect his traps on a farm here in rural southwestern Rensselaer County.
Mr.
Leggieri had been invited in by a farmer who feared that coyotes were bothering his dairy cows.
A part-time trapper, Mr.
Leggieri is a high school teacher of history and economics by profession.


2 Cruise Ships Change Hands
Society Expeditions, which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on Jan. 28, will no longer operate its two ships, the World Discoverer and the Society Explorer, after their current series of Antarctica cruises ends March 13.
Clipper Adventure Cruises has chartered the World Discoverer for four and a half years, and Abercrombie &amp; Kent is buying the Society Explorer.
Clipper's schedule begins April 5 with an 11-night voyage from Costa Rica to Panama, followed by cruises on the West Coast and in Alaska, South America and Antarctica.


Marni Smilow Plans to Marry
Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Smilow of East Brunswick, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Marni Beth Smilow, to Jonathan Philip Levitt, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Mayer Levitt of Providence, R.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Smilow, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and is a law student at Northeastern University.
Her father is a professor of clinical pathology at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick, N.J., and a co-director of the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital Laboratories.
Her mother, Turbi Smilow, is an independent college counselor in North Brunswick.


New Power Tools Help Add To Wood Screws' Popularity
WOOD screws are stronger fasteners than nails.
Although more expensive, they have become increasingly popular for many home repairs, because they are easy to install with an electric screwdriver or a drill equipped with a screwdriver bit.
Screws are particularly appropriate when hammering may cause damage, as when installing fasteners in a plaster wall, or when pieces may need to be disassembled later.
Following are guidelines for choosing wood screws and installing them correctly.


Homages To Homages?
To the Editor:
Caryn James really made me think about the future of cinema  [ "Old Movies Add to the Pleasure of the New," Jan. 26 ] .
Why, in 30 years we'll be seeing homages to homages.


Mexico Applies Strict Rules On Auto Entry
The Mexican Government has instituted strict requirements for the temporary entry (less than three months) of personal vehicles into Mexico.
The regulations are designed to insure that vehicles driven in are also taken out and not sold on the the black market.
A Mexican Government spokeswoman said many cars, some stolen, were taken over the border from the United States and sold to people wanting to avoid Mexico's import tax.
Another official said there were more than a million foreign cars in Mexico illegally.
The new requirements, outlined in a State Department travel advisory last month, apply to cars and trucks driven beyond the approximate 20-kilometer strip or "free zone" south of the United States-Mexico border.


Review/Music; Britten, Mozart, Elgar And a Fleeing Audience
New York Philharmonic subscribers can be an infuriating lot in their mindless resistance to repertory that smacks even mildly of adventure.
For the orchestra's concert on Thursday evening, the second in a series conducted by Andrew Davis, the house looked perhaps half full at the start.
At intermission, with Benjamin Britten's Four Sea Interludes from "Peter Grimes" and Mozart's Bassoon Concerto out of the way and Edward Elgar's First Symphony still to come, many patrons fled.
More followed after each movement.
But in fairness, one reader of Phillip Ramey's testy program note for the Elgar had to wonder whether Philharmonic audiences are receiving all the help and encouragement they clearly need.
True, Mr.
Ramey could hardly be blamed for the no-shows and probably had little to do directly with the defections.
Nor should he have betrayed his convictions by overselling a work he did not believe in.


From Coast to Coast, the Airlines Mean Business
IT may not be a shooting war in the airlines' business class, but it sure looks like intense competition.
On the most heavily traveled United States air route, between New York and Los Angeles, it was once difficult to get anything comfortable -- that is, anything other than crowded coach class -- if you did not want to pay steep first-class fares.
Now airlines, which have long offered business class internationally, are adding business class compartments and seats domestically, enhancing service and pushing tickets that cost more than the rarely paid full coach fare but less than first-class fare.
By one estimate, the average price paid one-way for a transcontinental trip in coach class at the end of 1991 was $396; business class tickets can be $400 to $500 more than this.
Business class, the middle price level, is also the middle compartment, with more space, better seats, food and service.
The airlines involved in the business-class dust-up are Trans World Airlines, which has been offering transcontinental business class for 10 years; American Airlines, which completed its jump into the transcontinental domestic business class market last week; Delta, which began its transcontinental domestic business class at the end of last year, and United, which began its buildup early in January.


Small Pins Offer Bowlers a Big Challenge
SCORES of children screamed and squealed as bowling balls crashed into pins on a recent Sunday afternoon at Barnum Recreation Lanes in Stratford.
Children outnumber grown-ups by a 3-to-1 margin on weekend afternoons at the bowling center on Barnum Avenue, and that would seem to bode well for the future of the game it features, duckpins.
But the general manager of the Barnum Lanes, Clarence Lavers, conceded that youngsters who come for family outings or birthday parties will not necessarily come back as they grow up.


Men's Movement: Win or Lose?
This most recent discussion of the "emerging men's movement" (Jan. 19) did a fine job of capturing the features of the movement that give me concern.
Why must this activity always be characterized as a win-lose situation for men and women?
Most of the recent coverage describes the women's movement as gaining power at the expense of men.
Perhaps it is a power that resides within individuals regardless of sex.


Toney Wins by Decision But Gets a Real Workout
At the final bell, James Toney, the International Boxing Federation middleweight champion, slumped over from the waist, his mouth wide open in pain, his arms hanging free.
The champion was exhausted.
His match today against an unheralded challenger, Dave Tiberi, was supposed to have been a breeze.
It was not.


Review/Music; Rosemary Clooney, Mellow as Mature Wine
Rosemary Clooney does not go in for the high drama or the flashy technical displays that most veteran popular singers rely on to impress an audience.
Miss Clooney, who is appearing at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza) through Feb. 29, brings a naturalness, solidity and unpretentious personal honesty to whatever she sings.
Instead of acting out the romantic fantasies of classic love songs, she projects a maternal wisdom and compassion.
In her warm, sympathetic interpretations, their emotional ups and downs are regarded as so much water over the dam.
The singer's current engagement is her third at the club in three years and coincides with the release of her newest album, "Girl Singer," on Concord Jazz Records.
And at Wednesday night's early show, Miss Clooney, accompanied by a sextet that featured Bucky Pizzarelli on guitar, Warren Vache on cornet and Scott Hamilton on saxophone, performed 15 songs, including 9 selections from that album.


On Car Dealer Service (Or Lack Thereof)
To the Editor:
"All About: Dealer Auto Repairs" (Jan. 26) describes the anxiety involved in obtaining service when there are unforeseen problems, but does not say anything about unneeded repairs.
While I am sure that there are many reputable dealers, I had an experience that drove me away from a long-time relationship with my dealer and has left me suspicious of any dealer service department.


South Africans of Mixed Race in a Political Shift
For nearly eight years, the Rev.
Allan Hendrickse and his Labor Party confidently dominated the mixed-race House of Representatives in South Africa's three-chamber Parliament, disregarding critics who accused them of collaborating with apartheid.
But Mr.
Hendrickse, whose 64 years have not muted his flamboyance, was humiliated last week when the Labor Party forfeited control of the mixed-race chamber after losing a vote of no-confidence, 44 to 40.
He was brought down by defectors from his own party who switched to the National Party after President F. W. de Klerk opened its membership to nonwhites in 1990.


CAMPUS LIFE: James Madison; Black Students Studying Africa In National Effort
Black students at James Madison University here have taken Africa out of the history books and put it onto a giant felt map to teach black students about their ancestral homeland.
The students are working through their local chapter of the National Students Support Council for Africa, an organization formed in April to educate black students about Africa.


The Case of the Expanding Gene
According to the common wisdom, genes are passed down intact from generation to generation like family heirlooms.
Occasionally a flaw will cause a genetic disorder, but it has long been assumed that, damaged or not, a gene and its progeny look just the same.
Thus it came as something of a shock last week when scientists reported in the British journal Nature that the gene that causes the most common kind of muscular dystrophy grows larger and larger each time it is bequeathed.
And so with each generation the disease becomes more severe.
When the gene is small the disease, called myotonic dystrophy, may go unnoticed, or manifest itself as a case of cataracts or a mild muscular condition in which a person has trouble relaxing his grip.
But several generations later, a baby may be born so afflicted that it cannot breathe without a respirator.


He Made the Blues Worth Listening to Again
One of the worst myths Americans have about African-American art is that it comes directly from the soul, unmediated by intellect -- that the artistic products of black culture appear without the need for study or refinement.
The idea that the blues reflected raw emotion was perpetrated by journalists, usually white, who were looking for the noble savage in their black blues musicians, as well as by the musicians, who knew what role they were being asked to play.
The notion, like the music itself, has become part of the rock-and-roll esthetic, where expressionism and extremism have been valued over craft and refinement.


On the Street; Black Leather Reborn
That fashion symbol of youthful rebellion, the biker's black leather jacket, was recently adopted as a uniform by fashion models.
But now it has been reborn once again.


Theater's New Director Isn't Bound by the Past
THE 12th year of Winterfest is under way for Yale Repertory Theater in New Haven, but it could just as well be the first -- or the last.
Though last year's series of new plays was known as Winterfest 11, this year's is not being called Winterfest 12.
It is simply Winterfest.
And next year's event may bear neither name nor number but may simply be another single play in the regular Yale Repertory schedule.
Clearly, Stan Wojewodski Jr., the new artistic director of Yale Rep and dean of the Yale School of Drama, feels that the previously established Winterfest way is "no way to go," he said, and he makes "no commitment" to such future festivals.


Yeltsin Deputy Calls Reforms 'Economic Genocide'
Vice President Aleksandr V. Rutskoi of Russia, bolstering his image as a superpatriot and a vigorous opponent of economic reforms, appeared today before a congress of about 3,000 nationalists and warned that the Russian people were headed for "economic genocide" under the course chosen by the Government and its Western advisers.
In a speech laden with references to Russia's glorious past and what he views as its current incompetence, Mr.
Rutskoi positioned himself to take advantage of despair over soaring prices and the hurt pride that many feel over Russia's loss of status.


There's Spring in Their Steps, and Perhaps in Their Arms
This is the kind of winter it has been for the Toronto Blue Jays: Jimmy Key, a 16-game winner last year, was changing an outside light bulb at his house when he fell off a ladder and badly sprained his right ankle.
David Wells, who gained 15 victories as a starter and a reliever, was putting together a crib in anticipation of the birth of his first child, got the little finger on his pitching hand stuck in one of the pieces and wound up wearing a splint.
Domestic mishaps, however, are not the Blue Jays' primary concerns; they expect Key, and Brandon's father, to be ready to do their customary work when spring training begins.
The pitchers they will scrutinize carefully are Dave Stieb, Ken Dayley and Al Leiter, who among them last season made nine starts and 11 relief appearances.


A Theater Couple Whose Memories Are the Stuff of Legend
PREDICTABLY, the interview is set up to promote a play.
The producer and the director mean to talk of "Park Your Car in Harvard Yard," now on Broadway.
But on this occasion the legend surpasses the publicity campaign.
For the producer is Robert Whitehead, once called the wonder boy entrepreneur of Broadway, and the director is Zoe Caldwell, renowned for both high comedy and high tragedy, with three Tony Awards to show for it.


What Feminists Learn From Hillary Clinton; Get Serious, America
To the Editor:
As a European observer of your emerging Presidential campaign, I am amazed at the way political debate in this country is driven by salaciousness, rather than issues.
Is it really because the solutions proposed for the country's social and economic woes aren't sexy enough to hold anyone's attention for long?


1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire; Kerrey Tries to Cast Doubt on Clinton
Bringing some forceful imagery to a campaign that has been surprisingly bereft of symbolism, Max Cleland, a former head of the Veterans Administration who lost both legs and an arm in the Vietnam War, traveled to New Hampshire today to campaign on behalf of Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska.
Mr.
Cleland, who now serves as Georgia's Secretary of State, insisted that his appearance in the state had nothing to do with recent accusations that Gov.
Bill Clinton tried to avoid service during the war.
But it clearly helped to keep the issue of military service in the news for another day.
And it drew attention to one of Mr.
Kerrey's major strengths: his heroism in Vietnam, which cost him part of his leg and won him the Medal of Honor.


Innovation Is Touchstone at Winterfest
SEVEN friends are invited to a woman's New England home.
So is the play's audience, which is led, in four different groups, to the lawn, the study, the bedroom and the kitchen, during the second act of "Fefu and Her Friends."
A black man dies, but he keeps coming back to life, and he keeps dying, and so on, 12 times.
The name of the man is Black Man with Watermelon.
The name of the piece is "The Death of the Last Black Man in the Whole Entire World."


Holmes Manages to Pull a Triumph Out of His Hat
In the beginning, Larry Holmes was nervous and his moves tentative.
A look of high anxiety flickered across his face.
In the Convention Center ring Friday night, he fought like -- well, a 42-year-old grandfather.
In those early minutes of the match, Holmes's opponent, 30-year-old Ray Mercer, reacted to his punches as though they were a mere distraction, with no more impact than what might land on him in a pillow fight.


Art Galleries, Old and Older
The Wadsworth Atheneum is a wonderful institution, and it seems a shame to splash a little cold water on its 150th anniversary (Jan. 12), but the honor of being the oldest art gallery in the United states belongs to another nearby Connecticut institution.
The Yale University Art Gallery, known then as the Trumbull Gallery, opened its doors in 1832, a decade before the Wadsworth Atheneum.
The new gallery was, interestingly, in part supported by a grant of $7,000 in bank stock from the Connecticut legislature.
The gallery mainly, but not exclusively, displayed the Revolutionary War paintings by Col.
John Trumbull that he had given to Yale College, "to be exhibited forever for the benefit of poor students, provided the College will pay me a competent annuity for the remainder of my life."


Making Chocolate Mousse Without Raw Eggs
RAW or undercooked eggs have become risky business, so risky, in fact, that the Health Department in New Jersey has ordered restaurants not to serve them soft boiled or over easy.
People who are worried about salmonella, especially from mass-produced supermarket eggs, and who pay attention to the advice to cook eggs beyond runny can now forget about some familiar dishes.
A soft-boiled egg in the morning may already be a victim of high cholesterol counts, but what about Caesar salad with its raw egg to bind the dressing?
Or something as simple as homemade mayonnaise?
Bottle dressings will now have to be used.
Eggs benedict is another casualty.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Bill Ripken, second baseman, on a one-year contract.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Gregg Jefferies, infielder, on a one-year contract.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Candy Maldonado, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Bip Roberts, infielder, on a one-year contract.


Making a Difference; 'Thrilled Beyond Belief'
The Beach Boys sang, Henry Kravis danced disco and waiters in surfing garb offered White Castle burgers and peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwiches.
Thus -- with food from the 50's, music from the 60's, dance steps from the 70's and celebrities from the 80's -- did the FMR Corporation introduce Worth, its magazine for the 90's, last Wednesday at Roseland in New York City.
FMR, the parent of Fidelity Investments, the giant mutual fund company, has put $20 million of its own money into the venture, and its chairman, Edwin C. Johnson 3d, was at the party, boasting and beaming over what he called his "new baby."


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
Rosenblatt says what Planned Parenthood and others have been saying for years: that the most effective way to eliminate abortion is to focus our energy (wealth, time and political influence) on education, improving access to family planning and research into new methods of birth control.
But instead we are wasting our resources battling a vocal minority.
In Maryland, for example, Planned Parenthood has to organize a multimillion-dollar campaign to maintain the right to choose.
Just think how that money and energy, from both sides of the battle, could be used to prevent the need for abortion in the first place.
DEIRDRE M. SMITH
Brooklandville, Md.


What Feminists Learn From Hillary Clinton; Exchange of Property
To the Editor:
I find William Safire's "Macho Feminism, R.I.P." (Jan. 27) problematic, though I am pro-motherhood, pro-family, pro-feminine, pro-monogamy in marriage and not a lesbian.


Venezuelans Secretly Support Army Coup Plotters
Judging by condemnations offered by every head of state in the Western Hemisphere -- from George Bush to Fidel Castro -- the leader of Tuesday's coup attempt here should now be Venezuela's No. 1 villain.
But in the back room of a slum shanty here, Jesus Lista offered a much different appraisal, one frequently heard in the Venezuelan capital.


Style Makers; Robert Small and Jim Burns, Entertainment Producer and Director
Robert Small and Jim Burns develop television programs that are rarely seen these days: hit music for children, jam sessions in which rock stars and rappers unplug their instruments and maybe even a program featuring poets.
Mr.
Small writes and directs their projects, and Mr.
Burns writes and produces them through their entertainment production company, RSE.
Their work has won ACE's, cable television's Oscars.


Alice L. Lawrenz Is Wed to Anthon R. Fuisz
Alice Louise Lawrenz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David Lawrenz of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday to Anthon Richard Fuisz, a son of Dr.
Richard Fuisz of Great Falls, Va., and Patricia Fuisz of Bethlehem, Pa.
The Rev.
James R. Adams performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Fuisz, 26 years old, graduated from Amherst College and is a fourth-year medical student at Georgetown University, as is her husband, 25, a Georgetown graduate.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
Your article states that "most of us actually know what we feel about abortion." It is true that most people have a position on abortion, but that position is seldom an informed one in this era of the 10-second sound bite and the oversimplification of issues.
Few people understand that Roe v.
Wade gives the interests of the woman precedence over those of the embryo early in the pregnancy, but allows Government to favor the fetus once it has attained viability.


'Luv' Offers Vaudeville of Neuroses
ONLY the antic staging by Mike Nichols in his second time out as a Broadway director, just after "Barefoot in the Park" and right before "The Odd Couple," could explain the wild success of "Luv," Murray Schisgal's smug comedy, in 1964.
One unenamored theatergoer at the time can't help recalling the roar of the crowd when the curtain rose, even before a line was uttered.
Evidently, all that was needed to convulse an audience bent on having fun at a Broadway hit was the view of a glistening bridge, designed by Oliver Smith, and the sight of a forlorn actor getting set to jump off it.
That was Alan Arkin, playing what was then still being called a bohemian type.


Goalie Overcomes an Icy Reception
The catcalls cascaded down from the rival bleachers as the goaltender for Lawrence High School took the ice.
"What are you doing after the game?" shouted one fan.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayville 242,000
8 Franklin Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, family room, basement; taxes $3,400.
Brentwood 122,000
201 Charter Oaks Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
Brightwaters 175,000
261 Windsor Avenue, 5-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; family room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,000.
Fort Salonga 269,000
45 Wayne Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old colonial; dining room, basement, pool; taxes $6,900.
Massapequa 370,000
95 Fairfax Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $8,200.
Matinecock 1.05 million
Linden Farms Road
4- bedroom, 4-bath, new brick ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room,; taxes $14,000.
OTHER AREAS Yorktown Heights, N.Y. 262,500
3175 Ronit Court  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old contemporary; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $8,371.
Southington, Conn. 142,000
251 Woodruff Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old Cape Cod; updated kitchen, 3-zone heat, 0.75 acre; taxes $1,541.
Allendale, N.J. 238,000
169 Dale Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old ranch; fireplace, patio, large level property; taxes $5,165.


Is Japan Out to Get Us?
"WE are definitely at war with Japan," says John Connor, the venerable detective in Michael Crichton's "Rising Sun," as he guides his junior officer through the intricate web of Japan's evil conspiracy to take over America.
Here is the latest, and least subtle, of a great tide of recent books demonizing the Japanese.
Almost all are classified as nonfiction; a few, like "Rising Sun," as fiction.
But in this genre the distinction blurs.
Mr.
Crichton's characters frequently deliver short lectures on the subject of Japan's insidious design, mixing established fact with fantasy.
The result is a thriller that doubles as a crude polemic.
Just in case the reader misses his point, Mr.
Crichton warns in an afterword of Japan's "adversarial trade, trade like war, trade intended to wipe out the competition," and encourages readers to verify the claims his characters make by consulting several recent works of nonfiction, which he lists.
But the nonfiction books Mr.
Crichton cites also tend to mix factual analyses of Japan's economic strength with hyperbolic visions of Japan's plot to run the United States.
High on the list is "Agents of Influence" (1990) by Pat Choate, which is partly a thoughtful examination of influence peddling by all large corporations, but also partly a paranoid fantasy about Tokyo's alleged payoffs to influential Americans to achieve "effective political domination over the United States."


A May Wedding For Miss Miller
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph H. Miller of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Meghan Marie Miller to Christopher Richard Creedon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Creedon of Chatham, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Miller, 26 years old, is a teacher's aide at West School in New Canaan.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father, a former agency manager for the Equitable Life Assurance Society in Milford, Conn., is an insurance sales agent in New Canaan.


At This School, Playing Post Office Doesn't Deliver a Kiss
IT wasn't even close to Valentine's Day, but workers on the afternoon shift at the Primrose Post Office in the Lincolndale section of Somers were working feverishly to sort, cancel and deliver the letters that had arrived since that morning.
One carrier, on the job only three days, simultaneously struggled to learn his new route and decipher the sometimes illegible addresses on his bundles.
All in a day's work, one might think, for a post office in a hamlet.
But this post office represents a joint venture between the Primrose Elementary School in Somers and the United States Postal Service's Wee Deliver program, developed 18 months ago to encourage literacy in the nation's schools.
Through this program, local post offices assist participating schools in designing and operating student-run post offices on school property.


Correction
An article on Jan. 19 about the return of diseases once thought to have been eliminated misstated the incidence of diphtheria in the United States and of strep throat in New York City.
No increase in diphtheria has been recorded in the last 10 years in the United States, and no documented increase in strep throat in New York City in recent years.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 9, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
40
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
3
3
TWILIGHT'S CHILD, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) When she becomes the owner of a hotel, a woman finds herself haunted by past heartaches.
4
3
ETERNITY, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.50.) A mail-order bride in 19th-century Maine.
5
3
DAZZLE, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $5.99.) The familial, professional and romantic life of a woman who becomes a celebrity photographer.
6
2
FORGIVING, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A woman finds family problems and love when she establishes a newspaper in Dakota Territory.
7
2
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) An elderly woman reminisces about six decades of life in rural Alabama.
8
6
COYOTE WAITS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The murder of a Navajo tribal policeman involves an ancient artifact.
9
12
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
10
2
VITAL SIGNS, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A physician's quest for fertility brings her horrifying experiences.
11
3
THE CAT WHO KNEW A CARDINAL, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran investigates the murder of a despised man.
12
1
MAGIC HOUR, by Susan Isaacs. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The romantic and professional lives of a detective become entangled as he investigates a murder in the Hamptons.
13 *
11
COLD FIRE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A reporter tracks the course of a good Samaritan.
14
8
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Plume, $15.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
15 *
1
THE SECRET PILGRIM, by John le Carre. (Ballantine, $5.99.) On the eve of his retirement, a member of British intelligence recalls his three decades as a spy.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
7
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
2
38
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
3
12
HIGH TREASON, by Robert J. Groden and Harrison Edward Livingstone. (Berkley, $6.99.) Evidence to suggest that the assassination of John F. Kennedy resulted from a massive conspiracy.
4
2
AND THE SEA WILL TELL, by Vincent Bugliosi with Bruce B. Henderson. (Ivy, $5.99.) An enigmatic 1974 murder case involving two American couples on a Pacific atoll.
5
2
CROSSFIRE, by Jim Marrs. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $13.95.) A Dallas journalist presents the case for believing that a conspiracy caused the death of John F. Kennedy.
6 *
431
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
7
30
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
8
116
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
9 *
31
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
10
15
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, feel, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
26
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
74
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
55
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
9
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1992. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
5
8
THE FAT-BURNING WORKOUT, by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.95.) A program designed to trim the body and tone muscles.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Mary O'Rourke To Wed in April
Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Philip O'Rourke Jr. of Radnor, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Patricia O'Rourke, to P. Matthew Bonanni, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter A. Bonanni of Armonk, N.Y.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
O'Rourke, 31 years old, is an account executive at Burton Luch Inc., a public relations agency in New York.
She graduated from St.
Michael's College in Winooski, Vt.
Her father is the assistant vice president of sales at the Consolidated Rail Corporation in Philadelphia.


Mutual Funds; Sometimes, Fund Managers Talk
Mutual fund investors may believe they have no direct access to the managers of the funds they own, but this is not necessarily so, according to a recent survey by Wiesenberger Investment Companies Service, a mutual fund monitoring firm.
The confidential survey of 220 managers of mutual funds found that 14 percent of the managers never talked to investors.
But the other 86 percent had at least a bit of contact with their customers.
This interplay ranged from rare for 43 percent of the respondents to very frequent according to 3 percent of the managers.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
Your article is an excellent exercise in values clarification.
Unfortunately, few people engaged in this war are willing to walk a mile in the other person's moccasins.
The passions generated by the marriage of politics and religion are rarely conducive to reasonable dialogue.
BEN THOMPSON
Marietta, Pa.


Dr. Nachtigall To Wed in May
Drs.
Richard and Lila Nachtigall of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Margaret Joy Nachtigall to Dr.
Anthony Joseph Giordano, a son of Anthony and Lorraine Giordano of Jacksonville, Fla.
A May wedding is planned.
Dr.
Nachtigall, 29 years old, is a chief resident in obstetrics and gynecology at the New York University Medical Center.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received her medical degree from N.Y.U.
Her father is a professor of medicine and her mother is an associate professor of obstetrics and gynecology at N.Y.U.; her father is also the medical director of Pepsico in Purchase, N.Y.


Kitt May Start at No. 15, but Where Will He Finish?
A.
J.
Kitt's final training today for the Olympic downhill on Sunday was nothing special: a time of 1 minute 52.86 seconds, 13th and almost two seconds behind Jan Einar Thorsen of Norway, who began the session with a stunning 1:50.93.
It was Kitt's second 13th-place training finish, which is good news if one believes in omens.


Karen B. Wohl Is Wed in Rye
Karen Beth Wohl, an associate at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, and Raymond Alan Schmitt, a vice president at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Rye (N.Y.) Golf and Country Club.
Rabbi Abraham Krantz performed the ceremony with Msgr.
Thomas P. Leonard attending.
Mrs.
Schmitt, 27 years old, graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as did her husband.
She has an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father, Harold L. Wohl of New York, is a certified public acccountant in New York.
Her mother, Arlene R. Buckley of West Nyack, N.Y., is a personnel administrator at Rockland Community College in Suffern, N.Y.


Ms. Blechner to Wed C. J. Pragman
Dr. and Mrs.
Stewart M. Blechner of Glen Oaks, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter Laura Lee Blechner to Christopher James Pragman, a son of Robert W. Pragman of Stuttgart, Germany, and Ruth Anne Pragman of Hyde Park, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Blechner, 23 years old, is a family-planning counselor at the Planned Parenthood clinic in Schwenksville, Pa.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is a dentist in New York.
Her mother, Maris Blechner, is the executive director of Family Focus Adoption Services in Little Neck, Queens.


National Team Named
MIRSAD HUSEINOVIC of Brooklyn College and CARLOS JAGUANDE of the Brooklyn Italians club team were named on Friday to the United States national soccer team for games at Costa Rica on Wednesday and in El Salvador on Feb. 19.
The selection of the two midfielders, both naturalized citizens, is a sign that Coach BORA MILUTINOVIC is making good on his promise to recruit foreign-born Americans.
Huseinovic is from Yugoslavia, and Jaguande was born in Peru.


O'Neal Is Hot but Duke Is Hotter
It's becoming the story of Shaquille O'Neal's collegiate career that he will win most of the individual battles while L.S.U.'s stronger opponents will win most of the wars.
This afternoon, the 7-foot-1-inch L.S.U. center came out ahead in his individual duel with Christian Laettner, outscoring the Duke center by 25-22.


Rest Easy. It's Not 1914 Anymore
Most of our international affairs experts remain incurably pessimistic about the prospects for a more decent and peaceful world.
Many assert that the new post-Communist world will be one of intolerant, aggressive nationalism rather than spreading democracy.
They suggest that Croatia, with its bombed-out churches and mutilated corpses, will be the model for much of what was the Communist world.
This scenario may indeed come to pass.
But if we look carefully at the last year, what is most striking is not the strength of intolerant nationalism but its weakness.
The impression, conveyed on our TV screens, of a generalized war of all against all is wrong: of the approximately 3,200 people who have died in ethnic violence in the former Soviet Union in recent years, virtually all have come from its non-European regions, most in the enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan and the Fergana Valley in Uzbekistan.


Where Every Day Is a Day for Roses
YEARS ago on Feb. 14, in places like Derbyshire, England, it was the custom for an unmarried woman to tap her forehead with a folded rose petal.
If the petal cracked, she knew that her valentine loved her.
Today, assessing a person's ardor on Valentine's Day is gauged not by petals, but rather the entire rose, preferably red, long-stemmed and 12 in number.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
Roger Rosenblatt's essay on abortion is timely and welcome ("How to End the Abortion War," Jan. 19).
However, his belief that Americans can coalesce on a policy that "discourages" abortion without making it illegal is probably too optimistic.
The polarization of Americans on this issue results from some pretty deep differences.
Differences in life style, for one thing, can dictate profound political polarization.
Many American women derive their most fundamental sense of self-worth from child-rearing and care of the family; many others find theirs in lives that include participation in the larger society, particularly the work place.
For women in "traditional" families (and their husbands), untrammeled access to abortion constitutes a form of permissiveness that threatens the things they hold most dear.
For women whose identities are tied to work outside the home, the right to control reproductive lives is essential.


A Still-Drowsy Cowboy Junkies
Was it a certain modesty that so attracted record buyers to the Cowboy Junkies?
In the clamorous world of popular music, the reputation-making "Trinity Session" -- recorded by the Cowboy Junkies on the cheap in a Canadian church four years ago -- stood out for its very quietness.
Margo Timmins, the group's husky, even-tempered lead singer, avoided ardor for a kind of drugged somnolence.
Or was it because the group's music brought a little old-world suffering to the new West: country-and-western beset by Weltschmerz, cowboys' cheeks gone pale, no more pining for lost loves (nothing matters anymore), Kierkegaard come to the Pecos.
Listeners were charmed.


Ellis Peters Tours
To the Editor: Your response in Q &amp; A on Nov. 3 about tours of Shropshire, England, with a connection to the mystery writer Ellis Peters was O.K. as far as it went.
There is more than a brochure of car trails.
The Shrewsbury Abbey Restoration Project has been working since at least the mid-80's on an ambitious plan to enhance the setting "through the designation of the land lying between the Abbey Forgate and the Rea Brook as a heritage site" to "present the character of medieval life centered on the historic Benedictine Abbey complex."
They have produced other brochures in addition to the one on car trails, including one covering the Abbey Church inside and out, St.
Winefride, heraldry and "In the Steps of Brother Cadfael," three walking tours of the area.


Mary MacDonald and Paul Squire Are to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
James D. MacDonald of Wilmette, Ill., have announced April wedding plans for their daughter, Mary King MacDonald, and Paul Donald Squire, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Squitieri of Brooklyn.
Miss MacDonald, 26 years old, is a management intern with the American Express Bank in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Wheaton College.
Mr.
Squire, 30, who changed his name legally, is an associate at the New York law firm of Hill, Betts &amp; Nash.
He graduated from Haverford College, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and Georgetown University Law Center.


Nancy E. Abrahams to Wed in Fall
Martin and Catha Abrahams of Stamford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nancy Ellen Abrahams, to Gregory Paul Shefrin, a son of David Shefrin of Farmington, Conn., and Betsy Kaufman of West Hartford, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Abrahams, 28 years old, is a marketing specialist at the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association-College Retirement Equities Fund in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University.
Her father is a partner in Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the New York accounting firm.
Her mother is the director of the Rape and Sexual Abuse Crisis Center of Lower Fairfield County in Stamford.


Flyer-Blackhawk Deal
The Philadelphia Flyers, who have one of the worst records in the National Hockey League, decided they needed some defensive help.
The Chicago Blackhawks, who've been doing somewhat better, decided they needed more offensive punch.
The result, a swap: Flyer left wing TONY HORACEK to Chicago for defenseman RYAN MCGILL. (AP)


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
I think Rosenblatt's "permit but discourage" formula is exactly right.
We need the Freedom of Choice Act; we need alternatives to abortion for those who choose not to have one; we need education in contraception, sexuality and responsibility.
ANNIE GOTTLIEB
New York, N.Y.


The Executive Computer; Stunning Spreadsheet, Minus Keyboard
For Dan Bricklin, a co-developer of the first popular computer spreadsheet, it is truly back to the future.
"It's been fun getting back into spreadsheets," Mr.
Bricklin said, as he demonstrated a remarkable new spreadsheet called At Hand during the Demo 92 computer conference here late last month.
At Hand, scheduled for delivery in the second quarter (list price $295) is one of the first major business applications for a generation of portable personal computers operated by writing and gesturing with a pen, rather than by typing on a keyboard.


Terreri Inspires, and Devils Do the Rest
Chris Terreri's 38 saves was more than enough inspiration for the Devils to withstand a fierce attack from the Bruins and skate away from Boston Garden this afternoon with a 6-4 triumph.
The Devils experienced a letdown after taking a 5-2 lead, and the Bruins took advantage of that to stage an onslaught.
But Terreri proved equal to the challenge with several brilliant saves.


Factory Dinosaurs Imperil Poland's Economic Gain
Plunked by government fiat on Defenders of Stalingrad Street, the W.S.K. company endured the cold war as a reluctant Polish cog in the Soviet military machine, grinding out spare parts and helicopter engines.
The street name -- choosing it was roughly akin to calling an American street Hanoi Avenue -- was changed by city officials shortly after Polish Communism collapsed in 1989.
Just a year later, the Soviet Union failed to make good on on a $30 million debt to the factory, and soon after disappeared from the map altogether.


Let's Test Australians, Too
To the Sports Editor:
Credit my wife, Elaine, with the best response I've heard to the threatened boycott by Australia's basketball team of Magic Johnson's playing on America's Olympic team: "If that's the way they feel, then their entire squad should submit to H.I.V. testing and be willing to make the results public. And that holds for any other country that feels the same way."


POSTINGS: Midtown Renovation; A New Castle For Chess Mates
The Manhattan Chess Club and the American Chess Foundation have been longtime partners in a program that has turned hundreds of public-school children into avid chess players.
They recently teamed up in another venture, the purchase of a building at the edge of the theater district in Manhattan; it will become a permanent home to both organizations.
The building is at 353 West 46th Street on the block known as Restaurant Row.
It will undergo a $250,000 renovation and be named the American Chess Center.
The Manhattan Chess Club, which dates to 1877 and is the oldest in the city, is now quartered in rented space in Carnegie Hall.
The Chess Foundation, which encourages interest in the game, has no official headquarters.


Man Kills Transvestite Prostitute, Then Himself
A Bronx man went berserk early yesterday when he discovered that the prostitute he had brought home was not a woman, the police said, fatally beating and stabbing the transvestite, then jumping to his own death as officers broke down his door.
The prostitute, who was not identified yesterday by the police, was well-known in the Bedford Park building, a warren of dingy cubicles and filthy narrow halls that was described by its residents as a den of drug dealing and prostitution.


Knocking Hype, And Adding to It
To the Sports Editor:
In "A Mountain Out of a Super Hill," (The Times, Jan. 14) Ira Berkow raises valid concerns regarding the megahype surrounding the Super Bowl.
Unfortunately, he concludes the essay with an unsupported -- and cutesy -- prediction of the game's outcome.
It's not that Berkow was wrong in his prediction, although, as a shameless Redskins fan, I'm glad he was.
His real lapse is expecting the reader to give the same credence to this throwaway forecast of a Bills victory (including the score!) as he would to the persuasive and documented lament on the ultracommercialism of the season's conclusion.
JIM MAYER Arlington, Va.


Haitians Provide a Test for Disputed Refugee Act
The first Haitians to win temporary asylum in this country have begun arriving in the New York area, and their accounts of suffering under the Haitian military Government offer some clues to the way American officials at the Guantanamo refugee camp are applying the ill-defined and often disputed test of political persecution under Federal immigration law.
About a third of the boat people interviewed so far at the American Navy base in Cuba have been granted entry to the United States under a three-month parole status, while the rest have been returned against their will to Haiti.
During the threemonths, those permitted entry will prepare for additional questioning to meet the test of the Refugee Act of 1980, which grants asylum to anyone who can show "a well-founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion."


On the Tube, Country Music Can't Go Down-Home Again
Three weeks ago, Garth Brooks's face appeared on national television.
As if he were delivering a State of the Union Message, country music's leading ambassador looked into the camera and said, "Hi, I'm Garth Brooks. I'm fortunate enough to play country music for a living. I'm from the state of Oklahoma and --
wait
!" His hand shot forward in anticipation that the words "country music" would scare viewers away. "I know what you're thinking.
Dull."
The camera cut to a shot of Mr.
Brooks in concert slamming his guitar into three drum cymbals.
"Old hat!" he said, and the camera showed him spraying streams of water into the air.
"Kinda like watching paint dry." Two acoustic guitars smashed together, splaying splinters of wood everywhere.
"Well," he concluded softly, "all I got to say is, welcome to the 90's."


Farce Demands a Canoe That Has No Paddle
DEADLY BUSINESS, THIS FORM called farce.
Not for those of us sitting out front, of course.
For us, it can be giddy, liberating fun.
I'm thinking of those unwitting characters, farce's sacrificial victims, who have no idea when the curtain rises of the torments and terrors that lie ahead.
For them, the experience is sheer hell -- rather like discovering that the current has picked up, the paddle has slipped away and the canoe is headed straight for the falls.
As the roar grows louder, they panic, clutch their hearts and mop their brows.
Their lives flash before them.
The world grows fuzzy.
Like tragic heroes, they curse their stars, although in the end it's usually a lucky star that saves them.
In addition to the telltale smudge of lipstick, these helpless souls have the mark of doom upon them.
Any production that doesn't take their flailings seriously is a production in trouble.


Dr. Sharon Seiler Becomes Engaged
Dr.
Jerome S. and Harriet Seiler of Great Neck, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Sharon Rachel Seiler, to Dr.
Charles Spielholz, the son of Terry and Rosalyn Spielholz of Medford, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Both Dr.
Seiler, 31 years old, and her fiance are research fellows in molecular biology at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University and received a doctorate in biology from M.I.T.
Her father is the associate chairman and director of medical education in the department of obstetrics and gynecology at the Booth Memorial Medical Center in Flushing, Queens.


CAMPUS LIFE: Northwestern; A Sit-In Protests $27 Student Fees For H.I.V. Testing
Campus police locked some 100 students out of Northwestern University's administrative offices last week.
They were seeking to prevent a student government-sponsored sit-in protesting the university's refusal to have free testing for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Testing now costs $27.
Chanting "Unity For H.I.V." and "Lives Over Money," students turned the Tuesday afternoon lockout into a noisy demonstration in front of the building.
"It's a life-or-death test," William Kircher, president of the Associated Student Government, told demonstrators.
"It's a stressful time for students and money shouldn't be an added worry."


Headliners; Her Move
If somewhere in the world recently there was heard that distinct crash and tinkle caused by a chessboard being flung through a window, it may have been Bobby Fischer learning that little Judit Polgar has supplanted him as the youngest person ever to be ranked a grandmaster.
The temperamental Mr.
Fischer was 15 years, six months when he accomplished that feat in 1958, a month older than was Ms.
Polgar when she achieved the rank by vanquishing a field of 10 grandmasters at the Super Championship of Hungary in late December.
That level of play is rare for teen-agers and almost unknown among women.
There are only four women grandmasters now, counting Ms.
Polgar, among the top 350 players, and chess experts commonly predict that there will never be a woman world champion.
But Maxim Dlugy, head of the United States Chess Federation, doesn't seem so sure.
"She has the chance of maturing and becoming a really strong player," he said last week, "and trying for the world championship someday."


Political Talk
Makings of a Welfare Battle
The New York State Senate does not typically devote a lot of time or trouble to its confirmation of the men and women nominated by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to head state agencies.


Irish Law Gives Americans a Key to Europe
Lured by the prospect of life in a new Europe, some young Americans of Irish descent are obtaining Irish passports, which let them live and seek jobs in any European Community country.
A relatively obscure Irish law, approved in 1956 in the hope of maintaining ties with the families of emigrants, entitles anyone with evidence of an Irish parent or grandparent to claim citizenship.


Debra Harmon Plans to Marry
Dr. and Mrs.
Martin Harmon of Springfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Debra Mindy Harmon, to Michael Arthur Distler, the son of Gladys M. Distler of New York and the late Daniel H. Distler.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Harmon, 33, graduated from the University of Connecticut and is the sales audit manager for the Bradlees department store in Braintree, Mass.
Her father is an optometrist in New Brunswick, N.J.
Her mother, Shirley Harmon, is a special-education teacher in Cedar Grove, N.J.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BY WITH TO &amp; FROM A Lincoln Kirstein Reader.
Edited by Nicholas Jenkins.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $30.


Donna Jacobson, Consultant, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Miles R. Jacobson of Dix Hills, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Donna Beth Jacobson, to Jeffrey Ian Halpern, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester L. Halpern of Holyoke, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Jacobson, 27 years old, is a consultant at AAA Business Communications, a management consulting firm in Paris.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University, as did her fiance.
Her father is a founding partner in the law firm of Jacobson &amp; Goldberg in Garden City, L.I.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ELIZABETH BISHOP The Biography of a Poetry.
By Lorrie Goldensohn.
Columbia University, $29.95.


DataBank/February 9,1992


CAMPUS LIFE: Cornell; Athletes Opposing Decision to Cancel At Least 4 Sports
Student athletes and coaches at Cornell University say they are angry and frustrated over $600,000 in budget cuts announced by the athletics department last week.
Department officials said the cuts would eliminate four intercollegiate sports, force four additional programs to rely entirely on their own fund-raising and require the department to reduce administrative expenses.
"Right now there's a feeling of hopelessness that no matter what you do, it won't work," said Michele Carey, a sophomore on the women's gymnastic team from Marblehead, Mass., who is majoring in English.


Headliners; Slide Show
Traveling feet first, flat on his back at around 70 miles per hour, Robert Pipkins made it to the United State Olympic luge team last week.
Mr.
Pipkins, 18 years old, got into the sport almost accidentally in 1987 through a program sponsored by his mother's employer, Nynex, and has inspired long-shot hopes that this might be the year for the United States to get its first Olympic medal ever in luge, a sport in which a competitor, supine on a small sled, plunges down a bobsled run.
The Staten Island college sophomore is the first black American Olympic luger and last month became the first American slider to win a gold medal in any level of international competition when he took first place in the world junior championships in Japan.
Though he placed second among 65 competitors in time trials last week, no talk of luge medals in France comes from Mr.
Pipkins, whose event ends tomorrow.
"No," he told a reporter.
"I'm not going to win a medal here." Instead, he said, he is looking forward to the next Olympics.


Inquiry Into a Threat by Mail Stirs Anger at Northwestern
Since a threatening package was sent to the Northwestern University president three weeks ago, a Federal investigator has been questioning, fingerprinting and photographing people on campus who are vocal on issues of interest to women.
The package was sent to the office of the president, Arnold Weber, on Jan. 15 and partially opened by his secretary, who called the campus police, who called the Cook County bomb squad.
Postal officials were also notified.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Greenlawn
THE hamlet of Greenlawn has always had a low profile.
In 1653, when a group of settlers bought a large tract from the Matinecock Indians, the part that later became Greenlawn was included as back-pasture lands, which the settlers called Old Fields.
And when the Long Island Rail Road opened a station in Old Fields in 1868 -- calling it Greenlawn -- it did so primarily to serve the resort town of Centerport to the north.
Although an 1880 painting by a local artist shows a green lawn from the tracks to what is now the Greenlawn Hardware Store, Carol Bloomgarden, a trustee of the Greenlawn-Centerport Historical Association, says "nobody knows how Greenlawn got its name."


Help Needed for Forsaken Somalia
A disaster almost beyond imagining has overwhelmed Somalia, now a ghost of a country in the Horn of Africa.
A senseless war between rival clans waged by teen-agers with automatic weapons has made a killing ground of the once-sleepy capital of Mogadishu.
Hundreds of thousands of Somalis are roaming the countryside, with little food or medicine.
The result is what the State Department calls "the most acute humanitarian tragedy in the world today."
Worse, it is far from clear what the world can do.
Relief efforts are imperiled by unfriendly fire.
Somali warlords have ignored a United Nations call for a cease-fire.
An arms embargo imposed by the Security Council means little since belligerents can tap existing stockpiles of high-powered weapons.
And Somalia's neighbors lack the will and means to resolve the conflict.


Adjusting the Record of Lincoln the Lawyer
The images clash.
Honest Abe Lincoln, the rough-hewn small-town lawyer and onetime rail-splitter plucked from prairie obscurity to lead the nation at a crucial moment.
Abraham Lincoln, an adroit and sophisticated trial lawyer, one of the best in Illinois.
But two hand-written documents recently discovered in courthouse files should demolish any notion that the latter view is overstated.
In one document, the future President cogently stated the case for two shady bankers accused of fraud in a railroad deal, not questioning most of the facts against the men but making his arguments on legal grounds.


Stringing Along


What Price Glory 20 Years Later?
JASON MILLER'S Pulitzer Prize-winning "Championship Season," at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst, is is predictable in every way except its final impact.
The plot deals with the 20th-anniversary reunion of a high school basketball team that won a state championship.
From the moment the men are introduced, we realize that they are first-class losers replaying their faded glory days.
You will recognize these people either from firsthand acquaintance or from the ceaseless and dreary news articles about petty corruption.


Crown Jewels at Risk
A 72-foot luxury yacht outfitted with a jacuzzi.
A 19th-century Italian fruitwood commode.
Expensive flowers.
Travel to vacation resorts.
Camera shots from an episode of "Life Styles of the Rich and Famous"?
Not quite.
These items were bought by universities with Federal money provided to support research.
A House subcommittee, chaired by John Dingell, has unearthed a seeming billion-dollar cesspool of mischarges and overcharges at Stanford University, M.I.T., Yale and other universities.


At a Standstill In Prague
After spending some time recently in Prague, we went to the main railroad station to go to (Marienbad) Marianske Lazne.
Knowing the departure time of our train, but not the number of the track, we went directly to the information office.


The Forgotten Silver Of U.S. Hockey Team
Although it was only 20 years ago, it was a much different era for politics and sports.
During the heat of the cold war, the hockey teams from the United States and the Soviet Union would meet on ice more often than their leaders met on land.
Dick McGlynn, then a defenseman for the United States, remembers how the Soviet coach greeted the American coach after the United States defeated Czechoslovakia, technically a Soviet ally.
"He put him in a bear hug and he gave him a big kiss on the lips," said McGlynn, now a lawyer in Medford, Mass.
"Right in front of all the players! Imagine how this seemed to a bunch of guys from a North American culture.


A Cozy Amish Craft
WHEN the Amish, an austere Anabaptist sect with origins in 16th-century Switzerland, settled in the fertile farmlands of southeastern Pennsylvania more than 250 years ago, they had no history of quilting.
But as they established what remains the oldest and one of the largest Amish communities in the country, they adapted what was then an all-American folk art to their own simple ways.
Today, Amish quilts themselves are regarded as a premier form of American folk art.
The peculiar palette and stunningly simple patterns of these antique woolen and cotton quilts are prized by private collectors from Tokyo to Geneva.
Amish women in Lancaster County, Pa., who pass this intricate craft down from mother to daughter, now produce more quilts than ever before.
But the quilts that once were lovingly stitched to commemorate a birth or wedding have become largely a commodity.
If you visit Lancaster County, a two-hour drive west from Philadelphia, you'll find a vibrant array of handmade quilts available at retail shops and in farmhouse parlors.
The observant shopper also will find that today's quilts are a little less traditional, a bit more contemporary in styles and fabrics, and a whole lot more expensive than they were even a few years ago.


Greens to Melons, Potatoes to Tomatoes
VEGETABLE garden planning is at its height.
Those who have grown their own for years know what does well.
Most important, they know what the family likes or what should be grown in quantity for preserving.
Some gardeners have huge plots and grow just about everything.
Others have just enough room for a few vegetables.
They delight in homegrown tomatoes or tossing a salad with greens just picked.


City College Says It Punished Student Groups
A City College spokesman said yesterday that two student groups had been suspended after rowdiness at campus events in the months before last December's fatal stampede at a celebrity basketball game, contrary to the findings of a critical report.
The spokesman, Charles DeCicco, took partial exception to a City University report that found a history of poor supervision of student-run events on the City College campus.
The report determined that the problems at the game, where nine people were fatally crushed, were not "isolated and unique."


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
AMERICAN ORIGINALS The Private Worlds of Some Singular Men and Women.
By Geoffrey C. Ward.
HarperCollins, $23.


Making a Difference; Looking for Good Deeds
"To me, the old saw is correct, that doing good is good business," said James E. Burke, the man who successfully managed two crises involving lethal cyanide poison in Tylenol capsules, in 1982 and 1986, when he was chairman and chief executive of Johnson &amp; Johnson.
Mr.
Burke, who was able to reassure the public and along the way save the Tylenol franchise, said last week that trust had helped him through.
"The company over 100 years had developed a trusting relationship with the public," he said.
"Trust is basically what all good trademarks are about."
Now, in the time since he stepped down at Johnson &amp; Johnson in April 1989, the 66-year-old Mr.
Burke is living out his belief that business should be serving the commonweal as well as mammon.
Much of his time, when he's not tending to his duties as a director of the International Business Machines Corporation and the Prudential Insurance Company of America, is devoted to the chairmanship of the Business Enterprise Trust, which honors businesses large and small for courage, integrity and social vision.


Review/Dance; Stravinsky, Balanchine And Robbins
The program that the New York City Ballet presented on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater was a generous one in several respects.
It lasted nearly three hours, and choreographically it was time well spent, for the evening featured major works by George Balanchine and Jerome Robbins.
Lovers of Stravinsky's music would also have been delighted, for three of the four ballets were to scores by that composer.
Nevertheless, the uneven quality of the company's dancing prevented the program from being a total joy.


Bleak Outcrop of Fear Awaits Returning Haitians
This small hamlet of donkey- and hand-plowed farmland is only five miles from the nearest paved road, but it takes 40 minutes to cover the rugged terrain by car.
It is the kind of world to which most of the forcibly returned Haitian boat people must return.
Here in Casale, a tiny pocket of green amid a rocky and forbidding badlands, residents are well acquainted with both poverty and political repression.


Morceli Takes Aim at Indoor-Mile Mark
One of the most illustrious records in track and field will be in jeopardy today when 21-year-old Noureddine Morceli of Algeria attempts to set a world indoor best for the mile in the Mobil 1 Invitation Meet in Fairfax, Va.
Morceli has been ranked No. 1 in the world the past two years in the 1,500 meters, or metric mile.
In 1991, he won 19 of 20 middle-distance races and captured the world indoor and outdoor titles in the 1,500.


Mosques of Istanbul's Great Builder
DOMES and minarets in great profusion against a bright blue sky: that, for centuries, has been the best-known image of Istanbul.
Today still, the city, seen from across the Golden Horn, looks like an architect's dream, a place where gravity has been temporarily suspended and vast masonry balloons soar carelessly into a welcoming heaven.
Seen at close range, though, some of these mosques lose their magic.
Too large, too small, too wide, too heavy, they can seem more like a catalogue of errors than triumphs of design.
Luckily, though, others are just as stunning as we had hoped, and the chances are that, in virtually every case, they will turn out to be the work of Mimar Sinan.
Architecture, on the whole, has not been one of Turkey's artistic achievements.
Starting with imitations of Byzantine buildings, the Turks went on, at the end of the 18th century, to copy Western styles.
There is, of course, the occasional pavilion made glorious by a decor of Iznik tiles, but that has more to do with faience than with structure.
And so it is particularly gratifying when we come across an architect of genius.


Stacey Mennen Is Married to Keith W. Webster
Stacey Marie Mennen, the staffing coordinator at Lord &amp; Taylor, and Keith William Webster, an investment representative at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, both in New York, were married yesterday in Phoenix.
The Rev.
Michael O'Grady performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at SS.
Simon and Jude Cathedral.
Mrs.
Webster, 26 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Arizona State University and received a master's degree in human resources from the University of Bridgeport.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Keith Mennen of Phoenix.


Swapping Woes: A Fed Official Sees Problems
Will the next great banking crisis come not from the things on banks' balance sheets -- the bad loans -- but from the things not on them, the arcane financial innovations that show up in bank financial reports deep in the fine print?
Ask that of a banker involved in such things, and you'll get -- not for attribution, of course -- assurances that all is well.
Given how little is disclosed, it is very hard for an outsider to challenge, or confirm, such assurances.


Cuttings; Your Own Nursery For Birth of Spring
It's time to stop dreaming and order your seeds.
Whittle that 200-item list down to something that won't break the bank and your back (remember weeding?), and get those orders in the mail.
Then set up your own little nursery.
You may think it's winter, but once you sow the seeds of your leeks and the velvet black pansies from Thompson &amp; Morgan, spring will have crept into your house.
Those little green cotyledons poking up through the pots are as endearing as babies' feet.


Focus: The Northeast; Debt and Mild Winters Afflict Ski Areas
THE empty chair lifts were swaying silently against a wintry sky -- skeletal reminders of headier days vibrant with the sounds of skiers riding up the mountain.
Along the edges the neat rows of vacant condominiums stood like wooden sentries over the abandoned slopes.
Like several others, the 750-acre Mount Ascutney ski resort here, closed since last April, was brought down by excessive debts from speculative slopeside condominium development coupled with unseasonably warm winters.
The shutdown has been particularly hard on the buyers of individual units, many of whom cannot even use their units pending a resolution with creditors.


U.N. Chief Reduces Top Posts in Administration
Barely a month after taking office, Secretary General Boutros Ghali has announced a sweeping reorganization that streamlines departments and slashes top posts in the unwieldy United Nations Secretariat.
The action, announced on Friday, follows the outlines of a proposal submitted last year by an informal group of representatives from more than 20 industrialized and developing countries, including the United States.


Lisa Koppelman to Wed J. H. Tames
Murray Koppelman of New York and Sarah Levy Koppelman of Tenafly, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Koppelman to Jason Harold Tames, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Tames of Huntington, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Koppelman, 32 years old, is a vice president of Eastlake Securities Inc., an investment banking concern in New York.
Her father is Eastlake's president and founder.
She graduated from Boston University and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her mother is a nurse at Englewood (N.J.) Hospital.


Brenda Corwin and D. P. Wallis to Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Corwin of Huntington, L.I., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Brenda Hilary Corwin and David Potts Wallis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George R. Wallis of Portland, Me.
The couple are both 25 years old.
Both graduated from Syracuse University and both work for the Strawbridge &amp; Clothier department store chain, she in Philadelphia as a merchandiser in charge of store displays and he in King of Prussia, Pa., as a department sales manager.


A New Old Spider From Alfa Romeo
ONE of the nice things about driving lots of cars is that you can get into any vehicle and pretty much know where everything is.
Sort of like being a garage attendant.
It doesn't always happen though, and when it doesn't, it is usually because the car is Italian.
I was thinking that as I tried to find my way through New York's potholes, wondering also how I was going to drive the 45 miles home without dash lights.


New &amp; Noteworthy
SMALL FORTUNES: Two Guys in Pursuit of the American Dream, by Edward Zuckerman. (Penguin, $10.) Set in the heart of Texas, these two rags-to-riches-to-rags stories show that succeeding in America requires savvy, spirit and a good deal of plain dumb luck.
The author's "compelling and often very funny portrait . . . gives the reader a colorful picture of contemporary Texas as glimpsed through the lives of his two heroes and some of those they encounter," Michiko Kakutani said in The Times last year.
GOSPEL HOUR, by T. R. Pearson. (Avon, $11.) Before his near-death experience, Donnie Huff's great loves in life were beer and television.
Then his mercenary mother-in-law persuaded the Virginia lumberjack to make his fortune as a preacher on the Pentecostal revival circuit.
"T. R. Pearson is a great spinner of tall tales," Judith Freeman said here last year, and this novel "may be his tallest and most hilarious tale so far. Reading it is like encountering a family of zanies in a fun house: there's craziness within the craziness, and everything is distorted, both the people and the place."


Practicing Law With an Eye On Issues, Not Billable Hours
AT Legal Services, the pay is low and the work often frustrating.
The top salary, even after 20 years, is less than many Wall Street lawyers fresh out of school earn their first year on the job.
"But if you want to concentrate on law without the pressure of billable hours, there's a virtual flood tide of interesting issues and cases in our office," said Michael D. Hampden, executive director of Westchester-Putnam Legal Services.


Men's Movement: Win or Lose?
The article on men's groups reminds me of my own experience in a men's group back in 1971.
We were all husbands with "women's lib" wives, and we were anxious about the changes in sex roles and having more assertive and ambitious wives to relate to.
We explored our masculine concerns about friendship, competition, women as property, homosexuality and tender caring.
Many of the marriages ended in divorce anyway, with the implication that the men tried but just couldn't be as open and loving and emotionally close as the women.


Prosecution Provides Glimpse of Gambino Tactics
An undercover investigator posing as an independent trucker was warned that he risked having his legs broken if he persisted in challenging what the prosecution contends is organized crime's control of delivery trucks serving Manhattan's garment industry.
The warning was offered as evidence to a Manhattan jury Thursday as the extortion trial of two reputed Mafia leaders, Thomas and Joseph Gambino, the sons of the late reputed organized-crime boss, Carlo Gambino, ended its first week of testimony.


Headliners; In Harm's Way
The sound of the whistle gets a lot of attention at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, one of the Government's oldest and dirtiest nuclear laboratories.
When Charles D. Varnadore, a 50-year-old mechanic at Oak Ridge, appeared on a CBS News program last year to talk about the incidence of cancer at the lab, including his own, executives of the Martin-Marietta subsidiary that runs the Tennessee lab rushed to do something about it.
What they did, Mr.
Varnadore said in a complaint to the Labor Department, was assign him to do busywork in an isolated room containing toxic and radioactive chemicals.
Last weekend, the Labor Department ruled that Mr.
Varnadore's employer had broken several laws and discriminated against him by placing him in a work space of "questionable" safety.
The company is appealing and Mr.
Varnadore is seeking damages.
One of his lawyers said, "What they did borders on attempted murder, knowingly putting a cancer patient with a suppressed immune system in there."


Starry Highways From Earth to Moon
Cyrano De Bergerac wrote in 1656 of riding to the moon in a chariot propelled by fireworks.
A century later, in "Gulliver Revived," Rudolf Erich Raspe told of Baron Munchausen's meeting on the moon with a lunar inhabitant who walked about with its head tucked under its arm.
And in his prescient "From Earth to the Moon," published in 1865, Jules Verne described the interior of an aluminum spacecraft furnished with all the comforts of home -- wine, gas lighting, tools, books, two dogs and a gun rack.
Space fantasies have flourished since 1610, when Galileo made the first astronomical discoveries with the newly invented telescope.
Some of the interplanetary dreams of scientists, writers and artists are documented in "Blueprint for Space: Science Fiction to Science Fact," an exhibition at the I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art, Madison Avenue at 56th Street, through March 28.


Ms. Schattinger, Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Schattinger of Shaker Heights, Ohio, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elisabeth Myers Schattinger, to Alistair Buchan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew S. Buchan of Edinburgh.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Schattinger, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and is pursuing an M.B.A. at Dartmouth College.
Her father is president of the Pioneer Manufacturing Company, a manufacturer of products for industrial maintenance, in Cleveland.
Her mother, Joan Schattinger, is a freelance writer and has written books on the the history of Cleveland.


How France Is Sliding From Mitterrand's Grip
As an opposition leader, Francois Mitterrand was a harsh critic of Charles de Gaulle's authoritarian manner, but when he too reached Elysee Palace in 1981, he promptly adopted the old general's imperial style.
Indeed, such was his aloofness that he soon acquired the nickname God.
And of course when he spoke, others listened respectfully.
Yet when Mr.
Mitterrand was interviewed on television last week about the latest scandal to shake his Government, he had to struggle to be heard.
In the good old days, the two journalists would have lobbed him soft questions.
This time they were so determined to pin him down that the President was reduced to calling out, "Let me speak! Let me speak!"


Sightseers


Sports of The Times; Magic Plays This Game For History
PUT simply, there has never been an event in American sports quite like what awaits us here this afternoon.
That son of the electronic age, Magic Johnson, has put this moment in terms of an MTV hit single: "It may be my last game. My V.C.R. will be working, so I can pop it in for my son or daughter, to see me playing with all these All-Stars."


CAMPUS LIFE: Texas, Pan American; Censurings Follow Suits as Professors Battle Their Dean
Soap opera writers would have a hard time creating a script to match the controversy brewing at the University of Texas-Pan American.
It involves two lawsuits, the Texas Attorney General's office and the proposed dismissal of two tenured professors.
"You could call this 'As the Academic World Turns,' " said Bruce Erickson, the director of university relations.
"It's a very complex situation."


Corrections
An article on Jan. 12 about tearooms in Paris misstated the opening hours of Verlet.
It is closed on Saturday from Easter to Sept. 30, not all year.
It is closed on Monday from Oct. 1 through Easter.


Lavish Opening Ceremonies for the Winter Olympic Games


Gay Canadian Minister Stands Trial
Like Christian churches in many parts of the world, the Anglican Church of Canada has struggled for years with the issue of homosexuality among its priests.
In an attempt to foster harmony on a matter that has the potential for a bitter split between its liberal and conservative wings, the church adopted a policy in 1979 that allowed homosexuals to become or remain ministers as long as they abstained from what the church called "sexual acts with persons of the same sex."


Rare Octets Featured In Concerts This Week
THE octets of Schubert and Mendelssohn are often recorded, but they seldom turn up in concert, primarily because of their unusual ensemble demands and the difficulties in assembling top-notch paired quartets.
So it is a pleasure to announce that both octets are being performed in the county this week.
The Mendelssohn is on tonight's 8 o'clock program at Congregation Emanu-El in Rye, with the Tokyo String Quartet and the young St.
Lawrence String Quartet playing for the Westchester Chamber Music Society.
The program also features quartets of Mozart and Debussy.
More information is available by calling 948-6533 or 723-0222.


At Season's Stormy End, a Hunter Finally Gets His Geese
A few days ago I realized that I had not fired a shot at a duck or a goose during the entire 1991-92 waterfowling season.
Prodded by the knowledge that I hadn't been so deprived for more than half a century, save for three years during World War II, I took one of my fowling pieces from the wall and swung it to my shoulder.
It felt good.
That particular shotgun, a 12-gauge over and under, had been purchased two seasons back when I knew that I had to have a gun of modern manufacture, one that would handle the steel shot that is now mandatory for waterfowling throughout the nation.


Just Half a World Away in Huntington
TRAVEL to exotic corners of the globe is a sure cure for the midwinter blues.
And what country is more foreign than Afghanistan?
Best of all, Long Islanders can forget passports, planning and expensive plane tickets when heading for Kabul in Huntington.
This authentic and atmospheric jewel of a restaurant seems half a world away from Jericho Turnpike.
A filigree curtain of hanging gourds and beads shields diners from passers-by hurrying to the other stores in the tiny strip shopping center.


The French, Too, Have a Word for It
To the Editor:
Although I enjoyed Jon Pareles's essay "The New Shapes of Sounds to Come"  [ Jan. 19 ] , I was surprised by the lack of mention of rap songs in languages other than English and Spanish.


Terrorizing the Work Force
To the Editor:
I find it remarkable that I.B.M. feels justified in threatening to dismiss 10 percent of its employees each year purely as a means of encouraging all employees to strive harder and that it has the audacity to publicly admit as much ("Take This Job and Love It").
It should at least have the good sense to be ashamed of itself.


Alexander's Departure Leaves Cuomo Tricky Task of Picking a New Judge
In announcing his move from the Court of Appeals to City Hall last week, Judge Fritz W. Alexander 2d left Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo with the delicate task of replacing the lone black judge on the state's highest court.
The appointment is also sensitive because Judge Alexander, in the view of some students of the court, has been a centrist swing vote on a bench that has been inching toward the right.


School Aid: The Figures
Perhaps the most contentious issue in New Jersey this year is education: who pays, how much, who benefits and how the money is allocated.
The focus of the debate is Gov.
Jim Florio's Quality Education Act, which was intended to funnel money to poorer districts, inevitably at the expense of wealthier ones, and that alone stirred anger in many of the state's 592 school districts where voters felt they were being shortchanged.


Cynthia Van Vranken Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Frederick Van Vranken Jr. of Laurel Hollow, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cynthia Dale Van Vranken to David Bruce Keating, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Geoffrey T. Keating of Bethesda, Md.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Van Vranken is an assistant product manager at Black &amp; Decker in Hunt Valley, Md.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received an M.B.A. and a master's degree in Asian Studies from the University of Virginia.
She was a member of the New York Junior Assembly in 1981.


Sunday Dinner; Ethnic Treats Abound In Restaurants of Queens
In recent years residents of Manhattan have been discovering the ethnic food troves of Queens, Brooklyn, Staten Island and the Bronx.
If you want Greek food, the cornucopia in Astoria is unmatched.
The same goes for Central and South American cuisine, Korean, Indian, Russian.
Here are three ethnic restaurants.
Elias Corner
31st Street and 24th Avenue, Astoria, Queens; (718) 932-1510 -- This tiny neighborhood spot that fills up nightly with a jovial Greek-speaking clientele is one of the best seafood restaurants in New York City.
Don't expect many creature comforts.
This hangout is to Le Bernardin what a Boston whaler is to the Forbes yacht.


From Texas to Crown Heights, a Journey of Love and Religion Ends Sadly
Theirs was a love story as old as time.
A mutual friend acting as matchmaker brought them together, and at once they sensed an ethereal magic.
Both had reached a similar juncture of deepened interest in their Jewish roots, a yearning that would thrust them on a meandering journey from Texas to the uncertainty of a fresh life in a tidy brick house in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn.


Topics of The Times; Market Update
When President Bush visited a grocers' convention last week, his encounter with the price-scanning machine spoke volumes, both about the insularity of White House life and the way sex roles have changed since the 1950's.
"This is for checking out?" Mr.
Bush asked, wonderstruck as his groceries passed over the scanner's face and prices appeared on the cash register's screen.
The President is entitled to amazement.
The scanner was developed a decade ago.
That's when Ronald Reagan took him to the White House, where trips to the market just aren't done.


Continued U.S. Embargo Harms Cuba and Ourselves as Well
To the Editor:
The Jan. 25 meeting on Cuba at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in New York City (news article, Jan. 26) focuses a light on one of the blind spots of American foreign policy -- the economic embargo of Cuba.
Not only are all items of trade still prohibited, but so is travel to Cuba by United States tourists and even sending medical supplies and other humanitarian aid (with a few exceptions).


From Ocean City 'Outsider' to Author Who Learned to Listen
EVERY afternoon, when a young Gay Talese returned home from St.
Augustine's, a parochial school in Ocean City, he felt he was entering an alien land.
"From the sunshine of this festive island resort, I'd pass into a somber retreat, to find my father kneeling in prayer before an enormous wall portrait of an emaciated, bearded medieval monk," Mr.
Talese, one of America's most successful nonfiction writers, recalled recently.
The era was World War II.
During movie newsreels, audiences jeered when a pompous Mussolini came up on the screen and applauded Allied planes that dropped bombs on Italian villages.
"I remember those triumphs along with the savings bond drives and snappy patriotic marches along Asbury Avenue," Mr.
Talese said in an interview.


A Race to the Big Sky, Complete With Sled Dogs
The sport of sled-dog racing tends to draw participants who are as comfortable in snow as a golfer is on grass.
But where crowning achievement for the golfer might be the fleeting hole-in-one, similar success comes long and hard for the musher.
"You need good dogs and then you have to train them the way you want to race them," said Terry Adkins, who is a favorite to win the Montana 500-mile Race to the Sky, which starts today.
"After that, you need good conditions, and then there's the wild card, that moose around the corner that you didn't see."


Greens to Melons, Potatoes to Tomatoes
VEGETABLE garden planning is at its height.
Those who have grown their own for years know what does well.
Most important, they know what the family likes or what should be grown in quantity for preserving.
Some gardeners have huge plots and grow just about everything.
Others have just enough room for a few vegetables.
They delight in homegrown tomatoes or tossing a salad with greens just picked.


Officer Goes On Trial, Town Holds Its Breath
The slaying of a black teen-ager by a white Teaneck police officer on a drizzly night in 1990 was a human tragedy that ignited an anti-police riot in a town that prides itself on its reputation for working hard to have the races live in harmony.
But the drawn-out manslaughter prosecution of Officer Gary Spath has compounded that tragedy into an institutional one, with rare public bickering erupting between wings of law enforcement that normally cooperate and the town of Teaneck working hard to head off new unrest.
The shooting has pitted the word of the two arresting officers against that of the teen-agers they stopped near a schoolyard on April 10th after a report that one had a gun.
Prosecutors are now, in effect, siding with the youths.
They contend that Mr.
Pannell had his hands raised in surrender when Officer Spath fired two shots, the second, fatal one hitting Mr.
Pannell in the back.
Officer Spath, 31 years old, argues that he fired in self-defense, saying Mr.
Pannell reached twice, in a threatening manner, into a pocket where officers say they found a starter's pistol drilled out to fire .22-caliber bullets.


Winifred Welch To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Welch of Reading, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Winifred Marcia Welch, to Alexander Fuster, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jose Miguel Fuster of Panama City.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Welch, 27 years old, is the manager of public relations, products and marketing at the Bachman Company, a snack-foods manufacturer in Reading owned by her father.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and has an M.B.A. from Stanford University.


Last Political Prisoners Freed, Russia Says
The final 10 political prisoners have been set free in Perm, the Ural Mountain internment center made infamous as a punishment camp for anti-Communist dissidents, according to the Russian Interior Ministry.
The 10 prisoners were sentenced for various violations of the treason law during the past decade and were pardoned last month by President Boris N. Yeltsin as a humanitarian gesture to establish Russia's new credentials in the world community.
Russia insists no other purely political prisoners identified as such by human rights organizations remain incarcerated.


Steven Fisch Wed to Ms. Schneirov
Allison Rachel Schneirov, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan B. Schneirov of Elkins Park, Pa., was married last night to Dr.
Steven Lloyd Fisch, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Solomon Fisch of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Rabbi Alan Fuchs officiated at Congregation Rodeph Shalom in Philadelphia.
Ms.
Schneirov, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, is an associate at the law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father is a partner in the Philadelphia law firm of Mesirov, Gelman, Jaffe, Cramer &amp; Jamieson.
Her mother, Miriam A. Schneirov, a management consultant in Philadelphia, is a past president of the Jewish Federation of Greater Philadelphia.


Light Rail Needed, Not Busway in Tunnel
The article "Vision of Rail and Office Complex Moves Nearer to Reality" (Jan. 26) presents a one-sided view of the waterfront transportation portion plan.
It failed to point out that as a part of the plan N.J.
Transit, over the objection of local residents and knowledgeable transit advocacy groups, is attempting to build a busway along the western edge of Hoboken and into the Weehawken Tunnel.
This so-called "interim" busway would pre-empt the right of way that would be much more useful as a rail corridor.


Marchers in Teaneck Fault Trial 'Theatrics'
The father of Phillip Pannell joined the Rev.
Al Sharpton and about 75 chanting supporters today in a 75-minute march from Teaneck to the Bergen County Courthouse today to protest what Mr.
Sharpton called "the theatrics" in the trial of a Teaneck police officer, Gary Spath, who shot Phillip Pannell.
"We're dealing with a mockery and praying for a miracle," Mr.
Sharpton said from the steps of the courthouse in Hackensack, where lawyers are to make closing arguments in the trial on Monday.
"We're staying in the streets until Spath pays for killing Phillip Pannell."


Sorcery With a Sweet Tooth
SUGAR CAGE
By Connie May Fowler. 319 pp. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
Even if our society should choose to "permit but discourage" abortion, as Rosenblatt suggests, we will never be able to live with it until we admit that it is a form of killing and that it is also often a matter of personal survival.
Then perhaps we can begin to address the morality of abortion in a more realistic fashion, much as we have come to accept slaughtering animals for food and sending soldiers off to war.
ELIZABETH BARRETT
New York, N.Y.


A Noah's Ark of the North
THE BLACK CANOE
Bill Reid and the Spirit of Haida Gwaii.
By Robert Bringhurst.
Photographs by Ulli Steltzer.  173 pp.
Seattle: University of Washington Press. $45.


Poland Asked No Questions When Fugitive Set Up Bank
David Bogatin vanished from New York in 1987 after pleading guilty to evading millions of dollars in New York State and Federal taxes.
But his conviction did not stop him from getting a license to open a bank in an eastern Polish city near what was then the Soviet border.
When he was setting up the bank in 1990 in the city of Lublin, Mr.
Bogatin asserts and Polish officials confirm, nobody asked questions about who he was or where the money came from.


Capital Gains Tax Cut Won't Cure Our Ills; Boon for High Rollers
To the Editor:
How can the President continue to insist that a significant reduction in the capital gains tax will stimulate the economy and put us on the road to recovery?
For almost a year the stock market has been reaching new heights despite deteriorating economic indicators.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending Jan. 25  MANHATTAN  East End Avenue 225,000
80 East End Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,150-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining foyer, new windows, south exposure; maintenance $670, 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group-Stribling &amp; Associates)  Gramercy Park Area 290,000
235 East 22d Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, solarium, fireplace, 250-sq.-ft. private terrace; maintenance $1,088, 52% tax-deductible (Brokers: Eychner Associates - Wells &amp; Gay/Stribling)  SoHo 525,000
55 Greene Street  2,500-sq.-ft. open-loft penthouse in a prewar building; elevator, 1 bath, 12-ft. ceilings, large skylight, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,100, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Meisel Real Estate)  Sutton Place 320,000
50 Sutton Place South  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,240-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, terrace, East River view; maintenance $1,236, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Frieda Greene &amp; Associates)  Upper East Side 243,500
445 East 86th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,064, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  BRONX Gun Hill Road Area 245,000
1609 Arnow Avenue  3-family, 3-story, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in second and 1 bedroom in the third; 1 bath, dining area in each; finished attic, 2-car garage, 32- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,040 (Brokers: J.A.V. Realty - Tancel Realty)  South Bronx 50,000
724 East 161st Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; eat-in kitchen, full basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $450 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Park Slope 122,500
654 Carroll Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; fireplace, 2 exposures, common rear garden; maintenance $326, 61% tax-deductible (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  Prospect Heights 130,000
177 St.
Mark's Place  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. condo in a brownstone; dining area, fireplace, renovated kitchen and baths, private rear garden; common charge $96, 100% tax-abated (Broker: Elaine Gay Real Estate Ltd.)  Sheepshead Bay 185,000
2362 East 29th Street  2-family, attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each, full basement, 1-car garage, 19- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Sure Sale Realty)  QUEENS  Corona 165,000
55-05 97th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Century 21/Elms-Kremer Realty)  Kew Gardens Hills 253,500
147-57 77th Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  STATEN ISLAND  Castleton Corners 135,000
12 Coal Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; eat-in kitchen, semi-finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,219 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  Heartland Village 186,000
578 Travis Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, hospitality suite on first floor, full basement, 1-car garage, 26- by 102-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)


Chess
Situations arise in which the most sober course is to make a risky attempt to win.
Simen Agdestein of Norway found himself in a typical one at the start of Round 13 of the traditional Hastings International Tournament in England on Jan. 11.
He was paired with the leader, Evgeny Bareyev of Russia, whom he had to defeat.
Bareyev was a half point ahead, and the double-round, all-grandmaster competition would end with Round 14.
An added justification for untrammeled adventure was that Alexei Shirov of Latvia was a point and a half behind, so that even if Agdestein's plans went awry, he would still keep second place.


No Silver Lining for Debt Collectors
DO hard times mean good times for some industries?
For instance, as more businesses and individuals fall behind in paying their bills, do collection agencies benefit?
Those in the debt-collection industry in Westchester say that although their business has increased substantially, their profits have not.


Streetscapes: 1155 Broadway; The Birthplace of the Movies
THE 1876 neo-Grec style building at 1155 Broadway, at the southwest corner of 27th Street, could be called a latent landmark: It is of moderate architectural interest but has an important history.
At first it was the studio of John Rogers, a noted sculptor.
But its real significance is that in 1894 it became the site of a much newer art form -- the motion picture.
Now the building will vanish so a developer, Peter Loduca, can save six feet in an addition.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LOVE &amp; OBITS By John Ed Bradley. John Macrae/Holt, $21.95.


Treasury Lifts Cambodia Ban
The United States Treasury Department has lifted restrictions on travel to Cambodia.
The move allows American companies to arrange transportation to Cambodia and organize tours and conduct business there, activities that were previously banned.
Another limitation removed was a ceiling of $200 that Americans could spend per day after arranging a visit through a third country.
Cambodia's major attraction is its ancient temples, particularly the Angkor temple complex near Siemreap.
Most tourists go on day trips by air to the temples.
Despite the Treasury announcement, the State Department is maintaining a warning discouraging trips to Cambodia because of military activity, hidden land mines and "widespread banditry" near tourist sites.
The United States does not have full embassy and consular operations in Cambodia.


By Scaasi, For Women Of the Day
One key silhouette at the recent couture showings in Paris featured a fitted bodice and a flared skirt.
That's not a new look for Arnold Scaasi, who has long favored the fit-and-flare shape as a flattering cut for many women.
It turns up in his custom collection, where prices hit five figures, and his boutique line, where they go to the low four figures.
Now the perky Scaasi way of dressing is available to women whose clothing budgets can accommodate $200 to $500 price tags.
For them there is Scaasi Dress.


CAMPUS LIFE: Lock Haven; Campus Game Teaches Lessons About Sex
The message that some Lock Haven students want their classmates to understand is simple: When it comes to sex and sexually transmitted diseases, what you don't know can kill you.
But the medium they chose to convey that message last week was unusual: a game called Sex Squares based on the popular television game show "Hollywood Squares" but featuring campus celebrities, the university's president, Craig Dean Willis, among them.
"People don't know everything they're supposed to, or not as much as they think they do," said Michelle M. Distler, a sophomore in journalism from Huntingdon, Pa., and student council president in the North Hall student residence, whose staff created Sex Squares.
"This is a fun way to get some important information out to the students."


U.S. TO CRACK DOWN
Six years after the passage of a law intended to halt the flow of illegal aliens from Mexico, immigration officials expect that the number of people apprehended at the border this year may reach or exceed the peak levels recorded before the law was signed.
In response, the Bush Administration plans to announce a series of stepped-up enforcement measures to handle what may be more than a million apprehensions this year.
The measures include hiring hundreds of new border patrol agents, issuing counterfeit-resistant work permits and using military vehicles left over from the Persian Gulf war to patrol border areas.


New York Tourism Industry Says '91 Was 'a Pretty Miserable Year'
Battered by a weak national economy, the Gulf war and a growing perception "that ours is a very expensive city," the New York City tourist industry staggered through "a pretty miserable year" in 1991, said Marshall E. Murdaugh, president of the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau Inc.
"The best thing to say about '91," he added, "is that we're glad it's over."


New-Found Love


Laura Gillespie Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Gillespie of Hanover, N.H., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laura Langdon Gillespie, to Christopher Lynn Demarest, a son of Shirley Demarest of Reston, Va., and the late Robert Demarest.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Gillespie, 27 years old, is a travel representative with the Raymond &amp; Whitcomb Company in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College, where her father is the director of the Parents Fund.


Federal Charges Taint a Waterbury Success Story
By most measures, Joseph J. Santopietro's young life was a success story.
Born into a politically active family, he began helping out in local election campaigns while in grammar school.
At 26, with no college degree and a career in the landscaping business, the Republican was elected Mayor of this city after a campaign that featured the theme song from the movie "Rocky."
He seemed a bright light in a gritty metropolis that once crowned itself "the Brass City" but that has seen many of its factories close.
Under Mr.
Santopietro, development surged.
He conducted high-visibility public works projects, like repaving roads and fixing water lines, and was re-elected twice.


Going Through the Motions, It Looks Like the Old Magic
As Magic Johnson continued to be the focal point of the National Basketball Association All-Star Game weekend here, all other league issues seemed to pale in comparison.
Johnson, who retired from the Lakers last Nov. 7 because he has the virus that causes AIDS, practiced with the Western Conference All-Stars today for the Sunday game.
The session was open to the news media, and although it was a light workout that lasted about an hour, Johnson fit in as if he had never been away from the game.


Between The Lines Of Page-Turners
Movie adaptations have a nasty habit of exposing the obvious flaws in novels carefully groomed and packaged for the best-seller lists.
This week's case in point: the work of the lawyer and author Scott Turow, much of which -- book, movie and video -- has come out of the Time-Warner machine, in the process being hailed with a Time magazine cover.
Mr.
Turow's first best-selling novel, "Presumed Innocent" (1987), was a good read but a decidedly logy film, especially if you actually read the book and knew that the wife did it.
Now the author's second best seller, "The Burden of Proof," published in 1990 and a far less satisfactory exercise, has been turned into a four-hour television movie (on ABC at 9 tonight and tomorrow), and it is anything but a shrewd career move.
Worse, with further exposure, the assumptions and messages underlying Mr.
Turow's tight little world of lawyers and malefactors trigger increasing unease, most notably in his portrayals of women.


POSTINGS: $1.7 Million Project; Snug Harbor Restoration
Behind the Greek Revival landmarks on Richmond Terrace that so gracefully symbolize Sailor's Snug Harbor, there is a virtual village of smaller buildings, many of them delightful examples of red-brick Victorian or Second Empire styles.
Some are much in use as part of Snug Harbor Cultural Center, the modern reincarnation of the sailor's asylum on Staten Island.
But others are decrepit and empty.


M. L. Zerneck Weds Ms. Klise
Elizabeth Anne Klise, a daughter of Marjorie A. Klise of Peoria, Ill., and the late Thomas S. Klise, was married yesterday to Michael Lawrence Zerneck, a son of Peter von Zerneck of Toluca Lake, Calif., and the late Beatrice F. von Zerneck.
The Rev.
Phillip Meagher, a United Methodist minister, officiated at Kingman House in Peoria.
Ms.
Klise, 33 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a vice president in New York of the Thomas S. Klise Company, a producer of educational videos in Peoria.
Her mother is the president of the company, which was founded by her father, a novelist.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Notre Dame and received a master's degree in fiction writing from Sarah Lawrence College.


Mason McKean To Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Frank H. McKean of Pittsburgh have announced the engagement of their daughter Mason McKean to John Peter Hoeller Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hoeller of Morristown, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
McKean, 30 years old, is an account executive for the Gillian Group, a manufacturer of women's dresses in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is a partner in Leeann Associates, a real-estate investment company in Pittsburgh.


Corrections
A chronology last Sunday about the cold war gave an incorrect date in some editions for the downing of an American U-2 reconnaissance plane over the Soviet Union.
It occurred on May 1, 1960, not May 26.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Wholesale trade, percent change
0.1
0.0
Thursday
Retail sales, percent
-0.4
0.2
Auto sales in millions, annual rate
6.1
5.7
Friday
Producer price index, percent change
-0.2
0.1
Industrial production, percent change
-0.2
0.0
Capacity utilization, percent
79
78.9
Business inventories, percent change
0.2
0.2
Tuesday: Three-year Treasury note acution  Wednesday: Ten-year Treasury auction Thursday: Thirty-year Treasury auction  Friday: World agriculture production  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Unexpected Performances Steal Spotlight at Millrose
The overachievers who stood out at the Snickers Millrose Games in Madison Square Garden on Friday night were Gail Devers and Willie Gault.
Devers, climbing back to the top of the world of track and field, won the women's 60-meter high hurdles with a classy clocking of 7.93 seconds, the fastest ever at the Millrose meet and in the Garden.


A May Wedding For Ms. Doyle
M.
L.
Katherine Doyle, a special-events producer for Harper's Bazaar, and Joseph Henry Hooper 3d, a freelance magazine writer, are engaged to be married in May.
Ms.
Doyle, 30 years old, graduated from Vassar College and is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Doyle Jr. of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Her father retired as a regional manager of the Fire-End and Croker Corporation, a maker of fire-protection equipment in Elmsford, N.Y.
Her mother, Marilou Stannard Doyle, retired recently as an editor of Town &amp; Country magazine.


Testimony By Tyson Wraps Up
The prosecutor in Mike Tyson's rape trial tried repeatedly today to challenge the former heavyweight champion's contention that he made a sexually explicit proposition to his 18-year-old accuser in their first meeting last July and that she readily accepted.
In his second and last day on the witness stand, Mr.
Tyson endured a steady stream of questions from the prosecutor, J. Gregory Garrison, who tried to convince the jury that Mr.
Tyson was lying in his testimony the day before.


Animal House? No. The Fraternity Is a Real Mansion.
Unlike most college students, Jay Flaherty and Michael Kaveny don't complain about where they live while they attend Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute here.
After all, when you live in a mansion, what's there to complain about?
Mr.
Flaherty, a senior from Norwood, Mass., who is majoring in mechanical engineering, and Mr.
Kaveny, a senior from Medford, Mass., who is majoring in physics, are members of the Phi Kappa Phi fraternity.
Along with 23 of their fraternity brothers, they live in a 19th-century mansion in downtown Troy, about a half a mile from the school.


Tech Notes; Office Buildings That Breathe
Air pollution has been obvious outdoors for decades, but in the last few years health experts have become increasingly aware of significant problems with the quality of air inside some office buildings as well.
In fact, the name "sick building syndrome" has been given to an array of symptoms among office workers that are sometimes associated with indoor pollution.
In part, the problem can be attributed to the increased energy efficiency of modern buildings.
Because of better insulation and a tendency to let in less fresh air, the air becomes stale and contaminants linger.
The latest standards recommended by the American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning require four times as much outside air as older standards.
The challenge is to improve air quality without increasing energy bills as fresh air is brought into the building.


He Can't Resist The Old Horseshoe
Over the last 13 years, no matter how far and how circuitous his journey was in the National Football League, Ted Marchibroda always kept one eye on the team with the horseshoe on its helmet.
And one day, just maybe, he kept hoping, that horseshoe would bring him back to his football home.
"I always felt, 'once a Colt, always a Colt,' and I always had great pride in what we had accomplished," Marchibroda said.
"There had always been ties there that were hard to break. I took a lot of ordinary jobs that became extraordinary. But this is all along where I wanted to be."


By Angie Jabine
DISAPPEARING MOON CAFE By Sky Lee. Seal Press, $18.95.


Small Co-ops
To the Editor:
I read with great interest your column on Jan. 5 entitled "Talking Small Co-ops -- Shopping Around to Refinance."


Did Moscow Spoil the Finns for the West?
The cold war gave the language of diplomacy a new term, Finlandization, that quickly came to suggest something shameful, even craven: the adoption by a small state of policies calculated not to offend or antagonize a larger and dangerous neighbor.
Officials in Helsinki always regarded the term as a kind of diplomatic slur, but there was another realization as well.
Whatever limits they had reluctantly placed on their independence to preserve harmony with Moscow, there were also advantages, at least as long as the Soviet Union was a going economic concern.
Now that the Soviet Union has disintegrated, the Finnish Government and political leaders are grappling with another problem altogether: How do they go about de-Finlandizing Finland?


Worldly Flavors Blended For Italy
It was time to leave the ice, but the Italian hockey team would not halt its spirited scrimmage in a mountaintop practice rink.
French officials wearing badges on astronaut jackets climbed above the Plexiglas, pointed to the clock, and told Coach Gene Ubriaco to remove his squad to the locker room.
Ubriaco paid no attention.
There was still so much to learn before the tournament opener Sunday against the United States.


RECORD BRIEFS
Enya: 'Shepherd Moons'
Reprise 9 26775-2; all three formats
.


Corrections
An art review on Jan. 5 about the Gallery at Hastings described Randy Frost's quilt incorrectly.
A letter from the artist received last Mondaypoints out that it is made of fabric, not carpet scraps.


Sarah Hurley Weds
Sarah Hurley, an account analyst for the Nike Corporation in Beaverton, Ore., and Craig Frederick Reed, a sales representative for the Melatis Beverage Company in Portland, Ore., were married in Portland yesterday.
The Rev.
Edmond Bliven performed the ceremony at St.
Michael the Archangel Roman Catholic Church.
The bride and bridegroom, both 27 years old, graduated from the University of Oregon and Portland State University respectively.
Mrs.
Reed is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Hurley, and Mr.
Reed is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm W. Reed.
Both families live in Portland, where the bride's father is a lawyer and the bridegroom's is an insurance bonder.


Anne Malara to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph J. Malara of White Plains have announced the engagement of their daughter, Anne Julia Malara, to Nicholas Anthony Penachio Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Penachio of Bedford, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.


Stephanie Klein To Wed in June
Prof. and Mrs.
Cornelis Klein of Albuquerque, N.M., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Stephanie Wilhelmina Klein, to Arthur James Peponis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Peponis of Chicago.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Klein, 25 years old, graduated from Stanford University and is studying for an M.B.A. at Harvard University, as is her fiance.
Her father is a professor of geology at the University of New Mexico.


At Last Gasp, LP Remains The Champ
The audio world, usually considered home to Tom Swiftian gadget-lovers, has a dirty little secret.
It is not whispered about in most audio salons; it is usually ignored in mass-market audio magazines, and it is too small to matter to the electronic giants that cater to our tastes for recorded music.
The secret is that the audio world harbors in its back rooms an impassioned rear guard, a group of music lovers of extreme views, an organization of Luddite fanatics.
I should know. I am one of them.


Where Downhillers Begin Steep Journeys to the Top
It begins with a child, a hill and a dream.
It begins with a working mother dropping off her son at what amounts to skiing day care on her way to work as, what else, a ski instructor.
It begins with the slope playing a more predominant role in the child's world than even the schoolyard or the baseball field.
"The place you spent the entire day, every day of the week, not long after you learned to walk," said Doug Lewis, whose life unfolded in much the same way as it did for A. J. Kitt, the United States' chief hope in the Olympic men's downhill Sunday, who has come to Val d'Isere from the suburbs of Rochester.


What Feminists Learn From Hillary Clinton; What Right to Know?
To the Editor:
What gives a reporter the right to ask a Presidential candidate whether or not he has ever committed adultery, a question properly reserved to a wife or a priest?


All About/Conference Centers; Shorter Meetings on Short Notice Are the Rule
Talk may be cheap, but not if you consider the $54.6 billion generated by the 350,867 meetings, conferences and conventions held last year, according to the International Association of Convention and Visitor Bureaus.
While conventions are the most glamorous part of the meetings market, sometimes involving a trade show and thousands of people, corporate conferences account for about 80 percent of the business.
They rarely exceed 100 people and most are devoted to one topic.


An Olympic Skier in the Making?


Making Sure That Federal Research Funds Go for Learning
Over the last year, Representative John D. Dingell of Michigan has become a university's worst nightmare.
His subcommittee on oversight and investigations has held several raucous hearings into how colleges and universities overcharged the Federal Government millions of dollars for campus-based research.
The findings -- including money spent on bed linen and a yacht for Stanford University -- have so angered officials that there are now demands for limits on how much the universities are paid to do research for the Government.
Last month, new abuses charged included a cruise down the Nile run by Carnegie-Mellon University and an $11,000 St.
Patrick's Day party at Syracuse University, all billed to the Government as part of the overhead of doing research.
Auditors said universities have overcharged the Government at least $350 million.


CAMPUS LIFE: Michigan State; Student Accused Of Taking Bets On Sports Events
The police at Michigan State University closed an illegal sports betting operation here last week.
They said it was one of the largest of its kind ever seized in the Lansing area and the only one based on a state university campus.
Bill Wardwell, a lieutenant with the school's Department of Public Safety, said that as much as $2,000 a day was wagered on sports events through Robert E. Nardone, a computer science major who is accused of running the bookmaking operation from his dormitory room.


New Restaurants Belie the Blues
IT is no secret that business is not good.
Yet the pace at which new restaurants are opening makes it seem as though the Island is booming.
Italian, Cajun, Chinese, California-style and American regional eating places have opened within recent weeks.
A sizable new seafood house is waiting in the wings, and an established Five Towns restaurant is opening a Florida branch.


Social Events
Century of Preservation
Feb. 9 -- Heading into its 100th year as New York's architectural watchdog and preservation champion, the Municipal Art Society will present its annual award to Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan at a black-tie benefit dinner at the old McGraw-Hill Building, 330 West 42d Street.
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 685-1095.


CAMPUS LIFE: Miami; Endowed Chair Recalls Friend Who Had AIDS
Most endowed chairs at universities are financed by a few wealthy benefactors, but at the University of Miami a chair in the medical school has been endowed with donations from nearly a thousand people -- from as far off as Norway, from Rotary Clubs and kindergarten classes, in sizable checks and penny-filled jars.
It is the nation's first endowed university chair for research into neurological diseases associated with AIDS.
It came about because of the 1988 death of Thomas Whigham, a young lawyer and former high school football hero in Sanford in central Florida.
Mr.
Whigham died at the age of 35 of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, a particularly virulent brain disease linked to AIDS, which Mr.
Whigham contracted through a tainted blood transfusion five years earlier.


In Canada, Up Among the Sheltering Palms
No cold winds, no snow, no slush eternal spring.
This is the February dream of every Montrealer (or Chicagoan, or Minneapolitan, or Torontonian) -- made concrete by annual escapes to Florida, Mexico or the Caribbean.
But what if, instead of northerners going to the sunny south
in the winter, the sunny south were brought to them?


Elisabeth Vandenberg Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald H. Vandenberg of Norwalk, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elisabeth L. Vandenberg to Andrew P. Walker, a son of Robert S. Walker of Providence, R.I., and Jean C. Sloan of Norwalk.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Vandenberg, 23 years old, graduated from Temple University.
She is a public relations assistant at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
Her father is the manager of package design at Nestle Foods in Purchase, N.Y.
Her mother is a travel agent in Greenwich, Conn.


INSIDE
A Kilogram of Prevention
The European Community is carefully scrutinizing what happens to the food it is sending to Russia, fearing that it will be diverted to the black market.
Page 10.
Fighting Smolders in Algeria
After a day of carnage that is being called "bloody Friday" in Algeria, fighting continued between Muslim fundamentalists and Government security forces.
Page 3.
Tyson Cross-Examined
Mike Tyson had some surly exchanges with the prosecutuor in his trial, but in his last day on the witness stand the boxer did not lose his composure.
SportsSunday, section 8.
Arrests in Queens Village
Two men were arrested in the killing of two young girls when their Queens Village home was ransacked a week ago.
Their baby sitter and another suspect are still at large.
Page 36.


Argentina Opens the Files on Its Nazi Ghosts
Argentina's decison to open previously secret files on Nazis who fled here after World War II has caused embarrassment to the Government and anxiety among old-line Peronists.
One of the major embarrassments came when Government officials could not find the file on Adolf Eichmann, the most notorious Nazi known to have fled to Argentina.


Making a Difference; The $550 Million Verdict
Joseph D. Jamail, the homespun Texas lawyer with a knack for wringing big awards from juries, did it again last week.
In a stunning verdict, a jury in a state court in Galveston awarded more than $550 million to Mr.
Jamail's clients -- investors in the Miniscribe Corporation, a now-defunct disk drive manufacturer that was accused of falsifying its financial records.


Wall Street; Repurchase Plans, and Myths
The script is familiar to anyone on Wall Street: A company's stock takes a sharp slide, either in a broad market panic, as in 1987, or after some solitary disaster.
The board of directors goes into a huddle and announces that the company will be using some of its cash to buy back a big chunk of its own publicly traded shares.
Just such a move was announced last week by Community Psychiatric Centers of Laguna HIlls, Calif., the beleaguered clinic chain whose stock has fallen about 65 percent in the last nine months.
And, of course, hundreds of buybacks were announced in the weeks after the 1987 market crash.


Technology; The 'Pharmers' Who Breed Cows That Can Make Drugs
Sometime before the turn of the century, a number of commercial drugs may well be extracted from the milk or blood of genetically altered relatives of common breeds of cattle, sheep, goat and pig.
"Pharming," as the futuristic industry has been dubbed, has been shown to be feasible by a series of experiments in the United States and Europe that have endowed livestock with human genes.
The genes enable these "transgenic" animals to produce human hormones or proteins.


Review/Recital; The Diverse Piano Styles of Alison Deane
The piano playing of Alison Deane has many appealing qualities, but probably the most striking aspect of her performance on Thursday evening at Merkin Concert Hall was her way of defining a distinct style for each work she played.
Those styles were not always the styles one associates immediately with the composers at hand.
Her account of Mendelssohn's Fantasy in F-sharp minor (Op. 28), for example, had an almost Brahmsian weight.
Yet it was so passionate and purposeful that to fault it on that ground would be to miss its point.
Mostly, though, her choices of coloration, balance and rhetorical gesture suited the music perfectly.
In Beethoven's Six Variations on an Original Theme (Op. 34), her gestures were stately and her ornamentation was a picture of clarity.
She gave Gershwin's Three Preludes the folksy rudeness and the bluesy accent that lies at their heart.
Of the four Rachmaninoff Etudes-Tableaux Ms.
Deane played, the ruminative G minor (Op. 33, No. 7) was the most touching, but each was individually characterized.
And her reading of Debussy's "Isle Joyeuse" made the alternation of vividness and mystery seem easier than it is.


CORRECTION
The "Gazetteer" chart last Sunday with an article about Whitestone, Queens, misstated the party affiliation of City Councilman Michael Abel.
He is a Republican-Conservative.


John Queenan, 86, Retired Leader In Accounting Profession, Is Dead
John W. Queenan, a retired leader in the accounting profession and a former member of the Federal Wage and Price Control Board, died on Friday at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 86 years old and was a resident of Greenwich and of Tequesta, Fla.
He died after surgery for a broken hip, his family said.


Pristine Open Space: A Clash of Interests
A PLAN by the United States Forest Service plan to limit development on more than a million acres of rolling landscape in northern New Jersey and southern New York State has drawn praise from conservationists and criticism from developers and farmers who own much of the land.
The draft plan, which was released last November and will be the subject of a public hearing on Tuesday, identifies more than 50 conservation strategies.
These include the acquisition of prime parcels of land, the purchase of development rights in others, the issuance of credits to landowners in lieu of development rights and the establishment of a two-state regional planning authority to oversee future development in the area.


Regarding Guerard
The name "Michel Guerard" is emblazoned in blue on his starched white chef jacket, his checkered trousers are well creased.
The three-star French chef who invented cuisine minceur preens under his pleated toque.
He looks ready for more television cameras, or to pose for publicity purposes once again in front of Eugenie-les-Bains, the luxurious country inn and spa that he and his wife, Christine, run in the southwest of France.
For nearly two decades, he's been the guru of the international slimming set -- by now his is practically a brand name.
"Michel Guerard" resonates with the French as immediately as "Lean Cuisine" does with the Americans.
But as the chef called Guerard wraps his apron around his waist this winter morning, he sighs.
A gentle puff of belly presses against his apron strings.
It looks like a "magret," the plump breast of the moulard duck that is raised and revered in his corner of France, straining against butcher's twine.
"Cooking is a dangerous business," Guerard says as he walks into his kitchen.


Abstractions Have Their Human Side, Too
Because human beings can't stop being human, abstract dances can't be totally abstract.
Choreographers who purport to tell no stories still make dancers seem like distinct individuals engaged in conflict or united in harmony.
Molissa Fenley, Peter Pucci, Randy Warshaw and Doug Varone all created storyless dramatic dances in the "Altogether Different" series that recently concluded at the Joyce Theater.
Their best offerings were focused and rich in implications.
Their worst were so ambiguous as to be vague.


The Not So Peaceable Kingdom
THE WRECKING YARD
Stories. By Pinckney Benedict. 208 pp. New York: Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $19.


Noted With Pleasure
The Hapless Hunter
Aboriginal peoples, the ethnologist Hugh Brody argues, suffer from the constricting (and equally inadequate) identities we impose upon them.
This is from "Living Arctic: Hunters of the Canadian North" (University of Washington, paper).


The Big Tweeze
No one knows precisely who started the whole thing, but people usually say it was Linda Evangelista.
"It's difficult to say who is responsible," says Stephane Marais, a makeup artist.
"For a few years, fashion has been going back to the 40's and 50's, to the glamour of movie stars. And Linda looks like a movie star, like Sophia Loren." Ilana Harkavi, president of Il-Makiage, the Manhattan salon, gets more to the point.
"Linda," she says, "was the one who had the guts to tweeze."
We're talking about eyebrows, of course.
And the brow of the moment, unabashedly glamorous, is meticulously plucked, penciled and powdered.
It has an arch.
And though you can see the little hairs as the brow swoops up, they're tamed, with none of the bushiness (or naturalness, depending on your point of view) that seemed so alluring just a few years back.
The look is polished and clean -- in short, well groomed.
These are the brows Elizabeth Taylor wore in "Butterfield 8" -- and wears still.
What's gone, for now at least, is the heavy, unadulterated Margaux Hemingway brow.
Even Brooke Shields, who almost single-handedly made the unpruned brow the choice of the 80's, is sporting a slightly more finished look these days.


Review/Theater; An Introduction to 'The Comedy of Errors'
One aim of Jeffrey Horowitz's Theater for a New Audience is to connect classics with young urban theatergoers, as exemplified last year by a production of "Romeo and Juliet" that was performed with youthful vitality.
The company's current version of "The Comedy of Errors" at St.
Clement's Church is easygoing and broadly eclectic.
A motley group of professionals and near professionals has been gathered under the leadership of William Gaskill, the distinguished British director.
Only a few of the actors seem to have a feeling for Shakespeare beyond the immediate horseplay.
The company specializes in nontraditional casting and in so doing approximates on stage the broad ethnicity of the people in the audience.
In principle, this serves a very useful purpose, but as practiced in "Comedy of Errors" it leads to unnecessary confusion.
The two actors twinned as Antipholus do not look or sound anything like each other, contradicting a crucial point in this comedy of mistaken identity.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Allendale 238,000
169 Dale Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old ranch; fireplace, patio, large level property; taxes $5,165.
Freehold 100,000
40 Barkalow Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; h/w floors, patio, full basement; taxes $2,052.
Madison 240,000
24 Maple Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 75-year-old colonial; wraparound deck, fireplace, large yard; taxes $4,100.
Mahwah 250,000
129 East Slope Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 39-year-old contemporary; deck, new kitchen, skylights; taxes $3,600.
Waldwick 172,500
83 Highwood Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old Cape Cod; skylight, new bath, heated playroom; taxes $3,597.
Wayne 250,000
53 Towsen Road  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 12-year-old renovated contemporary; family room with fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $4,000.
OTHER AREAS Yorktown Heights, N.Y. 262,500
3175 Ronit Court  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old contemporary; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $8,371.
Southington, Conn. 142,000
251 Woodruff Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old Cape Cod; updated kitchen, 3-zone heat, 0.75 acre; taxes $1,541.
Matinecock, L.I. 1.05 million
Linden Farms Road
4- bedroom, 4-bath, new brick ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room,; taxes $14,000.


While the World Trembled
EYEBALL TO EYEBALL
The Inside Story of the Cuban Missile Crisis.
By Dino A. Brugioni.
Illustrated. 622 pp.
New York: Random House. $35.


Noriega Lawyers Abandon Use of Accounts of Intrigue
Like so many other aspects of the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the first week of his defense has proved to be an anticlimax.
Instead of tales of high-level international intrigue that his lawyers had long hinted would be the backbone of their case, they are drawing more on the police blotter.
For four months, prosecutors pounded away at the idea that General Noriega's trial was "just another drug case" and that the man who ruled Panama during the 1980's "was just another crooked cop."


Tom Harkin's Old-Time Religion
On a cold day in Manchester, N.H., in January, Senator Tom Harkin was preaching to the converted.
He was talking to the board of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, many of whom were already wearing blue-and-white "Harkin for President" buttons.
The stop at the end of a hard day of campaigning was billed as a courtesy call, since the union local had already endorsed his bid for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
But Harkin was neither tired nor going through the motions.
As the union leaders gazed up at their standard-bearer adoringly -- the women in sensible shoes, the men in plaid flannel shirts, blue jeans and beards -- Harkin made a heartfelt pitch for help.


Carnesecca Finds a Way to the Top
When the Old Coach was still a young coach, when a kid could leave for college in the Bronx and bail out, homesick, for Brooklyn, Lou Carnesecca had this problem.
If a subway token did not get you there, if the streets were not laid out on a grid the way they are in his town, Carnesecca, the young coach, was in big trouble.
And so it happened that on one of his earliest scouting trips as a brand-new assistant to Joe Lapchick at St.
John's University, Carnesecca found himself somewhere in North Carolina, trying to deal with the complexities of renting a car and reading a map.
He had already been all over the world with the Coast Guard, but someone else had to have been doing the navigating.
He might as well have been on Neptune.


Henderson Supplee Jr., Refining Executive, 88
Henderson Supplee Jr., the former president and chairman of the Atlantic Refining Company, died on Monday at Bryn Mawr Hospital in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
He was 88 years old and lived in Radnor, Pa.
He died of complications from cancer, a family spokesman said.


New Power Tools Help Add To Wood Screws' Popularity
WOOD screws are stronger fasteners than nails.
Although more expensive, they have become increasingly popular for many home repairs, because they are easy to install with an electric screwdriver or a drill equipped with a screwdriver bit.
Screws are particularly appropriate when hammering may cause damage, as when installing fasteners in a plaster wall, or when pieces may need to be disassembled later.
Following are guidelines for choosing wood screws and installing them correctly.


Reading the Label
To the Editor:
It is perhaps understandable that Klaus Perls justifies his lifelong love and pursuit of only the art of Benin by labeling the rest of the art of Africa "folk art"  [ "The Royal Sculpture of Benin: Beyond African Folk Art," Jan. 26 ] .
Thankfully, the often used, slanderous and possibly racist term "primitive" was not used, but admirers of the greatness of African tribal life and art catch his drift.
GEORGE LOIS New York


Talking: TV Services; Exploring Available Options
CHANGING technology is forcing many co-op and condominum boards to become more directly involved in providing TV services to residents.
New satellite cable companies are reported by their trade association to be signing up 35,000 households a month nationwide.
"You should never assume any more that your cable franchise company or your old master antenna are your only choices," said Gurdon Buck, a condominium specialist in Hartford and group chairman of the housing committees of the real property section of the American Bar Association.


Lashing 'Backlash'
To the Editor:
I must take issue with Ellen Goodman's enthusiastic review of "Backlash: The Undeclared War Against American Women" by Susan Faludi (Oct. 27).
Ms.
Goodman praised Ms.
Faludi for "debunking the studies, experts and trend stories" that have made their way into common wisdom.
Yet in attacking the news media for distorting studies that seem to demean feminist gains, the author turns out to be playing the same game: she skews data, misquotes primary sources and makes serious errors of omission.


Remembering The Good Old Days
To the Editor:
At last, someone is in the opera-in-English camp  [ "Why Americans Speak in Tongues at the Opera House," Jan. 5 ] .
We need more Joseph Horowitzes to support those of us who want to understand what is going on.


Results Plus
N.H.L.
Kings Beat Penguins Luc Robitaille's backhander with 43 seconds remaining beat Tom Barrasso and gave the Los Angeles Kings a 4-3 victory over the host Pittsburgh Penguins yesterday. (AP)


Dramatic Innovation Is Touchstone at Yale
SEVEN friends are invited to a woman's New England home.
So is the play's audience, which is led in four different groups to the lawn, the study, the bedroom and the kitchen during the second act of "Fefu and Her Friends."
A black man dies, but he keeps coming back to life, and he keeps dying and so on, 12 times.
The name of the man is Black Man With Watermelon.
The name of this other piece is "The Death of the Last Black Man in the Whole Entire World."


Democracy Isn't Always Enough to Repel Attempted Coups
For days after President Carlos Andres Perez of Venezuela took to the airwaves to declare the failure of last week's military putsch against him, his image flickered on television screens across Latin America.
Shaken by what he described as a ruthless attempt on his life, Mr.
Perez wondered aloud what the plotters could have hoped to gain.
"We cannot imagine how these madmen could be full of such anachronism, such ignorance, or such hate or ambition," he said, "for them not to realize that the time of the coup d'etat is over in Latin America."
Given the months of coup rumors that preceded the first attacks late Monday night, Mr.
Perez could not have been entirely surprised.
But there were reasons for his disbelief.
For 34 years, Venezuela has been a democratic exception in South America, passing from one elected government to another.
Its economy grew a stunning 9.2 percent last year, winning praise from investors and financiers at home and abroad.
Just one day before the revolt, which left as many as 78 dead, Mr.
Perez gushed of his success at a meeting of business leaders in Davos, Switzerland.
"The spirit of the reforms is no longer a subject of controversy," he said.
Grudging Support
As much as Venezuela's neighbors might share Mr.
Perez's shock, they could hardly help but see last week's bloodshed as a reminder of the limits to Latin America's incipient recovery from a decade of economic crisis.
However retrograde their methods, the military rebels in Venezuela were not so out of touch with the national mood.
For months, as new investment poured into the country, Venezuelans angrily protested rising prices, falling wages, shoddy public services and reported Government corruption; in a poll the week before the coup, 81 percent voiced little or no confidence in the president.
And if many countrymen came almost grudgingly to Mr.
Perez's defense, their ambivalence seemed only to underscore how in Venezuela, as elsewhere in the region, fiscal austerity, debt restructuring and free-market reforms have helped yield new wealth without necessarily sharing it more equitably.


Sarah E. Key Plans Wedding
Sarah Elizabeth Key and James Carl Comis 3d are engaged to be married in September.
Miss Key, 29 years old, is an editor at Abbeville Press in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Duke University and has a master's degree in communications from the University of Southern California.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Lawrence W. Litchfield of South Orange, N.J., and Hugh B. Key 2d of Sugar Loaf Shores, Fla.
Her mother, Sallie Litchfield, is the owner of Alex, a women's specialty clothing store in Upper Montclair, N.J.


THE WORLD: Northern Ireland; Deals Come and Go; Death Is a Way of Life
For more than 20 years, the British have tried just about everything to stop sectarian violence in Northern Ireland: direct rule from London, deployment of troops on security patrol, internment of suspected terrorists, dialogue with Dublin and, last year, the encouragement of political talks between Catholic and Protestant parties.
Military measures have not worked, and last year the political dialogue never got off the ground because the Protestant unionist parties did not trust either the Irish or British Governments enough to let talks among all of them get started.
Last week, after 12 people died in mayhem that brought this year's deaths so far to 27 -- nearly a third of the total for 1991 -- Prime Minister John Major stepped in and invited the four Northern Irish parties that have clearly forsworn violence to talk with each other, with him in the chair, early this week.
It had generally been thought that until the British general election is held this spring, negotiations could not get anywhere.
But the election seems unlikely to make much difference to the situation in Northern Ireland, because all the main British political parties are determined to stay and resist the terrorists to the end.
In the long term, recent changes in political life in Dublin might have a greater effect.
For the last decade and more, to the Protestants in the North, the face of Catholic Ireland has been Prime Minister Charles J. Haughey, whom they suspected of sympathies for the Catholic republican cause.
With Mr.
Haughey now on his way out, the face of Ireland is President Mary Robinson, who has often spoken sympathetically of the need for understanding of the Protestants' dilemma.
Mr.
Haughey will be replaced this week by Albert Reynolds, a pragmatic businessman who says all Irish people just want the carnage to end.
Common Ground?
But politicians in Dublin and London can't stop the violence.
Only the Protestant and Catholic people of Derry and Belfast can, by finding common ground to push terrorists on both sides of the divide off their toeholds.


In East Haven, Just Plain Barbecue
SINCE Spanish explorers found native Americans cooking meat on racks over open-air pits and named the technique barbacoa, what was practicality has developed into an art form.
To fans of grilled food there are rituals to be observed in the making of the perfect barbecue.
What kind of fire is used?
Which wood is best, hickory, oak, mesquite?
How long should the meat be slow-cooked?
Is true barbecue the Southern version with pork, or is it Texan with beef?
Which sauce is essential to barbecued meat, a Texas-style, tomato-based sauce or the North Carolina-favored vinegar-based sauce?
There are even splinter groups in the barbecue cult, worshipers of the Memphis persuasion, the Kansas City sect, the Coloradan faction.


Public &amp; Private; Tyson Is Not Magic
Consider the case of two champions.
Both are the best at what they do; both are black.
And both are considered heroes to kids in communities that sorely lack them.
Magic Johnson is the one who has taught young men to use condoms.
Mike Tyson is the one who has taught them to use women.


THE ARCH TRIUMPHALIST
TRIUMPH WITHOUT victory" is the title of a new U.S. News &amp; World Report book about the Persian Gulf war. A nice differentiation of synonyms: in current usage, a
triumph
is a spectacular
win
, as of a single battle;
victory
-- rooted in the Latin
vincere
, "to conquer" -- often has the connotation of the successful culmination of a war.
Back in the days of the cold war (no, I'm not being nostalgic), the word
victory
was frowned on in accommodationist circles.
Gen.
Douglas MacArthur's stern 1951 statement to a joint meeting of Congress, "In war there is no substitute for victory," seemed unduly final to many seeking a settlement of the Korean conflict; a decade later, Senator Barry M. Goldwater used the word to provoke his liberal critics in the title of his book "Why Not Victory?"


A Rejection Of Revitalization In North Tarrytown
WHEN the North Tarrytown Board of Trustees rejected a $75 million plan to revitalize the village's deteriorated downtown, it ended more than three years of contentious revision and reversed the preliminary approval the developer had won from a previous board.
Its rejection, delivered on Jan. 31 just an hour before the deadline for a decision, may also generate a lawsuit.
A lawyer representing Halpern Enterprises, the Tarrytown development group that spent $750,000 to develop the revitalization concept, said last week that the company is considering suing the village for breach of contract.


New Power Tools Help Add To Wood Screws' Popularity
WOOD screws are stronger fasteners than nails.
Although more expensive, they have become increasingly popular for many home repairs, because they are easy to install with an electric screwdriver or a drill equipped with a screwdriver bit.
Screws are particularly appropriate when hammering may cause damage, as when installing fasteners in a plaster wall, or when pieces may need to be disassembled later.
Following are guidelines for choosing wood screws and installing them correctly.


Testimony By Tyson Wraps Up
The prosecutor in Mike Tyson's rape trial tried repeatedly today to challenge the former heavyweight champion's contention that he made a sexually explicit proposition to his 18-year-old accuser in their first meeting last July and that she readily accepted.
In his second and last day on the witness stand, Mr.
Tyson endured a steady stream of questions from the prosecutor, J. Gregory Garrison, who tried to convince the jury that Mr.
Tyson was lying in his testimony the day before.


No 2d Best Allowed at Dog Show
The Westminster Kennel Club's dog show, America's most prestigious canine fixture, will stage its 116th consecutive event tomorrow and Tuesday, with 2,568 dogs competing in Madison Square Garden.
For the first time in Westminster's long history, the show will be restricted to champions.
As such, the show marks the first champions-only event governed by the rules of the American Kennel Club ever held in this country.


Miss Crossfield Has Wedding
Ana Maria Crossfield, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry H. Crossfield of New York, was married yesterday to John Francis Mahoney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene J. Mahoney of Mendham, N.J.
The Rev.
Kenneth E. Lasch, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Mahoney, 27 years old, is known as Anina.
She is the publicity manager at Pharos Books in New York.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is the president of Tele-Tale Productions Inc., a children's television production company in New York.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
The argument about abortion is actually an argument about the nature of -- and the moment of -- existence.
A way to settle this argument might be to relate it, by analogy, to the criterion that is used to determine the end of existence, that is, to define life as the presence of organized brain activity (not just any electrical activity, but organized activity).
This would recognize that abortion in the first month is very different from abortion in the last and that we need not be "for" or "against" it in any absolute way.
RICHARD HELFER
New York, N.Y.


Yvette Kruger, a Lawyer, to Marry
Yvette L. Kruger and Joseph E. Mullaney 3d, both lawyers in Boston, are engaged to be married in June.
Ms.
Kruger, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from both Tufts University and Boston College Law School.
She is an associate at Goodwin, Procter &amp; Hoar.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joe W. Kruger of Naples, Fla.
Her father retired as the general manager of operations of Mercedes-Benz of North America, Inc. in Montvale, N.J.


American Accent


Courier's Just One Step From Top of the World
Tonight was the night.
On an indoor court at a downtown auditorium here, Jim Courier faced one last challenge before he could have his coronation.
But there has been so much talk about it, even Courier was viewing the moment less than enthusiastically.
He had won three matches and finally moved into the semifinals of the Volvo/San Francisco tournament, needing just one more victory to earn enough points to pass Stefan Edberg and become the world's No. 1-ranked male tennis player.


Who Knows What Causes Depression?
The letter from Ms.
Debbi S. Honorof of the National Foundation for Depressive Illness Inc.  [ Jan. 19 ] , though short, contains two serious errors.
(1) Medium to major forms of depression are not "always biochemically based." Most of us who are clinicians or researchers in this area do not know the cause of most of these depressions.


Cleveland
Not unlike a number of cities, Cleveland has been waging an ambitious campaign to keep people and businesses downtown.
And, despite the pull of the suburbs, it has in many ways succeeded.
A walk through the $400 million renovation of the landmark Tower City complex covering 34 acres in the center of the city will challenge any visitor who imagines this downtown is dead.
The central commuter rail station has been completely renovated and the interior of the 62-year-old Terminal Tower now includes a four-level retail mall elegant enough to lure the likes of Gucci, Barneys New York and Bally of Switzerland.
In the works for nearly a decade, the Tower City complex opened at Christmas 1990 to nearly as much skeptism as acclaim.
Yet it has brought people back downtown -- to dine, shop, see a movie, or just take a ride up to the top of the 52-story tower, with its view of the city, the river and Lake Erie.


Music, Food, Dancing And, of Course, Fashion
THURSDAY -- More than 800 junior members and their guests filled the halls and galleries of the Museum of the City of New York for its winter fund-raising dance.
The Nighthawks set up their big band under the curving marble stairway in the Fifth Avenue rotunda.
TUESDAY -- The auction galleries at Sotheby's were transformed into a nightclub for an auction and dinner-dance benefiting the Irvington Institute for Medical Research.
New stretch tablecloths that conform to the table legs were part of the decor, an arrangement that drew praise from women in long dresses. (The usual floor-length tablecloths fight with long skirts.) The evening supported young immunologists and their research into AIDS and other diseases.


POSTINGS: Trouble in the Heights; Co-op Bankruptcy
In what is believed to be the first bankruptcy of its kind in New York City, the co-op corporation at 867 West 181st Street in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan has filed for protection from its creditors.
Allen Turek, the co-op's lawyer, said that the Chapter 11 filing in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan by the Duncraggen Realty Corp. on Jan. 30 was forced by Crossland Federal Savings Bank, which holds the mortgage on the 72-unit, six-story brick prewar building.


Katherine Bilik To Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene W. Bilik of Stamford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Katherine Bilik to Michael William Sweeney, a son of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Sweeney Jr.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bilik, 31 years old, is a senior consultant with Deloitte &amp; Touche, the accounting and management consulting firm in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Colgate University, and received an M.B.A. from Cornell University, as did her fiance.


Emma Thomas To Wed in May
Ian Thomas of Wixoe, England, and Mrs.
Lorimer Mason of Geldeston, England, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Emma Thomas, to Jay Kenderdine Harrison, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
John Harrison of Greenwich, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Thomas, 28 years old, is an associate at Meadowcroft Associates, an investment firm in Westport, Conn.
She graduated from Oxford University and received an M.B.A. degree from Harvard University.
Her father is the chairman of Culpeper Ltd., an herbs and spices retail chain with headquarters in London.


Concerts in Movie Theater
Lincoln Center has scheduled four chamber music concerts in the Walter Reade Theater, on the plaza level of the center's Samuel B. and David Rose Building, 165 West 65th Street.
The performances will take place on March 23 (the Lark Quintet and the pianist Samuel Sanders), April 6 (Music Today Ensemble), April 27 (New York Festival of Song), and May 18 (Andrew Rangell, a pianist).


Carol and Lisa Saltzman Affianced
Carol Sue Saltzman and Joel Christopher Andrykowski are planning a June wedding, and Lisa Ann Saltzman and Charles Solomon will be married in October, the parents of the sisters, Mr. and Mrs.
Edward M. Saltzman of New York, have announced.
Carol Saltman is a freelance television commercial producer based in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Boston University, and received an M.B.A. from Suffolk University.
Mr.
Andrykowski is the supervisor of silk screening for Dive 'n Surf Inc., a sportswear manufacturer in Los Angeles.
He is a son of Elizabeth Andrykowski of Arlington Heights, Ill., and the late Daniel Andrykowski.


Borg Strives for More
Five Wimbledon titles and six French Open championships are apparently not enough, not for BJORN BORG, anyway.
The Swedish-born star says he is ready to resume competition, this time on the new ATP Senior tour, a 10-city international circuit for players 35 and over.


Ignition: Games Begin With Flames and Flair
Eleven years in the planning, $1.6 billion in the spending, the XVI Winter Olympics opened today under crystal-clear skies, with a lavish cermony that was typically French and a political controversy that was typically American.
For nearly two hours, an audience of 30,000 spectators in the world's largest temporary stadium, as well as millions watching on television around the world, were dazzled by screaming jet-fighter planes, strobe lights, fireworks and an entertainment pastiche that seemed to run the gamut of modern French culture.


The Romance With Linda
To the Editor:
"David Gelernter's Romance With Linda" (Jan. 19) distorts both history and current commercial status.
Linda was originally intended as a system for parallel computers.
I proposed that it could be applied to networks of existing machines, and did the first network implementation.
The article begins by citing current use of Linda at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories.
I was running Linda on a network just across the street, at Sandia National Laboratories, in late 1987.
Sandia was so excited by this work that it announced it publicly, leading to national press coverage.


CAMPUS LIFE: Minnesota; Astronomer Spots Clue To Future of Universe
After scientists the world over searched for more than 50 years, a University of Minnesota student may have found one of the most elusive objects in the cosmos.
The student, Claia Bryja, a 27-year-old doctoral candidate in astronomy, recently announced that she had found what she and other university astronomers believe to be brown dwarfs -- gaseous bodies too massive to be planets but not massive enough to ignite into full-blown stars.


This Week: Order Seeds and Supplies
Mail those seed and plant orders.
Rose plants and flowering shrubs are shipped in early spring, so don't delay.
Remember that some of the more unusual plants are in limited supply.
If you need sturdy equipment for seed-starting, here are a couple of tried-and-true suppliers: Gardener's Supply Company, 128 Intervale Road, Burlington, Vt. 05401; (802) 660-3500, and Indoor Gardening Supplies, P.O.
Box 40567, Detroit 48240; (313) 668-8384.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Nov. 91
Nov. 90
Change
Starts
1,075
1,130
-4.9%
Completions
984
1,246
-21.0%
Sales
559
480
+12.4%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.93
8.77
9.81
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.00
5.99
7.79
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.78
8.62
9.63
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.85
5.81
7.57
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.82
8.61
9.67
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.91
5.88
7.75
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.11
8.91
10.04
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.39
6.54
8.01
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.23
4.14
6.51
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.25
8.25
9.58
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


Ms. Foxen Wed To Richard Cote
Anne Louise Foxen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Foxen of Laurel Hollow, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Richard James Cote, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Cote of Fullerton, Calif.
The Rev.
Charles A. Ribaudo officiated at St.
Dominic's Roman Catholic Chapel in Oyster Bay, L.I.
Mrs.
Cote, 29 years old, was until recently the director of special gifts at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father is the president of Foxen &amp; Fredman Advertising in Garden City, L.I.
Her mother, Eleanor Foxen, is the village clerk-treasurer in Laurel Hollow.


Weather to Make a Polar Bear Glad to Be Alive
Gus was feeling good, all 800 pounds of him.
He swaggered around the Polar Circle area in the Central Park Zoo with his snout in the air showing off for visitors, leaping from one rock to another.
Then he nuzzled into a pas de deux with Ida, his 600-pound playmate for the morning.
Winter is the best time to go to the Central Park Zoo to commune with the animals that thrive in cold climates.
They are friskier, friendlier and in some cases more amorous than they are the rest of the year.
Also, crowds are small in February.


Hartt School Offers Mozart Program
ON Tuesday at 8 P.M. at Millard Auditorium in West Hartford, Sidney Harth will lead the Hartt School of Music Chamber Singers and Symphony Orchestra in a program featuring several of Mozart's instrumental and vocal works composed during his childhood.
On the program are the F Major Symphony (K. 19A), the Mass in D Minor (K. 65) and a "Church" Sonata in B Flat (K. 68).
Vocal soloists will include Jill Couto, Xin Zie, Maria Wood, Susan Yankee-Friend, Lawrence Constance, Mitchell Piper, Phillip Boykin and Jonathan Dean.
For information call 243-4228.
Also at 8 P.M. on Tuesday Tokyo String Quartet comes to Sprague Hall at Yale in New Haven, where the ensemble plays Schubert's B-Flat Quartet, Webern's "Five Movements" and the B-Minor Clarinet Quintet of Brahms, the last with David Shifrin as guest artist.
On Thursday evening at 8 the Brazilian composer (and visiting professor) Marlos Nobre conducts his own Concerto for Strings and the "Sonancias III for Two Pianos and Two Percussionists" at Sprague Hall with members of the New Music New Haven ensemble.
The free concert also includes pieces by the Yale composers Arthur Bloom, Nicole La Pera and Joseph Rubenstein (432-4158).


World Markets; The Altered Outlook on Interest
Last week three events, one in Germany and two in Washington, altered the near-term outlook for interest rates and stocks.
As a result, rates will not be cut soon in Europe and rates may decline further in the United States.
Some analysts were not surprised by the latest developments.
But, obviously, many investors were expecting something else.
This was clear in the recent strong performance of the dollar, the rise of interest rates here and the rally of some stock markets in Europe.


Snow. Sun. The Games Aren't Weatherproof.
The weather was glorious today for the opening ceremonies of the XVI Olympic Winter Games in nearby Albertville.
But snow was likely at several mountain venues Sunday, and there were reports that starting times for various events might be changed.
The men's downhill skiing was scheduled to start at noon Sunday (6 A.M. Eastern standard time) in Val d'Isere.
Olympic skiing officials were said to be considering an earlier start so the race might be completed before the snow began.


Wesleyan Highlights Its Photo Collection
WINTER at Wesleyan University means, among other things, that the Davison Art Center comes into its own.
With the leaves off the trees, the 150-year-old mansion, restored to its original Caribbean pink, puts the rest of the campus in the shade.
At the moment, the Davison and its neighbor, the gray, rectilinear Ezra and Cecile Zilkha Gallery, have in common photography exhibitions -- two at the first, one at the second.
The shows, in turn, share prints from the collection that has recently been bestowed on Wesleyan by Russell G. D'Oench, who just retired as editor and co-owner of The Middlebury Press.
The newspaper should go down in history for having tried colorization and, not liking it, reverting to black and white.
Or so the story goes.


Jefferies Gets $725,000 Raise
GREGG JEFFERIES avoided arbitration when he reached agreement with the Kansas City Royals yesterday on a one-year contract worth $1.15 million, a raise of $725,000.
Jefferies, who came to the Royals from the Mets along with KEITH MILLER and KEVIN McREYNOLDS in the BRET SABERHAGEN trade, is expected to play third base.


Capital Gains Tax Cut Won't Cure Our Ills
To the Editor:
It was unseemly that the loudest ovation President Bush received during his State of the Union Message (front page, Jan. 29) was in response to his insistence on cutting the capital gains tax.


New York, Detroit: Matchups Abound
Many years ago, before the proliferation of cable television and the invention of the San Jose Sharks, the National Hockey League appeared on a regular basis on free network television in the United States.
First on CBS, later on NBC, the league and the networks presented a game of the week on winter weekend afternoons.
It was in the best interest of all to choose an attractive match, often pitting good teams from different regions, to offer the best show to the widest possible audience.


What It Was, Was Britball
GOD SAVE THE QUARTERBACK!
American Football Goes to England.
By Michael Globetti. 277 pp.
New York: Random House. $20.


Mystery Shot Kills Woman, 30, Walking With Son in Coney Island
A 30-year-old woman was shot and killed yesterday afternoon as she walked with her 10-year-old son a dozen blocks from her home in Coney Island, Brooklyn, the police said.
It was not immediately clear who fired the fatal shot or where it came from.
The woman, whom the police did not identify, collapsed suddenly at 3:30 P.M. on West 20th Street after she was shot once in the back, the police said.


Greens to Melons, Potatoes to Tomatoes
VEGETABLE garden planning is at its height.
Those who have grown their own for years know what does well.
Most important, they know what the family likes or what should be grown in quantity for preserving.
Some gardeners have huge plots and grow just about everything.
Others have just enough room for a few vegetables.
They delight in homegrown tomatoes or tossing a salad with greens just picked.


Serbia's Economy Collapsing From War Cost
The burden of the war between Serbs and Croats is suffocating the Serbian republic's moribund economy and putting pressure on its Government to back the peace plan brokered by the United Nations.
"The economy here is collapsing, and there is nothing anyone can do about it," said a Western diplomat who has monitored the Yugoslav economy for years.
"I'm convinced it is going to come apart in a big way."


More Access to Waterfront Is Urged in Messinger Plan
Saying that the city's current period of financial hardship is a good time for long-term planning, Borough President Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan has proposed to open much more of the borough's 32 miles of waterfront to the public and to take the first steps toward a continuous esplanade around the island.
Ms.
Messinger's plan, contained in a 96-page report released last week, is the first to bring together dozens of other studies and to seek to guide development on the entire waterfront well into the next century.
The proposals range from moving fences and putting up extra signs to building multimillion-dollar parks.


Starks Is Up for the Dunk Contest, But Recognition Is the Main Thing
Winning the slam-dunk contest was not on John Starks's list of goals when the season began.
He wanted to help the Knicks win games.
He wanted to win Pat Riley's confidence.
And he wanted to win the respect of his peers, proving he belonged in the National Basketball Association to stay.


V.I.P. Crowding
To the Editor: Visitors to Czechoslovakia and, I presume, other former Soviet satellites, would be well advised to inquire about visiting foreign delegations.
During our three-week stay in Czechoslovakia we were captive behind police lines in Prague for half an hour, with no way out, awaiting Lech Walesa's stroll from the castle to the bishop's palace, about 200 feet.
In Bratislava, to which we made a special one-day return just to visit the castle museum, we taxied up the hill only to learn the place would be closed for an indefinite number of hours because of a visiting German delegation.
As we left we had to hug building walls while a convoy of dozens of vehicles raced up to the castle.


Air Safety
To the Editor: Your article "Vivid Lessons on Air Safety" (Practical Traveler, Dec. 15) brought to mind what I always feel on taking off on a flight.
The flight attendants routinely show you these practices, but most passengers are just bored and nobody really knows how it would work in reality.
Why do Air Canada and other airlines not allow people to participate in such simulator experiences on a voluntary basis and, if need be, at some cost?


T. M. Sprague Weds Ms. Linkhorn
Alison Virginia Linkhorn, the daughter of Forbes L. Linkhorn of Pawling, N.Y., and Marion Meade of New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Melvin Sprague, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Sprague of Princess Bay, S.I.
The Rev.
Robert Taylor performed the nondenominational ceremony at Christ Church on Quaker Hill in Pawling.
Mrs.
Sprague, 24 years old, is a sales associate at Frankels, a bedroom and bathroom accessories store in Heartland, S.I.
Her father is the art director of The American Journal of Nursing in New York.
Her mother is the author of several books, among them the biography "Dorothy Parker: What Fresh Hell Is This?" Her stepmother, Dona Wayman Linkhorn, is an owner of Heirloom Originals, a dress design concern in Pawling.


A Trap for Candidates; When 'the War' Means Vietnam, Politics Gets Muddy
For political longevity, it is hard to beat the generation that fought in World War II.
For the last 40 years, the nation's chief executives have been products of this era, and seven of the last eight Presidents served in the armed forces during what was, in the title of the Studs Terkel book, "The Good War."
Eventually, though, even the most enduring generation must yield to its successor, and as voters prepare to cast the first ballots in the 1992 Presidential election, it is clear that this transition is haltingly getting under way.
On the Republican side, President Bush of course has the classic military resume of a Navy pilot who was shot down over the Pacific.
But none of the five leading candidates for the Democratic nomination served in World War II.
And one of them, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, is the first major Presidential candidate who was a hero of the not-so-good war in Vietnam.


Attention America! Snap Out of It!
Just when Americans should be celebrating their victory in the cold war, they have grown alarmed that they are losing the next big war: the competitiveness war.
After years of watching Japan increase its manufacturing might, Americans have awakened to the dangers of losing the industrial base that long made their nation the envy of the world.
At long last, Americans of all stripes, Democrat and Republican, white collar and blue, are groping for ways to close the competitiveness gap that has allowed Japan to muscle into the lead in such key industries as cars and computer chips.


Q and A
Laws for the Disabled  Question: I am physically disabled and looking to rent or buy a co-op or condominium.
There are certain changes that I would need to make to make my home more accessible.
My biggest concern is that I be able to have a washer/dryer in my apartment.
I understand that some co-op boards frown on this, especially if there is a coin laundry in the building.
But it would be nearly impossible for me to use such a facility.
Are there laws concerning the rights of the disabled that would give me leverage with a landlord, co-op board of directors or board of managers on this matter? . . .
Paul Finnelli, Brooklyn Answer: Yes.
According to Janet Eriv, who serves as counsel to the Mayor's Office for People With Disabilities, there are several laws that help disabled people with accessibility.
Ms.
Eriv said the most specific to your case is the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.
This law says, in part, that a landlord or co-op or condominium board cannot refuse a disabled person's request to make reasonable modifications to the interior or common areas of a residential building that would provide full use and access.
An exception would be if the landlord or board could show that the requested changes would have a harmful effect on the building or its system or would be an impediment to other residents.
Your request to install a washer/dryer, for example, could be denied if it would hurt the building's plumbing system or affect water use in some way.


The Photo Op: Making Icons or Playing Politics?
The scene comes out of the best tradition of American barnstorming politics, as practiced in the media age.
Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative television commentator and maverick candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination in the New Hampshire primary on Feb. 18, is in the middle of a daylong campaign blitz along the western edge of the state.
By late morning the candidate has made his way to Butson's supermarket in Woodsville.
Trailed by a ramshackle army of campaign aides and media people, microphone booms raised like halberds, he enters the store in search of votes.
Halfway down the first aisle he accepts a slice of pizza from a young woman handing out samples.
As he begins to munch, photographers and television crews jostle for position in front of him, TV lights blazing and photographic strobes flashing.
After a moment, Mr.
Buchanan heads down another aisle and buys a ticket for the New Hampshire lottery.
Again, photographers and television crews cluster eagerly, as he holds up the ticket and half-eaten slice of pizza.


Business Diary
ECONOMY Mr. Bush on Health Care


Skiing the Bowls of Squaw Valley
LANDING in Reno, Nev., where slot machines pulse at the airport arrival gates, one might find it hard to believe that just beyond this treeless city of neon excess is an abundance of alpine splendor.
This is not to imply that acres of video poker games and $5.99 all-you-can-eat rib buffets are a bad thing.
But for thrills in thin air, Reno must be left behind.
Just beyond the Nevada-California border, some 45 miles west of Reno, the Sierra punches holes in the sky, and great stands of red-barked ponderosa pine crowd the slopes.
The Truckee River carves a deep valley through rock cliffs that recall the scrambling hideout for Humphrey Bogart in "High Sierra." The main source of wonderment in this part of the mountains is Lake Tahoe, which holds enough water to cover the entire state of California to a depth of 14 inches.
The lake sits at 6,229 feet above sea level, fed by runoff from the bowl of peaks surrounding it.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  COVERT ACTION IN IRAQ DETAILED
President Bush told Congress in the fall that covert action would be increased to try to incite the overthrow of Saddam Hussein, officials say.  1


Wall Street; Just What Is Driving I.B.M.?
The International Business Machines Corporation is one of the market's most widely followed stocks, but what really drives its price?
Most people, including I.B.M.'s management, assume it is largely profits per share.
But Donald W. Mitchell, a partner in the consulting firm of Mitchell &amp; Company, argues that the computer giant's stock is actually influenced chiefly by its dividends, its capital spending and the general level of inflation.
Its stock has tended to increase along with its dividends and decline when inflation and capital expenditures increase.


CULTIVATING THEIR OWN GARDENS
I noted with amusement the comments made by Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp in Jason DeParle's article "Cultivating Their Own Gardens" (Jan. 5).
Kemp says, "When people have access to power and control over their own lives . . . that changes attitudes," but goes on to condemn the social programs that grew out of the Johnson era as efforts to create "the Government, liberal plantation."


Science Fiction
Kate Wilhelm is a fine science fiction writer whose work often focuses on domestic drama -- tense confrontations between parents and children, husbands and wives.
She brings to these scenes the same rigorous narrative logic, the same unsparing extrapolation from premise to consequences that distinguishes her more conventional science fiction.
Of the 12 stories in her new collection AND THE ANGELS SING (St. Martin's, $19.95), three were first published in Redbook magazine; the others appeared in such science fiction venues as Omni magazine and the Orbit series of hard-cover anthologies edited by Damon Knight.
By positioning herself on the margin between fantasy and mainstream fiction, Ms.
Wilhelm is able to undermine expectations from both genres.
At every moment the stories in this collection threaten to veer toward the realistic or the fantastic; the longer both options are kept open, the more keenly the reader takes Ms.
Wilhelm's point that, in the end, it makes no difference what compels people to question their grip on everyday reality -- what counts is how they respond when they come face to face with the unexpected.


Ms. Mallaney to Wed J. A. McCarthy
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Mallaney of Basking Ridge, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Frances Rebecca Mallaney to James Arthur McCarthy Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. McCarthy of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mallaney, 28 years old, is an account representative of the Hertz Corporation in New York and a graduate of the University of Minnesota.
Her father retired as the chairman and president of Statewide Savings Bank of Jersey City.


American Voices: Fear for the Future - A special report.; Shadow of Pessimism Eclipses a Dream
Brian Williams is part of the great American dream.
Born one of eight children in a poor black family whose father worked in the meat-packing houses here, he has scratched and struggled his way up to the point where now, at the age of 25, he holds a degree from Princeton University and runs his own printing company.


POSTINGS: Building's Namesake; Hailing Lincoln
Three score and zero years ago, the 55-story Lincoln office building was built at 60 East 42d Street.
On Wednesday at 11:30 A.M. its owners will celebrate the 183d birthday of its namesake, Abraham Lincoln, with a program of his favorite songs and, at the same time, unveil the building's long-awaited refurbishing.
"Celebrating Mr. Lincoln's birthday with music dear to him is an opportunity to honor a great man and to bring together the tenants of the building and leaders of the business community in the Grand Central Partnership district," said Peter L. Malkin, a principal in the company that owns the building and chairman of the partnership.


Make a Hit With Youths
When a few score of New York City's movers and shakers gathered at the West 54th Street branch of the U.S.
Trust Company last week to celebrate the beginning of an ambitious new baseball program for disadvantaged youths, a couple of the celebrity guests had fun with the program's name: RBI, for Reviving Baseball in Inner Cities.
"When they told me RBI, I said, 'What's that?' " said TOMMIE AGEE. "I never had any."


Helmet Helped Girl In Bicycle Accident
I'll admit that bicycle helmets, to the unfamiliar, can look a bit peculiar.
But this is one New Jersey mother who lauds the new law in Westfield on mandatory use of helmets ("Grumbling Over Law Requiring Helmets on Young Bicyclists," Jan. 19).
On Sept. 6 of last year, our 7-year-old daughter, riding down a hill, hit a metal pipe and literally flew head first into a brick wall.


Sunday Menu; Gazpacho Sauce Teams Up With Salmon in Any Season
Gazpacho may be a summer soup, but it's a year-round salsa and a superb contrast in texture and flavor to the richness of the grilled salmon in this menu.
This meal is so quick you will have time to do some of the cleaning up while you wait for the rice to finish cooking.
Grilled Salmon With Gazpacho Salsa  4 ounces Kirby cucumber, scrubbed, trimmed and cut in 4  6 ounces red bell pepper, washed, trimmed and cut in chunks  2 ounces red onion, peeled and cut in quarters  6 ounces ripe cherry tomatoes, washed and stemmed  1 large clove garlic, chopped 1 1/2 teaspoons Worcestershire sauce  2 tablespoons red wine vinegar  1/8 teaspoon salt, optional  Oil for greasing grill 10 ounces skinless salmon fillet, washed and cut in half.
1.
Combine cucumber, pepper, onion, tomatoes and garlic in food processor and pulse until vegetables are finely chopped.
2. Stir in Worcestershire sauce, vinegar and salt.
3.
Grill salmon on stove-top grill or broil under preheated broiler, following Canadian rule: measure fish at thickest point and cook 10 minutes to the inch.
4.
When fish is cooked, arrange on dinner plates and spoon salsa over the top of each piece.
Yield: 2 servings.
Jalapeno-Cilantro Rice  8 ounces onion, chopped  1 teaspoon olive oil  1 large clove garlic, minced 1 1/2 cups no-salt-added chicken broth or stock  3/4 cup long grain rice  1/2 to 1 jalapeno, washed, trimmed, seeded and minced  1/4 cup chopped cilantro.
1. Saute onion in hot oil in pot large enough to hold the rice.
2. Add the garlic and continue to saute until onion begins to soften.
3.
Stir in chicken stock or broth, and rice.
Bring to boil.
Reduce heat, cover and cook rice until all of liquid has evaporated and rice is tender, 17 minutes total.
4. Remove from heat and stir in jalapeno and cilantro.
Yield: 2 servings.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'WOMAN CALLED TRUTH'
Soujourner Truth was born into slavery in Ulster County in 1797 and spent much of her life struggling to promote the cause of abolition.
Her story is the inspiration for a play by Sandra Fenischel Asher called "A Woman Called Truth." It will be performed today at 3 P.M. in the Shiloh Baptist Church, at 90 North Washington Street in Tarrytown.
Slavery was abolished in New York State in 1827, freeing Soujourner Truth and her son and permitting her to become a widely known and well-respected advocate of abolition and women's rights.
She lectured tirelessly throughout the mid-19th century and died in 1883, having lived long enough to see slavery abolished, albeit through civil war.


Sue Resnick to Wed
November wedding plans have been announced for Randye Sue Resnick, the daughter of Dr.
Martin Resnick of Bedford, N.Y., and the late Thelma Resnick, and Michael Dana Bernot, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Bernot of New York.
The couple, both 25 years old, are students at New York Medical College.
She graduated from Duke University, he from the University of Pennsylvania.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about a Texas Supreme Court ruling overturning the state's method of financing schools referred incorrectly to past court decisions.
The ruling was the court's first on the "Robin Hood" financing plan, in which money from wealthier school districts is used to pay for programs in less affluent districts.
The earlier decisions involved other school finance plans.


Sunday Outing; Winter Olympics, a la Belleayre in the Catskills
If you can't make it to France for the winter Olympics in Albertville this month, try the northern Catskills for skiing and ski-watching in a region dotted with French country inns.
The winter-sport resorts and restaurants of the Catskills, a little more than 100 miles from New York City, are not as glamorous or chic as those in France.
But at least there are virtually no long lines, traffic jams, parking problems or waiting at restaurants.


Public &amp; Private; Tyson Is Not Magic
Consider the case of two champions.
Both are the best at what they do; both are black.
And both are considered heroes to kids in communities that sorely lack them.
Magic Johnson is the one who has taught young men to use condoms.
Mike Tyson is the one who has taught them to use women.


Koch Pledges Allegiance to The Statute
Some people thought they saw Bill Koch nod when he passed President Francois Mitterrand of France tonight.
Others perceived an ever-so-slight dip of the wrist.
But the first United States controversy of the Winter Olympic Games faded into the Alpine night: Koch, the cross-country skier and American flag-bearer, didn't break his country's law by dipping the flag.


Tongues on Wry Lend Special Flavor to Movies
Tracey Ullman phones car dealers in Baltimore and comparison shops.
Meryl Streep frequents New York pirogi joints and grows a little zaftig.
Gary Oldman plays tapes on the freeway and ponders the uncanny congruities between Lee Harvey Oswald and Yogi Bear.
Kate Nelligan wangles an introduction to, and a tea party from, the most prominent matrons of Beaufort, S.C.
Barbara Hershey tools through the Louisiana swamps and climbs ashore now and then for a chat.
Eccentricities of the rich and famous?
Condescensions of royalty, in which the kings and queens of Hollywood slip out a la "Henry V" and slum?
Yes, in a way, and no.
All these slightly undignified enterprises are dramatic research, though not in the what-does-he-wear and how-does-she-
feel-
about-it sense of the word.
In a world where an audience can punch a television remote control and hear, in the space of five minutes, a Kurdish soldier, a Swedish farmer, a Nigerian businessman and a Bolivian pianist, these are simply the lengths to which some actors will go to find and perfect an acceptable accent.
And they are not just striving to outdo Ms.
Streep's gnarled Polish vowels in the film "Sophie's Choice," either.
What they are after is merely the one particular, class-bound, ethnically determined and regionally specific manner of speaking that every character must have.


Corrections
The last words of the "New Yorkers, etc." column on page 50 today are omitted.
The last paragraph should read as follows:  The conversation was brief.
"I said I had a date that night," she said.
"He said, 'Break it,' and I said, 'Well, O.K.' " And it was.


Fruitcake in One-Page-Plus
To the Editor:
"The Pentagon's Fruitcake Rules," (Forum, Jan. 5) asserts that it takes the Pentagon 14 pages to cover the requirements for fruitcake.
Since 1986, the Defense Personnel Support Center, which is the Defense Logistics Agency's buying activity charged with procurement of subsistence for the military, has used a commercial item description for fresh fruitcake that sets forth requirements in a little more than a page.


Driven By Fear; Crime and Its Amplified Echoes Are Rearranging People's Lives
Almost nightly, local television news shows here and in many other cities announce the running total for the number of murders committed for the year and compare the toll to the same time last year.
Like body counts from the war in Vietnam, the numbers are more important for the emotions they arouse than for the information they convey.
In Houston, where 671 murders were committed in 1991, violent crime has become an obsession, making home security systems a growth industry and handguns ever more popular.
The residents of the country's fourth-largest city are taking their personal safety more into their own hands, and in this they are not alone.


New Yorkers,etc.
Not quite 10 years ago, Jon Morrell, a young opera singer, was standing on a street in Athens wondering where he could buy his mother an antique necklace.
Enter Nikos Antonakeas, a resident of Athens.
Could he help the traveler, he asked.
He could, did, and the two men parted company.


CONGRESS NOTIFIED OF IRAQ COUP PLAN
President Bush notified Congress last fall that the Administration was undertaking increased covert actions in Iraq intended to foment a coup against Saddam Hussein that could be supported by United States military forces if necessary, Administration officials said today.
The officials were responding to published reports that a new Presidential finding related to efforts to oust the Iraqi leader had gone to Congressional intelligence oversight committees.


Public &amp; Private; Tyson Is Not Magic
Consider the case of two champions.
Both are the best at what they do; both are black.
And both are considered heroes to kids in communities that sorely lack them.
Magic Johnson is the one who has taught young men to use condoms.
Mike Tyson is the one who has taught them to use women.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Jan. 26 about Harris tweed misstated the value of the British pound.
It is about $1.80.


Jonathan Kern and Beth Sexer Wed
Beth Allyson Sexer, the managing editor of Sportstyle magazine, and Jonathan Sterry Kern, a vice president of BT Securities, both in New York, were married last evening at Temple Beth-El in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Arnold S. Turetsky officiated.
Mrs.
Kern, 31 years old, graduated summa cum laude from the State University of New York at Albany, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in journalism from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Sexer of White Plains.
Her father is the controller of British Khaki, a sportswear maker and distributor in New York.
Her mother, Janet Sexer, is a collections and sales coordinator in White Plains for Intracorp, a cost-containment company for the insurance industry.


Style Makers; Dwight Huffman and John Rantanen, Furniture Makers
Two students at the Genoa, N.Y., woodworking school, 25 miles north of Ithaca, have combined art and trash to encourage the world to recycle.
The students, Dwight Huffman, who is 24 years old, and John Rantanen, 30, a third-generation carpenter, have created a series of containers that are both attractive and useful.
They describe themselves as "21st century craftsmen seeking a beautiful solution to an ugly problem."


Economic Myopia: Obvious Problem, Hidden Causes
Has America become a nation of short-hitters, of corporate managers who issue dividend checks at the expense of quality and innovation, of workers who live from lite beer to lite beer and entrust their retirement to the kindness of strangers at the Social Security Administration?
That is certainly how many Japanese see us.
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa's disparaging comments last week on the quality of American management and workers reflect deep frustrations in doing business with a country that seems to be burning the candle at both ends.
And the criticism strikes a responsive chord among many Americans.


First Get the Materials, Now Get to the Streets, Then Get the Vote


Mutual Funds; Mr. Yacktman's 10-Year Horizon
Donald A. Yacktman, who manages the $700 million Selected American Shares fund, based in Chicago, has consistently beaten his peers by 4 percentage points a year.
For the three years that ended on Dec. 31, for instance, Selected American Shares rose an annual average of 19.1 percent, compared with 15 percent for all growth-and-income funds.
The fund gained an annual average of 15.6 percent in the last five years and 18.8 percent in the last decade.
In 1991, the fund's gains were particularly strong -- it rose 46.3 percent compared with 29.3 percent for all growth-and-income funds.
But even more impressive is how Mr.
Yacktman did it.
"He buys bigger blue-chip value-oriented companies but managed to turn in a terrific showing in a year that favored small, go-go growth stocks," said Don Phillips, vice president of Morningstar Inc., a mutual fund research group.
Mr.
Phillips calls Selected American Shares "a solid, all-weather fund."


Alas, Ivy League Is Like the Others
To the Sports Editor:
The Ivy League's decision to allow freshmen to play varsity football, thus eliminating the freshman teams, has surprised and disappointed a lot of us, but "Ivy League Furor, On and Off the Football Field" (The Times, Jan. 27) makes their reasoning clear, if equally depressing.
The Ivies plan to cut "from 50 to 35 each year the number of matriculating freshmen identified as football players."


Making Chocolate Mousse Without Raw Eggs
RAW or undercooked eggs have become risky business, so risky, in fact, that the Health Department in New Jersey has ordered restaurants not to serve them soft boiled or over easy.
People who are worried about salmonella, especially from mass-produced supermarket eggs, and who pay attention to the advice to cook eggs beyond runny can now forget about some familiar dishes.
A soft-boiled egg in the morning may already be a victim of high cholesterol counts, but what about Caesar salad with its raw egg to bind the dressing?
Or something as simple as homemade mayonnaise?
Bottle dressings will now have to be used.
Eggs benedict is another casualty.


Could City Officers Keep the Subways Safe?
On May 14, 1936, a 54-year-old clothing executive was robbed and strangled in a subway station bathroom at 42d Street and Eighth Avenue.
His death prompted a public outcry over crime in the subway and led the Board of Estimate and the Board of Aldermen to create the job of special patrolman for the city-owned IND line.
Such were the beginnings of the New York City Transit Police.


School Aid at Center Of a Political Storm
ABOUT 40 percent of state and local taxes in New Jersey go to support education.
The state pays more per pupil to school its children than any other state.
Gov.
Jim Florio's Quality Education Act put even more money into the pot.
So it is no wonder that the costs of education are emerging as the state's most explosive political issue.


R. M. Sloan to Wed Lisa Moskowitz
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Moskowitz of Upper Montclair, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Robin Moskowitz to Randy Mark Sloan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Sloan of Forest Hills, Queens.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Moskowitz, 31 years old, is an associate brand manager at Ciba Consumer Pharmaceuticals in Woodbridge, N.J., where her fiance is the vice president of marketing.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. from Northwestern University.
Her father is a physician in the Passaic (N.J.) Internal Medical Group.
Her mother, Bernice R. Moskowitz, is a hospice program coordinator at Beth Israel Hospital in Passaic.


Q and A
Viewing the Kentucky Derby
Q.
I would like to see the Kentucky Derby.
Do you have information on viewing the race? -- Rosemary N. Bireline, Cocoa Beach, Fla.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
After reading page after page of Rosenblatt's essay on abortion, am I to understand that his idea of the "great compromise" on this issue is for Congress to enact a law like Roe v.
Wade and then to spend lots of money on sex education?
Some compromise.
ALLEN GOLDMAN
South Orange, N.J.


Jennifer Contas Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Alan Friedberg of Boston have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Friedberg's daughter Jennifer Thompson Contas to Mark Churchill Monaco, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony P. Monaco of Newton, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Contas, 26 years old, is also a daughter of the late Arthur Peter Contas, a founding partner and vice president of the Boston Consulting Group.
She graduated from Lake Forest College and was until recently a publicity and promotions coordinator in Dedham, Mass., for the National Amusements theaters in Britain.
Her stepfather is the chairman of Loews Theaters in Secaucus, N.J.
Her mother, Niki Friedberg, is president of the board of the Institute of Contemporary Art in Boston.


1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Buchanan Tries to Soften a Boyhood Bully Image
Fresh dispatches from the past prove that Patrick J. Buchanan did not shatter every jaw, streetlight and windowpane in Washington in the 1950's.
Only his fair share.
Now that his self-created myth of his days as bully and "boyo" has taken on a life of its own, Mr.
Buchanan is instructing his family and friends to help him with some emergency revisionism.
The amateur spinners were on hand at a beer-and-oldies fund-raising event at the Bethesda-Chevy Chase Rescue Squad the other night.


Out of the Jungle -- In El Salvador, Rebels With A New Cause.
When they heard peace was at hand, Oscar and a group of fellow guerrillas decided to come out of the hills and join the celebrations in the capital.
The Salvadoran Government had declared Jan. 16 a national "day of peace," and an informal cease-fire seemed to be holding.
But amnesty for political crimes was still under negotiation and, technically speaking, the guerrillas were outlaws.
Hoping for the best and unwilling to miss the biggest party in years, the grimy band of rebels hopped into a battered Toyota pickup and barreled down the highway singing revolutionary ditties and waving to soldiers at army checkpoints along the way.
When the soldiers waved back, they began to believe peace really might have come to El Salvador.


Sharp Eyes Are Needed In Effort to Help Russia
After the first five truckloads of 40 tons of donated German butter vanished without a trace into the Russian maw, the administrators of the European Community's emergency food aid program knew well that wariness was at least as important as charity in trying to help this tough and hungry land.
"The butter trucks just disappeared," said Elisabeth Apraxine, a Belgian who is one of the visiting community executives administering a program to put $280 million worth of basic foods into the markets of Moscow and St.
Petersburg this winter.


In Unlikely Pairing, Ickes Strengthens Clinton Bid
That Harold M. Ickes joined Gov.
Bill Clinton's Presidential quest surprised many of Mr.
Ickes's political colleagues.
Not just because the Arkansan is viewed as a moderate and the iconoclastic Mr.
Ickes is a liberal from the West Side of Manhattan who profoundly disagrees with Mr.
Clinton's support of the death penalty.
Most people were surprised for another reason.
Mr.
Clinton is -- or was -- considered the front-runner for the Democratic nomination.
And Mr.
Ickes, who is as unconventional as he is committed, has been a perennial supporter of losers.
Four years ago, he supported the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, not to make a President, but to make a point about the Democratic Party's drift from its liberal roots.


New Power Tools Help Add To Wood Screws' Popularity
WOOD screws are stronger fasteners than nails.
Although more expensive, they have become increasingly popular for many home repairs, because they are easy to install with an electric screwdriver or a drill equipped with a screwdriver bit.
Screws are particularly appropriate when hammering may cause damage, as when installing fasteners in a plaster wall, or when pieces may need to be disassembled later.
Following are guidelines for choosing wood screws and installing them correctly.


Set and Costumes: Icing on the Cake
To the Editor:
The Lyric Opera of Chicago production of "Turandot," as designed by David Hockney and Ian Falconer, was such a thrilling, balanced and memorable evening of theater that Edward Rothstein's essay "When Form Exceeds Function"  [ Jan. 26 ]  reads almost as if he had not attended the performance, but merely written based on a quick viewing of the sets and his anticipation of what an opera critic might expect from a production designed by such major talent.


New York City's Suburban Commuters Also Had Fare Rises
To the Editor:
Much coverage has been given to the New York City subway and bus fare increase.
People have complained that the increase is unfair, that riders of suburban transit systems get away without fare increases.
The Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North are given as examples.
These complaints are inaccurate and unfair.


Cable's Now an Olympic Contender
A senior executive of Turner Network Television says the honor of being the first cable channel to carry the Olympic Games is worth the $20 million that it will lose on the deal.
The loss will be especially easy to take, said Kevin O'Malley, the senior vice president of Turner Sports, if the high cost of the Olympics leads to a joint broadcast-cable bid for American television rights in the future.


Leigh Walzer Wed to Dr. Jacobowitz
Dr.
Esther Jacobowitz, a fellow in child psychiatry at the Westchester division of the Cornell Medical Center in White Plains, and Leigh Walzer, an investment analyst and vice president of BDS Securities in New York, were married yesterday at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Rabbi Elazar M. Teitz officiated.
Mrs.
Walzer, 29 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Boston University's six-year medical program.
She is a daughter of Ada and Ronald Jacobowitz of Phoenix.
Her father is a professor of mathematics at Arizona State University.
Her mother is a Hebrew instructor at Phoenix College.


Karen Lipton, Editor, Marries
Karen Elsa Lipton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Lipton of Santa Fe, N.M., was married yesterday to James Russell Gaines, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Gaines of Haines City, Fla.
Rabbi Bruce Freyer performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Gaines, 28 years old, graduated from Tufts University and is an assistant picture editor at People magazine.
Her father is the president of Lipton, Caston &amp; Company, a member of the New York Stock Exchange.


Dinkins Plan For Budget Draws Praise
In its first comment on Mayor David M. Dinkins's four-year fiscal plan for New York City, the staff of the State Financial Control Board has given a favorable review, telling Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo that the plan "is comprehensive, it is complete, and it poses a viable approach to solving the city's financial problems."
For months, the Control Board, which has monitored the city's spending since the fiscal crisis of the mid-70's, has harshly criticized Mr.
Dinkins's budget plans.
Its views are especially important because the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, Felix G. Rohatyn, has said he would not support a $700 million bond refinancing that the Mayor wants to use to help balance the budget without the Control Board's approval.


Insurgent Parents' Group in Princeton Pressing Goals for Minority Students
Insurgent parents in this small, relatively affluent community have begun an attack on low achievement levels for minority students and a school administration that, the group believes, does not do enough to improve minority achievement.
In the process, the parents have revealed differing priorities that, they say, may exist in hundreds of suburban school districts with small but distinct minority and immigrant populations.
According to this view, the middle class and the school administration stress the role of the high school as a route to the best colleges and measure the school district's performance in terms of Ivy League admissions.


Dinkins Meets With Former I.R.A. Member
Mayor David N. Dinkins traveled to Pennsylvania yesterday to visit Joseph Doherty, the former Irish Republican Army member imprisoned in a Federal prison in Lewisburg, to show support for Mr.
Doherty, who is facing deportation to Great Britain.
A United States Supreme Court decision on Jan. 16 appears to have ended Mr.
Doherty's eight-year struggle to stay in the United States.
Mr.
Doherty, 36 years old, was arrested in New York in 1983.
Two years earlier, he had escaped from a British prison, where he was being held on charges of taking part in the killing of a British soldier in Belfast in 1980.


On Remote Chilean River, a Fight Over a Dam
Lucia Renado Huenchucan lives in the shadow of the Callaquen volcano, a 10,440-foot snow-capped mountain that emits a thin plume of smoke to show it is far from dormant.
A member of an isolated Indian tribe, the Pehuenches, she says she has never feared an eruption.
What she does fear is a plan by the Government to build as many as six dams along the Bio-Bio, one of Chile's largest rivers, whose crystalline waters run half a mile from here.
Though Mrs.
Huenchucan, like most Pehuenches, lives in extreme poverty, she does not welcome the prospect of development, tourism and "outsiders" coming to this place 250 miles south of Santiago, the capital.


Executives Skeptical on Bush Health Plan
Some business executives say President Bush's health-care proposals could make their problems worse because they do not go far enough to slow the rapid increase in the nation's medical spending.
"It is a plus that the President has come forward and taken a position that we need overall reform," said Walter Maher, director of Federal relations on human resources issues for the Chrysler Corporation.
"But we have to bring our health costs more in line with those of our major competitors, Japan and Germany. That requires some very tough cost-containment strategy, which I did not see in the proposal."


Germans Asked to Reveal If They Were Informers
Athletes on the German Olympic bobsled and luge teams have been told to reveal any past ties they might have had to the former East German secret police, a national sports official said here today.
A champion bobsledder has already admitted he was an informer for the agency, known as Stasi.
Athletes or coaches whose cooperation with Stasi led to arrests or the loss of other persons' jobs will be thrown off the team, said Klaus Kotter, president of the German bobsled and luge federation.


CHRONICLE
No one gives birthday parties for Abraham Lincoln, PETER L. MALKIN noticed recently, so he decided to remedy that lapse with a party Wednesday for what he hopes will be more than 7,500 guests.
Luckily, Mr.
Malkin, a real-estate developer and lawyer, is one of the owners of the Lincoln Building, a 55-story office tower at 60 East 42d Street.
The lobby and ceiling of the landmark building were recently restored, so it seemed to be a good time to celebrate, and never mind that this would have been an inconsequential birthday for Lincoln, his 183d.
"We have invited all the tenants in the building," said Mr.
Malkin, who is also chairman of the Grand Central Partnership, the nonprofit group that manages the business district in a 50-block midtown area.
That's 579 companies, with 7,500 people, and he added people in neighboring buildings.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Buchanan Says Party Needs His 'Little Rebellion'
Countering assertions that his candidacy is splitting Republicans and providing ammunition for Democrats, Patrick J. Buchanan has stepped up his attack on President Bush, accusing him of abandoning conservative principles.
In a blistering speech Saturday night at a dinner for conservatives, Mr.
Buchanan said conservatives in Washington, as epitomized by the President, had lost touch with their ideals and their constituency.


Soviet Exports Of Oil Plunge
Oil exports from the former Soviet Union, the world's largest producer, slumped to 53.9 million metric tons in 1991, or about 1.1 million barrels a day, from 99 million tons, or two million barrels a day, the year before, the Interfax news agency reported Saturday.
A metric ton of oil contains about 7.3 barrels of 42 gallons each.


Where to Turn as Winter Games Get Hot
There aren't enough icy and snowy events to fill every minute of the 116 hours CBS has set aside for the Winter Olympics, so Jim Nantz, the weekend daytime host, unveiled a new event yesterday: the Turnaway.
The Turnaway may one day turn into a lunatic bobsled variation ("Herschel, remember, the best brakemen turn away at the meanest turn").
But this Turnaway was CBS's way to report on the winner of the men's downhill, an event that was not shown in a taped package until prime time last night, even though it was run early enough to be put into CBS's morning or afternoon programs.


Question Box
Charity Stripe? Forget It
Q.
On Dec. 27, 1991, Tim Hardaway of the Golden State Warriors missed all 17 of his field-goal attempts to set a National Basketball Association record for one game.
What's the record for free throws attempted in a game without making any of them?


Venezuela, Wary After Coup Attempt, Censors Press
Wary that plotters of an unsuccessful coup may be depicted as heroes, the Government has stationed censors in newsrooms and confiscated stacks of magazines in some of the strictest press controls imposed since the advent of civilian rule in 1958.
President Carlos Andres Perez contends that the restrictions, adopted after the failed military putsch last Tuesday, are a temporary step to calm the public.


Police Arrest Two in Slayings of Sisters
A parole violator and his wife, who had been sought by the authorities as far as Portugal in the slayings of two young sisters during a robbery in their Queens home, were arrested yesterday before dawn as they slept in a Bronx tenement, the police said.
After developing leads during a week of interviews with numerous people, including residents, family members of the suspects and survivors, the police slipped into a building at 1920 Loring Place at 5:45 A.M. yesterday and arrested the two suspects, Ismael Ramos, 25 years old, and his wife, Claude Millery, 19, in a fifth-floor apartment, said Deputy Chief Raymond Abbruzzi, commander of Queens detectives.
They offered no resistance, he said.
Earlier, on Saturday, about 2:20 P.M., the police descended on a quiet, residential street in Cambria Heights, about a mile from the scene of the killings in Queens Village, and arrested two men in their homes several houses apart in connection with the crime.
One suspect was involved with the slayings, the police said, and the other was believed to have driven the getaway car.
In the robbery, on the night of Feb. 2, the sisters, Desiree Bernard, 2 years old, and Tawana Sharp, 5, were each shot in the head.
Their mother, Joan Bernard, 38, was shot in the head and arm but managed to escape out an attic window.
She is in critical condition at Jamaica Hospital.
Her oldest daughter, 17, Nathalie Hayes, who was grazed by a bullet and pretended to be dead, is in protective custody.
Cash and Gun Recovered
Ms.
Millery had baby-sat for the victims at Mrs.
Bernard's home at 99-09 211th Street.
Ms.
Millery and Mr.
Ramos, who had been paroled in October after serving time in a New York prison on an arson and weapons conviction, lived next door.
"I don't know that there's any one of us, including the most seasoned of detectives who has not been appalled by the brutal cold-blooded execution of these two defenseless young children," said the Queens District Attorney, Richard Brown, at a news conference yesterday in the 105th Precinct station house.
"Everyone has been working virtually around the clock on this case."
Mr.
Brown said each suspect faces charges of second degree murder, attempted murder, robbery, burglary, and criminal possession of a deadly weapon.
The police said that about $40,000 in cash plus jewelry and clothes were stolen from Mrs.
Bernard's house and that about half was recovered but would not say where.
A 9-millimeter pistol, believed to be a murder weapon, was also recovered.
Chief Abbruzzi said the police were investigating why so much money was in the house.
Mrs.
Bernard's husband, George Desmond Bernard, is serving a seven-year sentence in a Federal penitentiary in Tuscon, Ariz., on a conviction for money laundering, but, Chief Abbruzzi said yesterday that there was nothing to indicate Mrs.
Bernard was guilty of any wrongdoing.
The survivors had been able to identify Ms.
Millery and Mr.
Ramos and the police had theorized the two might escape to Puerto Rico, where Mrs.
Ramos is from; Haiti, where Ms.
Millery is from, or Portugal where the couple went after a November wedding.
But instead, Mr.
Ramos sought refuge at the home of an uncle by marriage, the police said.
The uncle, who spoke on the condition of anonymity last night, said he had not seen his nephew for years and really did not know him well.
"He said he had problems," the uncle said, red-eyed and crying as he spoke.
"He wanted to stay here a couple days. He stayed here a week."
The uncle said he had heard of the slayings of the young girls, but he never connected them to Mr.
Ramos and Ms.
Millery.
When the police told him, he was shocked, he said, adding he believed Mr.
Ramos should go to jail "forever."
Mr.
Ramos, who had violated the conditions of his parole before the robbery by failing to attend regular meetings with parole officers, was "surprised" when the police and the New York State parole officials entered the apartment, the uncle said.  2 Other Suspects
Two other suspects, Vincent Williams, 25, and Donald Sealy, 23, were arrested on Saturday at their homes of 210th Street near 115th Avenue.
It is street of well-maintained houses in the $150,000-to- $175,000 range, said residents, many of whom expressed disbelief the two could be involved with a slaying.
Lieut.
James E. Lane, commander of the 105th Detective Squad, said the two men were longtime friends of Mr.
Ramos's.
Mr.
Williams, who the police said was in the Queens Village house during the robbery and possibly one of those who fired the shots, lives at 115-11 210th Street.
Mr.
Sealy, who the police said drove the getaway car, lives two doors away at 115-21 210th Street.
A 1990 green Honda parked in front of his house was confiscated.
The two families were described by neighbors as "very nice people" and "hard-working."
William Bowens, a 75-year-old retired New York City police officer who lives across the street, said Mr.
Williams's father worked for the Transit Authority and his mother for the telephone company.
"The Sealy boy, I think he works at night," Mr.
Bowens said.
"Very quiet boy. Same as the Williams boy, very quiet boy too. Respectful. It don't make sense to me. It don't make sense at all."


New York's Move On Pro Bono Work
In an effort to ease the path for agencies seeking pro bono account assignments from New York City, the Mayor's office has developed a system to insure that all interested shops have an opportunity to participate.
The system is being put into place to comply with stringent guidelines imposed by the new city charter to replace the informal process the city had used to select agencies to do pro bono work.


A Plea for Truth-in-Bashing
Reasonable people can disagree abut whether a "buy American" campaign makes sense.
But we could do without several fatuous arguments:
1. You can't tell where this stuff comes from anyway.
Even the hard-headed Mike Royko has fallen for this.
In a recent column, he said that he'd bought an American car and a friend had bought Japanese -- but that the Japanese car was made in America and was probably more American than the real thing.
Hah!
The joke was on the buy-American crowd.


The New Heroin Bargain
As the U.S. begins to lose its appetite for cocaine, South American drug dealers are trying to develop a new market for heroin.
Disturbing as it is, the prospect of more heroin abuse has one positive implication.
It adds weight to the already powerful arguments for spending more on drug treatment to rescue addicts.
During the 1980's, heroin seemed to lose its appeal as the drug world discovered crack.
The population of heroin addicts appeared to have stabilized at about 750,000 nationwide, compared with 4.5 million using cocaine.
The heroin users were an aging group and public health officials were less concerned about their addiction than that they had begun to spread AIDS by sharing needles.


CHRONICLE
GENE KELLY always wanted to go backstage when he saw SUZANNE FARRELL, the former principal dancer of the New York City Ballet, perform, but, he recalled the other day, "I only watched her dance from afar. I was too shy to run backstage and say, 'Hey, I think you're a real prima ballerina.' "
Tonight he will be able to tell her in person, when she presents him the Lifetime Achievement Award of the School of American Ballet, the official academy of the New York City Ballet and Ms.
Farrell's alma mater.
The ceremony will take place during a benefit dinner-dance at the New York State Theater, where alumni of the school, including DARCI KISTLER and ROBERT LA FOSSE, will perform.


Tug of War, With Rallies, Is Played Out in Moscow Amid Mood of Discontent
Rival crosstown political rallies laid bare the mood of disgruntlement in post-Communist society today as the old and new orders were assaulted and defended by tens of thousands of Muscovites.
In the first rally, various protest movements united behind a phalanx of hammer-and-sickle red flags and marched past heavy police cordons to the Kremlin, their ranks bristling with messages of chauvinism, Communist nostalgia and anti-Semitism.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Co. plans to redeem all of its outstanding 10 percent bonds due in 1999, beginning March 9. *
Mobil Corp., Fairfax, Va., is offering $200 million in 6.5 percent five-year notes due in 1997, priced at 99.91, to yield 6.521 percent, through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co..
The noncallable notes are rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service and AA by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Paramount Communications Inc., New York, plans to redeem its $19.5 million of 12.375 percent subordinated notes due in 1995 through Bankers Trust Co., beginning on April 1. *
Ralston Purina Co., St.
Louis, is offering $250 million of 8.625 percent debentures due in 2022, at a price of 99.86, to yield 8.368 percent, through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable debentures are expected to be rated Baa-1 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P. *
San Diego Gas and Electric Co. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $300 million of first-mortgage bonds. *
Security Pacific Corp., Los Angeles, is offering $100 million of 6.5 percent notes due in 1995, at a price of 99.953, to yield 6.517 percent, through J. P. Morgan.
The noncallable notes are rated A-3 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P. *
USX Corp., Pittsburgh, is offering $200 million of 9.375 percent debentures due in 2012, at a price of 99.285, to yield 9.455 percent, through First Boston Corp.
The noncallable debentures are expected to be rated Baa-3 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P. Preferred  *
Chrysler Corp., Highland Par, Mich., is privately placing eight million shares of $50 convertible preferred stock through First Boston.
The issue is not callable for five years.
Common  *
New York State Electric and Gas Corp., Ithaca, has filed for a public offering of 4.5 million common shares through Merrill Lynch. *
Westinghouse Electric Corp., Pittsburgh, has filed for 26 million depository shares through Morgan Stanley and Lehman Brothers.
Ratings  *
Allegheny Power System Co.'s AA- senior secured debt, A+ senior unsecured debt and preferred stock, and A1+ commercial paper ratings have been placed on Credit Watch with negative implications by S.&amp; P. The company is based in New York. *
American Brands Inc.'s senior debt and preferred stock have been raised to A, from A-, by S.&amp; P. The company is based in Old Greenwich, Conn.  *
Borden Inc.'s senior debt ratings have been lowered to A-2, from A-1, by Moody's.
The company is based in New York. *
Dow Corning Corp.'s senior debt ratings on its debentures, medium-term notes and industrial revenue bonds have been lowered to A-3, from A-2, by Moody's.
The company is based in Midland, Mich. *
Nomura Securities Co.'s long-term debt rating has been lowered to Aa-2, from Aaa, by Moody's.
The company is based in Tokyo.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet  New York State Theater
The New York City Ballet presented an oddly mixed but mostly enticing evening of dance on Saturday night.
George Balanchine was represented at his most poignantly mysterious and romantic in "Divertimento From 'Le Baiser de la Fee' " and in a seemingly playful turn of mind in "Symphony in Three Movements." William Forsythe's dark and sinewy "Behind the China Dogs" served as a sort of pungent sandwich filling.


Correction
An entry in the Addenda listing with the Advertising column in Business Day last Monday referred incorrectly to an account assigned by the Bose Corporation to the DDB Needham Worldwide advertising agency in New York, which supplied the information.
DDB Needham was awarded only a special project by Bose.
Bose's overall advertising account continues to be handled by its in-house advertising department.


Muttsy, Wuzzy and Others Join Campaigns to Sell Toys
WHEN the American International Toy Fair opens today in New York City, more than the usual dolls, trains and other playthings will be on display.
Many leading toy marketers will take the opportunity to introduce the advertising meant to sell those toys to consumers.
For the toy companies, providing a preview of television commercials and print advertisements has a simple, yet crucial, goal: If the toy sellers know that millions of dollars will be spent on stimulating demand, they may be encouraged to squeeze the new items onto the shelves of their stores.


Long Shots Seize Day In Preview Stakes
Confusion began piling up on the road to the Kentucky Derby today when three long shots who had never won a stakes race dominated the $130,430 Preview Stakes at Gulfstream Park, with Waki Warrior charging wire to wire to win it by half a length over Scream Machine.
In the confusion, some other colts with track records failed to keep pace and further confounded the rankings in the 3-year-old division: Choctaw Ridge, trained by D. Wayne Lukas, ran fourth.
My Luck Runs North, who had won four races in a row, including the Hutcheson Stakes here three weeks ago, ran sixth.
And Black Question, trained by Carl Nafzger, went off as the betting favorite and finished 10th.


A Community Board in Conflict
Fear and anguish have upset the workaday business of Community Board 14 in Brooklyn.
Angry outbursts and denunciations have disrupted its monthly meetings in school auditoriums.
Its storefront office on Avenue H in Flatbush closed for three days last month while its staff underwent counseling, and when the office reopened, a police officer stood guard out front.
For two years now, the community board has been under a sort of political siege as a small but determined group of black community advocates has waged a vigorous campaign to increase the number of blacks on the largely white board.


Sports Auction With a Hook
The third annual auction to benefit the Upward Incorporated after-school program in Harlem will be held at Christie's at 502 Park Avenue this evening, with the usual array of autographed items up for bids, including jerseys and footballs signed by the likes of JIM KELLY, JOE MONTANA, WARREN MOON, BOOMER ESIASON, RANDALL CUNNINGHAMand LAWRENCE TAYLOR.


Private L.I. Water Rates Spur Drive for Takeover
When 100 homeowners settled into their cold metal folding chairs at the American Legion hall here the other night, a subject that falls near the bottom of the financial agenda for most Americans -- water service and what it costs -- provoked an outburst of passion.
All were residents of this Nassau County village made up mostly of retirees and middle-income families struggling through the worst recession in decades.
To make matters worse, they are customers of a private water utility that charges double, or even triple, what nearby municipal utilities charge -- as much as $899 a year for an average family.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Ruzicka's 4 Goals Power Bruins  Vladimir Ruzicka scored four goals yesterday as the Boston Bruins extended the Pittsburgh Penguins' winless streak to four games with a 6-3 victory in Boston.
Ruzicka, who had his first National Hockey League three-goal game in Pittsburgh last Nov. 5, polished off the Penguins with his 34th goal of the season into an empty net in the final seconds.(AP)
North Stars 4, Whalers 4: Jim McKenzie scored two goals as Hartford, at home, rallied from a three-goal deficit in the third period to tie Minnesota.
Hartford's winless streak was extended to 14 games, the longest in the team's history.(AP)
Kings 5, Sabres 4: Former Sabre Mike Donnelly scored the game-winning goal with 2 minutes 2 seconds left as Los Angeles, which squandered a 4-1 third-period lead, beat Buffalo in Buffalo.(AP)
Capitals 6, Sharks 2: John Druce had the first three-goal game of his National Hockey League career as Washington beat San Jose in Landover, Md.
The loss ended a two-game winning streak for the expansion Sharks.(AP) GOLF A Big Victory for Hamlin Shelley Hamlin, coming back from breast cancer and 14 years without a tournament victory, shot a 66 yesterday to win the Phar-Mor at Inverrary in Lauderhill, Fla.
Hamlin, 42 years old, sank eight birdie putts, including the decisive 10-footer on No. 16 that broke a three-way deadlock with the eventual second-place finishers, JoAnne Carner and Brandie Burton.
Hamlin, who entered the final round four strokes behind the leaders, finished at 10-under-par 206.
Carner finished with a 71 and Burton with a 69.
Carner, 52, a non-winner since 1985, missed a 30-foot birdie attempt, giving Hamlin her first victory since August 1978. (AP)
Cook Is Winner by Two Shots: John Cook shot a seven-under 65 yesterday to win the $1.2 Hawaiian Open by two shots over Paul Azinger.
Cook finished at 23-under 265, tying the course record set by Hale Irwin in 1981.
The victory, Cook's second of the year, is worth $216,000.
Azinger pocketed $129,600.
Jeff Maggert was third at 17 under.(AP)
Powell Too Much for Trevino: Jimmy Powell shot his second straight seven-under-par 65 yesterday to beat Lee Trevino for the Aetna Challenge PGA Seniors championship in Naples, Fla.
Powell, who won $67,500, shot a 31 on the back nine to hold off Trevino, who made an eagle on the 10th hole before struggling at the end.(AP) TENNIS  Seles Breezes Past Fernandez  Monica Seles needed just 54 minutes to beat Mary Joe Fernandez, 6-0, 6-3, yesterday and defend her title at the Nokia tournament in Essen, Germany.
The top-ranked Seles won the first nine games before Fernandez made a brief run by winning the next three games.
Seles, though, easily took the next three games to win at Essen for the third time and earn $70,000.(AP)
Sukova Triumphs in Japan: Second-seeded Helena Sukova of Czechoslovakia served 12 aces in defeating third-seeded Laura Gildemeister of Peru, 6-2, 4-6, 6-1, yesterday to win the Mizuno World Ladies tournament in Amagasaki, Japan.(AP)
A First for Frenchwoman: Noelle van Lottum of France won her first professional tournament, beating Donna Faber of Hilton Head, S.C., 6-4, 6-0, yesterday in the final of the Fernleaf women's classic in Wellington, New Zealand.(AP) BOATING  Defiant Extends Streak in Trials  Defiant extended its winning streak against Stars &amp; Stripes to four in a row yesterday as The America 3 Foundation continued its dominance over Team Dennis Conner in the America's Cup defender trials.
Defiant won the second race of the second round by its largest time advantage yet, crossing the line 4 minutes 16 seconds ahead of Stars &amp; Stripes.
Pushed by southeasterly 12- to 15-knot winds off Point Loma, Calif., Defiant cruised around the eight-leg, 22.6-mile race course in 2 hours 37 minutes 38 seconds.(AP) DOG SHOW  'Bonz' Selected as Best Pug  The Empire Specialty Association Clubs ended a two-day run yesterday by staging 11 shows on Pier 90 in Manhattan.
The Pug Dog Club of Greater New York drew the largest entry, with 98 of these little dogs, and the best-of-breed winner was Patricia Wehrle's and Bert Porter's Ch.
Porter's Spirit of Eighty Six, handled by Patrick McManus.
Bonz, as the fawn 5-year-old is called, has been best Pug 65 times and he has led toy groups on nine occasions.
Ruth Havemeyer-Norwood's Ch.
Sunbrook Buckskin Gal was gaited by Linda Stevens to the top honors in the Empire Miniature Pinscher Club of Greater New York specialty.
The 3-year-old bitch will be retired tomorrow, after the end of the Westminster show, which starts today at Madison Square Garden.
Ch.
Ken's Special Showman, owned by Ken Roux, showed the way in the Boston Terrier Club of New York event.
His sire, Ch.
Staley's El-Bo's Shoman and his grandsire, Ch.
Rudy is A Dandy, also had been winners of the specialty.
Top honors in the Greater New York Bichon Frise Fanciers specialty went to Lois Morrow's Ch.
Chaminade Larkshire Lafitte.
HORSE RACING Aqueduct Stakes to Argyle Lake  Argyle Lake, racing as part of the Peter Ferriola-trained entry with Shine Please, rallied strongly through the stretch yesterday for a half-length victory in Aqueduct's $90,300 Hollie Hughes Stakes for 3-year-olds.
Argyle Lake overtook Northern Crush, who led into the stretch.
Northern Crush finished second in the 11-horse field, two lengths ahead of the favored All Smarts.
Argyle Lake covered six furlongs on the fast track in 1:111/5 and earned $54,180 for James Riccio.
The Ferriola entry returned $14.80, $7.40 and $2.60 for $2 across the board.(AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Metropolitan Title to Manhattan  The Manhattan College's men's track team won the Metropolitan Intercollegiate Indoor championships at Rutgers University's facility in Piscataway, N.J., yesterday.
The Jaspers scored 136 points to edge Seton Hall (122) and St.
John's (114).
Manhattan was led by Tom Vandemark, who won the 35-pound weight throw with a toss of 60 feet 2 inches and the shot put at 57-11 3/4.
Manhattan's other winners were David Frazier, who took the triple jump with a leap of 51-5 1/2, and Steve Agar, who took the 3,000 meters in 8:24.26.
The leading scorer was Errin Hatwood, a St.
John's sophomore, who won the 55-meter and 200-meter dashes (in 6.44 and 22.01 seconds, respectively), and who won the long jump with a leap of 23-10 1/4.


Small Plane Crashes in Queens but Pilot Survives
The pilot of a single-engine airplane trying to make an emergency landing yesterday afternoon at La Guardia Airport crash-landed on an off ramp of the Clearview Expressway in Queens, the police said, but he survived and no one was injured on the ground.
The pilot, the only person aboard, was critically injured when the plane, a Piper Saratoga, crashed at 4:25 P.M. on the off ramp to Union Turnpike off the expressway as it passed through a wooded section of Cunningham Park, the police said.


Review/Pop; A Little Of This, A Little Of That
The Shamen's performance on Friday night at the Limelight could have been billed as English Pop Trends of the Early 1990's: an Update.
Few groups try to jump on so many bandwagons at the same time.
With colorful banners and a pullulating light show onstage, the club was decorated for a rave, the neo-psychedelic dance parties that have fostered English bands like Happy Mondays.
Most of the recorded music -- and the opening act, Moby -- was techno: the booming, uptempo, largely electronic and nearly wordless dance music of the moment.
The Shamen use the electronic beat and blips of techno, but they write pop songs with verses and choruses, filled with lyrics espousing a vague, lightheaded optimism and ambition -- "Do whatever we want together/Nothing is impossible" -- and a touch of science fiction.


In Palestinian-Israeli Talks, Parties Are Unequal
To the Editor:
"Arab-Israel Chasm" (news analysis, Jan. 19) suggests a symmetry between the positions and conduct of the two sides in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
You speak of the enormous gap between the behavior of the respective peace negotiators and the people back home in whose name they negotiate.
You note that Israelis, while talking self-rule, continue building settlements.
You then suggest, as a parallel, that Palestinians at the table talk of peace and co-existence, "but then their compatriots back home do their best to negate that by shooting Israeli civilians."


Books of The Times; Is This Theory About Games or Life? Well, Both
Prisoner's Dilemma  By William Poundstone Illustrated. 290 pages. Doubleday. $22.50.
This chillingly fascinating book is the biography of a man and one of his most influential ideas.
The man is John von Neumann (1903-1957), best known as a pioneer of the electronic digital computer and for his work on the Manhattan Project.
In "Prisoner's Dilemma," which is subtitled on its dust jacket "John von Neumann, Game Theory and the Puzzle of the Bomb," William Poundstone writes: "A few may recognize him as one of several alleged models for 'Dr. Strangelove' of the 1963 Stanley Kubrick film. It was, at any rate, von Neumann who attended Atomic Energy Commission meetings in a wheelchair."


Dance in Review
Fred Darsow Dance Company
Bessie Schonberg Theater
The Fred Darsow Dance Company has positioned itself at a busy and exciting cultural intersection.
Mr.
Darsow is a Chicago-born choreographer who is familiar with both Spanish flamenco and American modern dance.
And he has assembled a troupe of dancers of various nationalities and backgrounds.


Now, a Word About Catfish
In an effort to broaden the appeal of catfish, an advertising campaign will promote its merits to Northerners and others unfamiliar with the Southern staple.
Radio commercials sponsored by the Catfish Institute, a trade association of Mississippi catfish farmers and feed manufacturers, will begin running today in 14 cities, including Kansas City, Mo., and Chicago, as well as New Orleans and San Antonio.


Testimony Ends in Tyson Trial
Jurors will begin deciding the fate of Mike Tyson on Monday, nearly seven months after a sexual encounter between the former heavyweight champion and an 18-year-old woman.
After nine days of testimony in the rape trial, the defense and the prosecution rested this afternoon, but not before calling a total of seven rebuttal witnesses to repair any damage done to their key witnesses in earlier testimony.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  AN ABUSED LIFE, A CRIPPLED SYSTEM
The story of Yaakov Riegler, who died in 1990 after repeated beatings by his mother, is about an affectionate retarded boy and a mother who was overwhelmed by the unending tasks of homemaking.
It is about a child welfare system that was unable, despite repeated warnings, to help the child.
And it is about a pediatrician who, though he knew of the mother's abusive history and was called on several times to treat Yaakov's wounds, said he recognized in the Riegler household only a harried mother, not a battered child.
A1.
FEAR BECOMES REALITY IN CONEY ISLAND


Ozone Laws Worry Appliance Trade
Even as they try to meet increasingly strict energy efficiency requirements, makers of home refrigerators and freezers are likely to face a new and costly challenge: finding alternatives to the use of ozone-damaging chemicals sooner than they had planned.
An accelerated phase-out of these chemicals, known as chlorofluorocarbons, or CFC's, would also force the owners of billions of dollars of industrial and commercial chilling devices to modify their equipment to use alternative chemicals, none of them a direct substitute for the compounds in use today.
Chemical manufacturers say they will have the capacity to supply alternatives as they are needed.


Aristide Condemns U.S. Policy
Angered by reports that Haitians are being mistreated as they return home, Haiti's exiled President asserts that the United States is using a double standard to deny political asylum to refugees from his homeland.
In an interview on Saturday night, the ousted leader, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, condemned a policy that he said shelters refugees from Communist Cuba but returns Haitians to a country governed by a repressive military.


OPEC Set To Discuss Output Cut
The president of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries said today that he would press for a significant cut in oil production to prop up sagging prices, which have dropped by 20 percent since November.
Jibril Aminu, who is also the oil minister of Nigeria, said he would ask OPEC's 12 members to reduce production by about 6 percent when they meet on Wednesday in Geneva.


Austrian Wins Gold in the Downhill Without Any Distractions
Two years ago, his World Cup season was ended by a spill in a race in this very resort village.
A year ago, a teammate died while attempting to qualify for a downhill race in Wengen, Switzerland.
This afternoon, Patrick Ortlieb of Austria won the gold medal in the Olympic downhill and complained that the mountain had not been dangerous enough.
"You don't have to overcome any inhibitions within yourself on this track," Ortlieb said after the first downhill victory of his career.
"It was just too slow, not spectacular enough."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; A Front-Runner in Trouble, Clinton Portrays Himself as a Victim of Attacks
Meet Bill Clinton, front-runner.
In seven days, he has encountered delirious crowds from Maine to South Carolina, raised hundreds of thousands of dollars and attracted nonstop news coverage.
Meet Bill Clinton, doomed candidate.
His formidable lead among New Hampshire voters is contracting, according to the most recent polls.
Every new day holds the threat of yet another damaging story that could deliver a killing blow.
He is damaged goods.
All the Washington commentators say so.


Carrots, Sticks and 363,000 People's Lives
Much of the debate over New Jersey's sweeping welfare revision, signed into law last month by Gov.
Jim Florio and subsequently endorsed by President Bush, has focused on a provision cutting off new benefits for welfare mothers who have additional children while on welfare.
But while that is indeed the most radical change -- New Jersey is the first state to adopt it -- the total package is a complex set of incentives and punishments, or "sanctions," as proponents prefer to call them.
These carrots and sticks are intended to gradually shift welfare recipients and their children out of the cycle of dependence that the package's author, Assemblyman Wayne R. Bryant of Camden, calls "a modern form of slavery."


Sniffles and Shaky Skates Make for a Rough Debut
They had become virtual American folk heroes, the waitress and the truck driver: two middle-class kids raising money through public appearances and the sale of booster pins so they could live out their dreams as Olympic athletes.
With a stretch, you could almost imagine them climbing that victory podium and bowing their heads to be draped with the gold medals.
In a dream, anyway.


Infiniti Revamping At Hill, Holliday
In a change in creative personnel on its key Infiniti account, Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Inc. in Los Angeles has hired two senior vice presidents and creative directors who will be responsible for all creative work for the Nissan luxury-car division.
David Wecal and Dean Noble, who had worked together on the Volvo account at Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer in New York, will join the agency on March 1.
Jack Sansolo, the agency's president, said a recently introduced campaign, featuring the voice of the actor Michael Douglas, would continue running.


Neediest Cases Works to Find Ways to Ease Racial Tensions
Even when he told Luz Maria Rosario that she would not get the job because she was of Hispanic origin, Donnie Simmons could not spark a response from the shy 15-year-old.
Mr.
Simmons, the leader of a group discussion on racism at the Children's Aid Society's East Harlem Center, seemed perplexed, but one of the other teen-agers knew which button to push.


Hasidim Continue Crown Heights Protests
As the investigation into the killing of a 38-year-old Hasidic woman in Crown Heights continued, about 1,000 Hasidim demonstrated last night for a second consecutive night outside the 71st Precinct station house, and vowed to stage protests each night until a suspect was arrested.
"Till there's such a time as an arrest has been made we feel we have to express our desire that the police put all efforts to finding him," Rabbi Joseph Spielman, chairman of the


Bridge
Half a century ago a young Englishman faced probable blindness.
Unable to fight in World War II, he developed a talent for bridge and won a major competition in London at the age of 20.
An operation saved his sight, and in 1948 in Copenhagen he helped Britain win the first postwar European Championship; at 25, he was one of the youngest ever to win that title.
Falling heir to the family business, he then abandoned tournament play and was a successful shoe manufacturer and exporter for the next four decades.
His name was Edward Rayne, and he was shoemaker to Queen Elizabeth II, who knighted him three years ago on his retirement.
He died on Friday when fire swept his home on the south coast of England.


Albertville; AUSTRIAN TAKES DOWNHILL


Weeklies See Profits Without A Charge
Although numerous publications have been battered by the recession, Michael Schenkler remains convinced he can make money by expanding in the free-distribution newspaper business in the New York area.
Mr.
Schenkler, president of News Communications Inc., says his small company's four free newspapers -- The Manhattan Spirit, Our Town and The Queens Tribune in New York City and Dan's Papers on eastern Long Island -- are profitable, with a total circulation of about 425,000 copies a week.
And he is so certain that he has found the formula for success that he is aggressively seeking to buy other, similar publications.


Ms. Fleck Wed In Philadelphia
Carole Lynn Fleck, a daughter of Seymour and Thelma Fleck of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Joseph Paul Scicchitano, the son of the late Joseph and Charlotte Scicchitano.
Rabbi Israel Wolmark performed the ceremony at the Warwick hotel in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Scicchitano, 31 years old, is the news director of the national broadcast wire for United Press International in Washington.
She graduated from Temple University, as did her husband.
Her father, who is retired, was a postal worker.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Almanac; Television Dollars


Olympic Weather
Map: Flurries are possible this morning in the higher elevations of eastern France, but then sunshine will return.
High 27-35, low 12-18.
Tomorrow, snow arriving, windy.


In Palestinian-Israeli Talks, Parties Are Unequal; For Arab Compromise
To the Editor:
The Arab-Israeli peace talks show that the parties involved have not yet learned the meaning of the word "compromise." Although it is easy to shower blame on the seemingly childish stubbornness of the negotiators, the primary reason for the collapse of the peace talks is unequivocally the political scenario at home, which has effectively handcuffed the negotiators, especially the Israelis.
In Israel, where the breakup of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's governing coalition has proved that there is a price to pay for the slightest show of flexibility, it is now necessary for everyone to admit that even if the Israeli team wants to make a deal, it can't, until the domestic constraints have been relaxed.


Review/Television; Chatting About Anything, Shark Bites Included, on HBO
With talk shows becoming a dime a dozen these days, Paula Poundstone has come up with a format worth at least a silver dollar.
As a stand-up comic, Ms.
Poundstone has done the HBO circuit over the last few years, including her very own "HBO Comedy Hour," a special called "Cats, Cops and Stuff." This month, she can be seen on four half-hour editions of "The Paula Poundstone Show," being shown around midnight on Fridays, with several reruns each week. (A repeat of the premiere can be seen at 11 tonight.)
Looking a bit like Geena Davis crossed with a youthful version of Julia Child, Ms.
Poundstone gives the impression of being unusually tall -- maybe she is -- as she lurches onto a small stage dressed in boots, jeans, floppy shirt and perhaps a vest.
Sidling up to a stool, she seems a bit shy, perhaps self-conscious about her height, but then wastes no time in demonstrating that despite the friendly manner ("You comfortable and everything?"), this is one sharp, not-to-be-meddled-with woman.


Washington Journal; After Politics, Life Can Be Awkward
When Russian astronauts return to earth from a long space flight, they sometimes have to learn how to walk.
When senior United States Government officials return from the orbits of power to private life, they sometimes have to learn how to drive.
While taxpayer-financed perquisites have occasionally caused outrage among Americans, they cause isolation for Homo superiorus washingtonus and his rarer cousin, Femina superiora washingtona.
As a result, ordinary life can prove to be personally or politically hazardous.


Review/Music; Creating Links Between Pieces
The program of 20th-century works presented by the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center over the weekend at Alice Tully Hall was like a poker hand full of wild cards.
At first glance, connections were evident among various individual pieces -- between the two by the society's composer in residence, Oliver Knussen, for example, both featuring Lisa Saffer, a brilliant young soprano -- but it was not immediately apparent just how winning the combination would prove as a whole.
The Knussen works, in their colorful contrasts, seemed to set the tone for the entire affair, and the appearance of the composer to conduct the larger works lent a certain overall focus.
In addition, Mr.
Knussen's sheer hulking mien in combination with Ms.
Saffer's diminutive stature afforded the program's most arresting visual image.


Argentina Returns to Peso, Saving Numerous Zeroes
For the fifth time in 21 years, Argentina has switched currencies.
The country has officially stopped using the austral and returned to the peso, the name of the currency in many Spanish-speaking countries.
In leaving the austral behind last month, the Administration of Carlos Saul Menem is hoping to send a signal that stable times are here.


Rangers and Red Wings In a Tie on Brawl Way
This wasn't free-flowing, fight-free, Olympic-style hockey last night at Madison Square Garden.
Despite the match of two, good, first-place teams, it wasn't even the honestly rugged style of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
At times, it seemed as if the Rangers and the Red Wings should have taken off the skates, left through the back door and continued in the alley using broken broom handles for sticks, crushed tin cans for pucks and clenched fists as instruments of debate.
The ice on the pavement couldn't have been any worse than that inside the building, and the behavior of the street people on Eighth Avenue couldn't have been more ornery than that of the players.


Pressures Are Building For Rate Cut
Less than two months ago, the Federal Reserve Board shocked and delighted financial markets with an unusually aggressive cut in short-term interest rates.
But thus far, many credit market analysts say, the visible benefits to the economy from that bold move on Dec. 20 have been exceedingly modest, and the pressure is building for the central bank to do more.


Modern to Show New Picasso Tomorrow
The Museum of Modern Art has acquired the only known existing oil sketch depicting the whole of Picasso's "Demoiselles d'Avignon," the painting of 1907 that is not only a cornerstone of the museum's collection but also one of the central monuments of 20th-century art.
The tiny sketch was quietly bought for 2.5 million francs (about $480,000) at an auction in Paris in late November.
To pay for the work, the museum sold "Upside Down Table and Mask" of 1940, one of its two paintings by the Japanese-American painter Yasuo Kuniyoshi.
The Kuniyoshi, which had rarely been exhibited at the Modern and was often on loan to other museums, has gone to the Yasuo Kuniyoshi Museum in Okayama, Japan, which is operated by the Fukutake Publishing Company.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Journal; Steady Drum of '92 Ads Takes Toll on Voters
Campaign fatigue may be setting in at the D'Angelo Sandwich Shop here.
Each morning, just after Georgette Seguin starts slicing the bread at precisely 9:30, the same commercial attacking President Bush comes on the radio, and Dan Deshaies cannot resist the temptation to come out of the back room, look her in the eye, and begin lip-syncing to the President's voice: "Read my lips: No new taxes."


Un-American Activities
Ten days ago, we had a benefit at Cooper Union for Franklin Furnace, the experimental arts center.
We raised $20,000, which for a small place like Franklin Furnace is a big boost in very tight times.
Unfortunately, concurrent with our benefit, the National Endowment for the Arts chose to reverse a grant of $25,000, which had been recommended by a panel of the artists' peers.
The reason is that some of Franklin Furnace's work is sexually explicit.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc., two million shares.  Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
Advantage Bancorp Inc., 3.1 million shares. Kemper Securities.
Ambac International, a global offering of 17.4 million shares, with 13.9 million shares offered in the U.S.
Morgan Stanley.
Applied Immune Sciences Inc., two million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Buttrey Food and Drug Stores Co., 2.9 million shares. Morgan Stanley.
Canandaigua Wine Co., 2.05 million class A shares. Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Cash American Investments Inc., 1.75 million shares. Principal/Eppler.
Cytogen Corp. and Cytorad Inc., 3.5 million units, each consisting of one Cytorad common share and one Cytogen warrant.
Merrill Lynch.
Defense Software and Systems, Inc., one million shares. Laidlaw Holdings.
Document Technologies Inc., 750,000 units, each consisting of one common share and one warrant.
Paulson Investments.
Enhance Financial Services Inc., five million shares, 4.25 million in U.S.
Salomon Brothers.
First Financial Corp. of Western Maryland, 1.38 million shares. Adams, Cohen.
Forest Laboratories, three million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Frame Technology, two million shares. Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
Geneva International Ventures Inc., 800,000 shares and 1.6 million class A warrants.
A.
S.
Goldman &amp; Co.
International Jensen Inc., 1.65 million shares. William Blair.
Inter-Regional Financial Group, 1.3 million shares.  Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
Intertape Polymer Group, 2.8 million shares. Dean Witter Reynolds.
Korea Investment Fund Inc., five million shares. Paine Webber.
Living Centers of America Inc., 7.29 million secondary shares. Merrill Lynch.
Marcum Natural Gas Services Inc., one million units, each consisting of one common share and one warrant.
Cohig &amp; Associates.
Meadowbrook Rehabilitation Group, 1.55 million class A shares. J. C. Bradford.
Metropolitan Federal Savings and Loan Association of Seattle, 1.2 million shares.
Montgomery Securities.
Mountain Gas Resources Inc., 2.6 million shares.  Dillon, Read.
Nahama &amp; Weagant Energy Co., 2.25 million shares. Howard, Weil.
National Health Laboratories Inc., 14 million shares.  First Boston.
Network General Corp., 2.2 million shares. Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
Paraclesian Inc., one million shares. Hampshire Securities.
Providence Health Care Inc., one million shares.  Commonwealth Associates.
Providential Corp., 4.2 million shares. Prudential Securities.
Roper Industries, 2.5 million shares. Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
Sholodge Inc., 1.88 million shares. J. C. Bradford.
Southwest Airlines Co., two million shares. Merrill Lynch.
Syspower Technologies Inc., 1.1 million units. First New England.
TNT Freightways Corp., a global offering of 12.5 million shares, with 10 million shares offered in the U.S.
Goldman, Sachs.
Technology Solutions Co., 1.8 million secondary shares.
Goldman, Sachs. (Source: MCM Corporate Watch.)


For German Speed Skater, A Gold Medal and Tears
The East German presence as an Olympic power, so evident for 20 years until unification brought East and West Germany together two years ago, remained in effect today as two women from Erfurt won Germany's first medals of the Albertville Games.
With fluid strides that barely revealed a hint of exertion, Gunda Kleemann-Niemann powered through the 3,000-meter speed-skating event in 4 minutes 19.90 seconds to claim the gold medal, a victory that left her in tears for the start of her victory lap around the outdoor oval.


Freer Jews Face Harder Choice: To Leave or to Stay
Just about every day, Mikhail Davidovich says, he struggles with internal pushes and pulls about whether to stay put with the devil he knows or move on down the road, gambling that no new devils await him.
In other words, he constantly asks himself whether he should remain in Russia, where he has lived all his 36 years, or emigrate to Israel.
A photographer from St.
Petersburg who prefers keeping his family name to himself, he weighs his options these days like a grocer.


CHRONICLE
HELEN HAYES, the actress who has won a Tony and an Emmy and whose two Oscars were awarded nearly four decades apart, was in stable condition yesterday at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital, recuperating from what hospital officals described as exhaustion.
A beloved actress who has performed with distinction in virtually every thespian medium, Ms.
Hayes earned an Academy Award for best actress in 1932 for her first movie, "The Sin of Madelon Claudet,"; in 1970, she won an Oscar for best supporting actress in the film "Airport."


Dailey &amp; Associates Gets Sizzler Account
Dailey &amp; Associates in Los Angeles has wrested the Sizzler International Inc. account, and its $25 million to $30 million in billings, from BBDO Los Angeles.
Along with a predecessor agency, BBDO had handled the family restaurant chain for more than two decades.
The decision by Sizzler, based in Los Angeles, followed a review that involved Dailey, BBDO and Chiat/ Day/Mojo Inc. in Venice, Calif.
The shift of the account -- the second largest at BBDO's Los Angeles office, after Apple Computer -- was not unexpected; Sizzler's sales and earnings have been slumping amid intense competition.


South African Panel Looking Into Political Strife
Under the direction of a senior judge, a commission has been investigating a morass of charges and denials that South African security forces have orchestrated political violence in which thousands of blacks died.
The commission, named after its chairman, Justice Richard Goldstone, an appointee of President F. W. de Klerk, has yet to find clear proof of the allegations made by Government opponents.
But last week it began to scrutinize cases that seemed suspicious.


Send the Candidates a Message
In the preliminaries to the Presidential election, all the candidates have been asking the voters to send a message to Washington, but nobody has been sending a message to
them.
Herewith a few suggestions.
To the Democrats: why do you go into the playoffs with your second team?
You have tried that and lost five of the last six Presidential elections.
It's true that the country is in a recession, but it's no depression, and George Bush, whatever else he is, is no Herbert Hoover.
At least he looks and sounds like a President, and, as Ronald Reagan proved, the appearance of things catches more votes than the substance.


Down to the Wire
Polls in New Hampshire show a close race in the Democratic primary, with many voters still undecided and hungry for ideas.
Page A14.


4 Are Killed in Copter Crash
A Marine helicopter carrying four crewmen crashed and exploded Saturday at a naval air station, a Navy spokesman said today.
No survivors were found.
The H-53 Super Stallion helicopter was on its way from Key West to its base in North Carolina, said Bert Byers, base spokesman at Cecil Field Naval Air Station, just west of Jacksonville.
The cause of the crash has not been determined, he said.


In the Dark, In the Money
Cedric Ceballos hopes he will not need a blindfold to keep his National Basketball Association career in the spotlight.
Ceballos, a second-year guard-gorward with the Phoenix Suns, won Saturday night's slam-dunk contest here using a unique twist on his final dunk.
After his teammate Dan Majerle tied a blindfold over his eyes, Ceballos ran down the lane and made a two-handed slam dunk.


Ray Helfer, Leader in Preventing Abuse of Children, Is Dead at 62
Ray E. Helfer, a pioneer in the prevention of child abuse, died on Jan. 27 at Sparrow Hospital in East Lansing, Mich.
He was 62 years old and lived in East Lansing.
He died of complications from a stroke he suffered while visiting a son studying in Spain, his family said.


Pilot Survives Crash-Landing on Expressway Ramp in Queens


Chefs in U.S. Must Recognize Demand for Vegetarian Cuisine; Change Your Cookbook
To the Editor:
Speaking as one young woman who bows to "rampant vegetarianism," as Zachary M. Schrag puts it (letter, Jan. 28), I must protest; "only steamed vegetables and plain pasta" is not a fair estimation of vegetarian cuisine.
If Mr.
Schrag wants to impress vegetarians of his generation, he might try his hand at black bean chili, stuffed eggplant, vegetable strudel, ratatouille or asparagus souffle.
Before he passes judgment on vegetarian diets as insipid and uninspired, he should consider getting a new cookbook, rather than a carnivorous girlfriend.
DEBORAH R. LEVY New York, Jan. 28, 1992


Man Is Killed by Officers
Two police officers shot and killed a man wielding a gun early yesterday morning after they came upon him threatening a woman on a street corner in the East Tremont section of the Bronx, the police said yesterday.
Officer Cliff Thieleke and Detective Anthony Roman saw a man with a gun menacing a woman on the corner of East 182d Street and Third Avenue, the police said.
The officers approached the subject and told him to drop the weapon.
The man refused, turned toward the officers and they fired a total of three shots at the man, the police said.
The man, tentatively identified as Roger Haynes, 42 years old, of 1425 University Avenue in the Morris Heights section, was taken to Jacobi Hospital, where he was pronounced dead on arrival.


Review/Music; Fancy Norwegian Fiddles
The Norwegian fiddle called the Hardanger looks like a fancy violin, with ornate neck inlays and a filigreed pattern outlining the body.
But along with its four regular strings, the Hardanger has four or five sympathetic strings that resonate and sustain what's being played by the bow.
The resonance makes harmonious traditional tunes at once more robust and more ethereal.
On Friday night at the Ethnic Folk Art Center's performance space at 179 Varick Street, Manhattan, New Yorkers had a rare chance to hear Norwegian fiddle tunes and songs, then to dance to them.
The program, featuring four performers from western Telemark in Norway, was part of the center's monthly First Fridays series of concert-dances.


Schools Chief Wants to Lengthen Year for New York City Students
New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez is fashioning a plan to lengthen the school day by an hour and the school year by 25 days, both to improve student skills and to make a bid for a hefty share of the $1.1 billion the city hopes to gain through bond refinancing.
Mr.
Fernandez, who has gained national attention for initiatives like a condom-distribution program and school-based management, is seizing on an idea that some educators contend can make American students more competitive with those of other industrialized countries.


Tick. Tick. Tick. U.S. Has Blast Against Italy
Twenty minutes away from losing to a country with winters so mild they do not disturb the vineyards, United States Olympic hockey Coach Dave Peterson was certain things would turn out just fine.
And why not?


Market Place; 3 Car-Part Makers Worth Watching
THE companies that supply parts to auto makers would appear to have brighter prospects, given the eventual cyclical rebound that is expected in auto sales and a recent pledge from Japanese auto makers to buy more car parts from the United States.
But analysts warn investors to proceed with caution, noting that the auto parts industry is changing in ways that will benefit some suppliers and hurt others.
Both foreign and domestic auto makers, for example, rely increasingly on their suppliers for design and engineering expertise, skills that not all component makers possess.
Auto makers are also trying to build longer-term relationships with fewer suppliers and insisting that they meet stringent quality guidelines.


On Frigid Northern Plains, One City Finds Way to New Jobs in Hard Times
As hard times whip across the region like a winter wind, this small city in the heartland has dodged the worst of the storm so far.
Luck and geography no doubt play a role.
The city is two hours from Winnipeg, a city of 560,000, and every weekend Grand Forks is happily awash in Canadians and their money.
They come to Grand Forks to shop because goods at home can cost almost double what they do south of the border because of the higher transportation and other costs and smaller markets in Canada.


Reviews/Music; For the Juilliard Quartet, the More Difficult the Better
No one ever said the Juilliard String Quartet lacked ambition.
On Wednesday evening, just two days after these veteran players dispensed with Bach's "Art of Fugue" at the Juilliard School, they took on another demanding program at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater, this one highly varied.
They began with Darius Milhaud's String Quartet No. 17 (Op. 307, no less).
Milhaud's centenary is being celebrated this year, and the Juilliard set a formidable standard for the many performances of the composer's work sure to follow.
This is a work of acerbic wit, with glazed polytonal harmonies supporting long melodies that meander irregularly and often at cross-purposes.
The Juilliard played it with just the right bite, anchoring its wry little excursions in an earthy solidity.


Treasury to Auction Bills, Notes and Bonds
Among the Treasury's offerings due this week are the regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today, an offering of three-year notes on Tuesday and an offering of 10-year notes on Wednesday.
An auction of 30-year bonds is set for Thursday.
The following fixed-income issues are also scheduled for this week: TAXABLE  TUESDAY
National Fuel Gas Co., $125 million of debentures due in 2004.
Competitive.
ONE DAY DURING THE WEEK
Automatic Data Processing Inc., $700 million face value of convertible subordinated notes maturing in 2012.
Merrill Lynch.
Chase Manhattan Corp., six million shares of $25 cumulative preferred. Merrill Lynch.
Fair Lanes Inc., $113.5 million of senior secured notes maturing on Aug. 15, 1997.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
General Motors Corp., 12 million depository shares, representing series C $50 preference stock, which is convertible into General Motors class E stock.
Merrill Lynch.
Stone Container Corp., $100 million of convertible subordinated debentures due in 2007, and four million shares of $25 cumulative convertible, exchangeable preferred, series E. Bear, Stearns.
Tandy Corp., 15 million depository shares, representing one-hundredth of a share of preferred equity redemption cumulative stock (PERCs). (Source: MCM Corporate Watch) TAX-EXEMPT  ONE DAY DURING THE WEEK
City of Albuquerque, N.M., $65 million in Presbyterian Health Care Revenue Bonds.
First Boston.
Columbus, Ohio, $130 million in sewer revenue refunding bonds.
A.
G.
Edwards &amp; Sons.
City of Denver Airport, $249 million in system revenue bonds, series 1992 A. Lehman Brothers.
Kenton County Airport Board, Commonwealth of Kentucky, $440 million in series A and B special facilities revenue bonds.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
State of Maine, $51.1 million in general-obligation bonds. Paine Webber.
Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency, $336 million in series A, B and C residential revenue bonds (series B taxable).
Goldman, Sachs.
New York State, $77.1 million in certificates of participation. Dillon, Read.
New York State Environmental Facilities, $65 million in special obligation bonds.
Bear, Stearns.
Palm Beach County, Fla., Airport System, $90 million in revenue refunding bonds, series 1992.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
San Francisco Redevelopment Agency for the George Moscone Convention Center, $90 million in debt securities.
Goldman, Sachs.
Transmission Agency of North California, Ca-Oregon Transmission Project, $115 million in series A revenue bonds, due in 1992.
Lehman Brothers.
Wichita, Kan., San Francis Regional Medical Center, $185 million in series A and B hospital facility improvement and refunding revenue bonds.
Lehman Brothers.


Quotation of the Day
"People with this virus can live on -- that's the message. They can run, they can jump. Second of all, you don't have to worry about me playing. You can't get it from hugging, kissing, elbows, and high fives. Life doesn't stop because something happens to you." -- MAGIC JOHNSON.  [ A1:4. ]


Reviews/Music; Robin Holcomb's Folk Songs of the Future
Robin Holcomb's folk music, acoustic and distraught, is for the 21st century.
At the Knitting Factory on Thursday night, this Seattle-based singer and pianist performed songs that, whatever their explicit lyric content, seemed to be about loss.
Ms.
Holcomb sat at a grand piano, her pale hair falling down her back, her hands sewing melodic phrases that were simple and homespun pure.
Her voice was so fragile, you feared it might break; her performance had a devastatingly poetic quality, like a tune from a music box, or a moment of silence.


Essay; Radio Free Asia
Television junkies have a hard time getting their squared eyes focused on this fact: The rest of the world gets most of its information from radio.
The short-wave set remains most people's lifeline to news they are confident is truthful.
For world news, people who live in present or former Communist nations turn to the BBC or the Voice of America.
For local news, despite frequent jamming, they turn to the stations of Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty, which act as surrogates -- and lately, exemplars -- for free local media.


Foreign Affairs; Worriers Vs. Wallowers
Environmentalists are saying that the Bush Administration will do nothing about gases dangerously warming the planet.
And Administration officials are saying that it is the environmentalists who are full of impractical hot air.
While the warming worriers are demanding urgent action, the officials are wrestling with -- and alas, wallowing in -- the practical problems of doing something.


Abuse Turns Fatal: How the System Failed -- A special report.; As Mother Killed Her Son, Protectors Observed Privacy
In 1986, Shulamis Riegler beat her 8-year-old son Israel so badly that he was hospitalized in a coma.
Doctors noticed human bite marks on his shoulder.
When the boy recovered, he and his two little brothers spent several years in foster care before going home in 1988 and 1989.


Few Surprises as Austrians Go 1-2 in Ski Jumping
He sailed through the air for 5 or 6 seconds twice today, and then an Olympic event was over for Jim Holland.
"It's one of those stupid things you train for all your life, and then you come down to this," he said good-naturedly afterward.


ALBERTVILLE: Sports of The Times; The Down, Down, Down, Downhill
IF the men's downhill is the jewel of the Winter Olympics, the setting was more dazzling than the diamond.
At the top or bottom of the mountain known as Bellevarde, the snow was whiter than milk.
Above the peaks, the sky resembled a bolt of blue cloth for the French flag.
Not a cloud.
Not even a jet stream.
Only an occasional balloon floating in the sunny chill before bursting high above the thousands who had gathered in this tiny village of pine chalets on a shelf of the Alps.


World Economies


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices closed lower in Tokyo today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues lost 287.60 points, or 1.3 percent, to finish at 21,819.52.
On Friday, the index rose 168.55 points.
The Tokyo Stock Exchange will be closed on Tuesday for Foundation Day, a national holiday.


Morceli Runs Alone In Fastest 1992 Mile
Noureddine Morceli of Algeria raced the fastest mile of the indoor season today in the Mobil 1 Invitational Meet at George Mason University.
His time was 3 minutes 54.41 seconds.
After following the pace-setter, Mike Michno, through the half-mile in 1:55, the 21-year-old Morceli assumed the lead.
Running alone out front, Morceli was urged on by a record-conscious crowd of 5,000.
His pace slowed, however, but Morceli still triumphed by 40 meters over Mohammed Suleiman of Qatar and broke the meet record by 3.65 seconds.


Remember Yesterday? Expect the Same Today.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
OPEC's president said he would press for a significant cut in oil production to prop up prices, which have dropped 20 percent since November.
The official, who is also Algeria's oil minister, said he would ask OPEC's 12 members, which are scheduled to meet on Wednesday, to reduce production by about 6 percent.
The average price of OPEC crude oil is now about $16 a barrel, compared with the group's goal of $21.
Output has increased to an 11-year high of 24.2 million barrels a day.  [ Page D1. ]


Film Makers Shape Their Visions to Fit TV
ABC, pursuing what it is calling event series, has signed Oliver Stone, the movie director, to create and produce a special six-hour television series.
Robert A. Iger, the president of ABC Entertainment, announced the deal with Mr.
Stone last week but did not describe any details of the project.
He said Mr.
Stone would be the executive producer of the series and heavily involved in the writing.
Mr.
Stone created and directed the controversial movie "J. F. K.," along with "The Doors," "Born on the Fourth of July" and "Platoon."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Magazine Notes; At Harper's Bazaar, the Price Is Right
MAGAZINELAND was abuzz last week over a report that Hearst would pay Elizabeth Tilberis, the editor in chief of British Vogue, $1.25 million a year in salary and perks to move to New York and salvage Harper's Bazaar.
"A cosmic amount of money!" exclaimed Les Hinton, president and chief executive of News America Publishing Inc., echoing what was being said over lunch at the Four Seasons, Orso and Restaurant 44.


AGENCIES HINDERED IN EFFORT TO WIDEN DEFINITIONS OF AIDS
Two Federal agencies that are proposing to change the definition of AIDS and the criteria for AIDS-related disability benefits are being hampered by widespread criticism of their plans and the complexity of defining a disease that has no symptoms of its own.
The Centers for Disease Control had originally intended to announce its change in the definition of AIDS at the beginning of the year.
But it postponed formal announcement to allow the public more time, until Feb. 14, to comment.


Frances Koestler, 78, Expert on Blindness
Frances Adlerstein Koestler, an author and an expert on blindness, died on Thursday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of respiratory illness, her relatives said.


Bush Budget: Officials See Local Damage
At a time when New York City is seeking an additional $200 million in Federal money to close its own fiscal gap, city officials looking in detail at President Bush's proposed budget have concluded that it would reduce Federal aid to various city agencies by as much as $428 million.
That estimate came yesterday from City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman, who released a report tallying the potential economic impact of the President's proposal on a variety of city programs, including those that provide health care, support public housing and assist the homeless.


Dividend Meetings


John deLaittre, 84, Prominent Banker And a Civic Leader
John deLaittre, a retired bank president, Federal regulator and spokesman for the banking and mortgage industry, died Tuesday at Abbott Northwestern Hospital in Minneapolis.
He was 84 years old and lived in Minneapolis.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Quayle, in Europe, Denounces Protectionism
Vice President Dan Quayle today rejected protectionist calls in the United States as "dead-end streets" and said America should serve as a security bridge linking the world.
Addressing European officials at the annual Conference for Security Policy, Mr.
Quayle also made a strong push for final approval of a worldwide trade agreement, saying it carried with it implications for the security of Europe, America and Asia.


To Curb Congressional Mailing Abuse
To the Editor:
I believe my position was misconstrued in "Frankly, It's an Abuse" (Topics of The Times, Jan. 19), on abuse of franking, the Congressional free mailing privilege.
A little more than a year ago, I was teaching high school civics students about our Government and the careful balance of accountability that must be maintained among the judicial, legislative and executive branches of the Federal system.


INSIDE
Rival Protests in Moscow
Protesters railed against economic reforms at a rally in Moscow while another throng gathered across town to defend the new system.
Page A10.
Russian Jews Weigh Leaving
Torn between volatile conditions at home and reports of few good jobs in Israel, many Jews in Russia cannot take the last big step.
Page A10.
Algeria Declares Emergency
Algeria's military-backed leadership declared a state of emergency and shut down the offices of the Islamic fundamentalist movement.
Page A3.


Goodbye T. Rex, Hello Barosaurus
The generations of New Yorkers who have made an old friend of a very old fossil have only a short time left to say goodbye to his venerable bones.
Tyrannosaurus rex, who has spent 75 of his 60 million years on the fourth floor of the American Museum of Natural History, will soon leave his familiar haunts while they are completely done over.
T. rex was probably just another dinosaur back in the Cretaceous period, just before the species disappeared.
In New York he became an institution and the most popular fossil in all paleontology.
His attendance statistics are grandiose -- some 70 million to 80 million visitors -- and the succession sounds biblical.
Mothers and fathers brought daughters and sons who brought their sons and daughters who in turn brought their children . . .


SOME HAITIANS SAY CONTINUING ABUSES FORCED A 2D FLIGHT
Dozens of refugees forcibly returned to Haiti in recent months have told United Nations officials that they suffered beatings, imprisonment, death threats and other abuses that prompted them to flee their country a second time.
The statements, made to interviewers last month at the refugee camp set up by the United States at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, appear to undercut a key argument made by the Bush Administration in defending its policy of forcibly returning Haitian boat people.
State Department officials have consistently said there is "no evidence" that any Haitians have suffered political repression upon their return.


Jumpy Job Of Looking Smooth On Film
Robert De Niro didn't look too good.
Suffering from multiple gunshot wounds, he was being wheeled to a waiting ambulance.
Jessica Lange looked distraught.
And the man in the cowboy hat looked downright bizarre.
Strapped to a swiveling camera, shielded by two assistants carrying a six-foot-tall windscreen, Larry McConkey raced alongside the actors, sped past the ambulance as its doors closed, and then stepped deftly onto a crane that hoisted him 20 feet over lower Broadway in a quick, sickening swoop.


Coming Back; Moving Ahead With the Homeless
A remarkable consensus is emerging on how to help the homeless who have taken over public spaces in New York City.
The Dinkins administration and a special mayoral commission have independently developed humane and effective solutions that may prove valuable to other American cities as well.
Although Mayor Dinkins and his commission are often portrayed as in conflict, they are in striking agreement on the necessary program and differ only in how to implement it.
For the first time, New York has a powerful opportunity to break the political stalemate that too often impedes any constructive response.


U.S.C. Making Most of 'Miracle Season'
Last week, the Southern Cal team had some T-shirts made up that said: "Harold -- and His Buddies" and, on the back, "That's U.S.C. Basketball."
Most college basketball teams ranked No. 16 in the country by The Associated Press this late in the season wouldn't be so focused on one player.
But this season's U.S.C. team revolves around Harold Miner, the No. 4 scorer in Division I, and it finds itself playing as well as he is.


At This Museum, Art Can Be a Mess
Lena Katz doesn't know much about art but she knows what she likes.
The 19-month-old likes to smear swirls of shaving cream and tempera colors across a table top, get a lot on her hands and face and stand in a puddle of it.
Ditto the Mozlin twins, Ryan and Kyle, David Benjamin, Scott Leung, Jack F. Gill, Kenley Stark, Emily Russell and Roan La Plante.
Karen Katz, Lena's mother and one of the large colony of artists that made the chic renaissance of this once-derelict quarter of old factory lofts below Houston Street, does know a lot about art.
She knows she likes the Children's Museum of the Arts, where Lena and her preschool friends not only look at art but also exuberantly execute it in often innovative media.
Not incidentally, adds Mrs.
Katz, it is a place where "you can make a mess and walk away."


Lacrosse Outfits Shall Be Uniform
Lacrosse has always been a sport attractive to free-spirited players.
And that's all for the good, according to JIM GRUBE, a longtime coach and the secretary for the rules committee of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
But bandannas, which in some quarters are called "Frisbee helmets," pose a problem.
"Lacrosse players like to express themselves differently and the idea of a uniform betrays them," Grube said.
"The committee felt there had to be some curbs on self-creativity."


For One Stirring Afternoon, Magic Johnson Dazzles Again
Magic Johnson got another chance to smile at the world through basketball today.
And the world and his peers smiled back.
Johnson was named the most valuable player of today's National Basketball Association All-Star Game, finishing with 25 points and 9 assists in 29 minutes of memorable play at the Orlando Arena.
With his performance, he fulfilled a personal quest in a storybook fashion.
And in doing so, Johnson seemed to strengthen his determination to increase AIDS awareness and to fight H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, through his words and his deeds.


PRO BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; Magic Makes Highlights for His Tape
SHOULD we have expected any less from Magic Johnson?
He had promised a tape for his unborn child, to be popped in the V.C.R. machine in a few years.
What he produced was not just a cameo performance, Magic Cavorts With the All-Stars, but a career highlight film, a man at his peak, taking over the All-Star Game, exactly as everybody had wanted.


Profits vs. Programs for British TV
The forced resignation of the executive chairman of Granada Television Ltd., whose hits included "Brideshead Revisited" and "The Jewel in the Crown," has stirred fears here that quality programming will be sacrificed in the quest for short-term profits in Britain's increasingly competitive television industry.
Granada is one of Britain's most respected commercial television companies, and its critically acclaimed programs have proved quite popular in the United States as well as in Britain.


Testimony Ends in Tyson Trial
Jurors will begin deciding the fate of Mike Tyson on Monday, nearly seven months after a sexual encounter between the former heavyweight champion and an 18-year-old woman.
After nine days of testimony in the rape trial, the defense and the prosecution rested this afternoon, but not before calling a total of seven rebuttal witnesses to repair any damage done to their key witnesses in earlier testimony.


Buying American Won't Be Enough
To the Editor:
In the rush to buy American (front page, Jan. 27), let us not forget that most United States businesses that can benefit from such a move in the short term will have to function efficiently over the long haul in not just a national, but a global economy.
That is, the coming decade's real growth markets -- for automobiles, tractors, household goods and appliances, and a host of other goods and services -- will be in second- and third-world countries, especially in Eastern Europe, the Pacific rim and to a lesser extent the Americas.


Ishak Ramzy, 80, Pioneer in the Field Of Child Psychology
Dr.
Ishak Ramzy, a leader in the development of child psychoanalysis, died on Thursday at St.
Francis Hospital in Topeka, Kan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Topeka.
He died of natural causes after a brief illness, his family said.


Review/Country; A Road Called Longing
Between songs and during guitar breaks, Joe Ely sometimes wandered away from his microphone, as if he didn't want to stay in one place for too long.
At the Lone Star Roadhouse on Thursday night, this Lubbock, Tex., singer and songwriter gave a solo acoustic performance that seemed to be for and about people who like to move: people nagged by the desire to up and leave their lives for no reason they can understand.
He told stories about jumping freight trains from the deep South to the far Northeast; he sang songs -- some of his own, others borrowed from Texas friends like Butch Hancock -- about boxcars, pickup trucks and sad hotels.
Mr.
Ely's characters are indefatigable.
When they reach their horizons, they invent new ones.
Currently signed to the Nashville division of MCA, Mr.
Ely has been recording albums since 1977, and he has toured with people as diverse as Merle Haggard and the Clash.
Although he had no accompaniment on Saturday night, his songs kept the imprint of the country, rock, blues or Western swing styles he had elevated them from.
The raunchy backbeat of "Cool Rockin' Loretta" was couched in his frenetic acoustic strums; the heartwrenched twang of pedal-steel guitar echoed through his voice when he sang the country ballad "Where Is My Love?": "Where is my love on a night like tonight/Does she still see the same stars as I."


Today's Toy Must Pass a Screen Test
Despite coming off one of their most profitable seasons in years, the big toy companies are playing it safe, taking their cues from popular television shows and soon-to-be-released big-budget movies.
"We've done a lot more licensing in the past four months than we have in the past," said John W. Amerman, chairman and chief executive of Mattel Inc.
"It gives you a running start," to introduce a toy based on characters already well known to children, he said.


Courier Has No. 1 Ranking, but Chang Wins the Title
Jim Courier's reign as the world's new No. 1 men's tennis player begins this week, but he won't bring a tournament victory with him.
One day after he earned enough points to move to the top of the Association of Tennis Professionals computer ranking, Courier lost in the final of the Volvo/San Francisco tournament today, falling to Michael Chang, 6-3, 6-3.


Federal Fund Cutoff Is Closing Experimental Clinic for AIDS
The only clinic on Long Island providing free experimental treatment for AIDS or H.I.V. infection is being forced to close because the Federal Government has withdrawn its financing, clinic officials said.
The three-year-old clinic, at the Stony Brook, L.I., campus of the State University of New York, is serving more than 225 AIDS patients from Nassau and Suffolk Counties, which have the largest number of AIDS cases of any suburban area of the country.


Rutgers the Class Of N.J. Recruits
It has not been easy for Rutgers to attract good New Jersey high school football players to the State University.
This year was different.
Of the 18 recruits who last week signed letters-of-intent to enroll, 14 were from New Jersey high schools and 8 had been named first- or second-team all-state players.


Chefs in U.S. Must Recognize Demand for Vegetarian Cuisine
To the Editor:
As co-director of the country's largest national, nonprofit vegetarian group, I feel compelled to respond to Zachary M. Schrag's "Haute Cuisine vs. the Vegetarian Menace" (letter, Jan. 28).
Mr.
Schrag's inability to recognize and respond to a growing demand for elegant vegetarian meals seems common among chefs.
For years, professional cooking schools have failed to prepare students to meet the needs of a rapidly growing vegetarian population.
Instead, they continue to emphasize meals centered on meat, fish and poultry.
I can't tell you how many times I and other vegetarians have been fed steamed vegetables and, if we were lucky, plain pasta at catered events and in elegant restaurants.
Most of us leave these places starved, feeling we have been ripped off and wondering why it is so difficult for American chefs to create elegant gourmet dishes based on grains, vegetables, beans, nuts and fruits, as is done throughout the world.
Vegetarians find such dishes in ethnic restaurants in the United States -- Chinese, Ethiopian, Middle Eastern, Mexican.


Teen-Agers Accused Of Killing a Woman While Testing Rifle
Two teen-age boys who bought a rifle for $80 on the street and then took it to the roof of a building to test it were arrested yesterday evening in the killing of a woman who was walking with her son along a Coney Island street, the police said.
The shooting and the arrests of two neighborhood youths underlined the seemingly inexplicable randomness of crime and the easy availability of guns in New York City's crime-ridden neighborhoods to anyone who has the cash.


Italian Obsession: Was Airliner Shot Down?
The DC-9 had left its cruising altitude and was easing down through 21,000 feet, 15 minutes out from Palermo, Sicily.
Then the radar screens went blank.
Without warning, or storm or explanation, the plane had plunged into the Tyrrhenian Sea.
All 81 people aboard were killed.
Thus, almost 12 years ago, on June 27, 1980, the seeds were sown for one of this country's obsessions, as compelling and laden with charges of conspiracy for some Italians as the suspicions evoked in some Americans by Watergate or the killing of John F. Kennedy.


Post Yuppies
To the Editor:
"Post Yuppies" (Topics of The Times, Jan. 31) asks: "Is there a mot juste that categorizes the generation following the yuppies?" Indeed, there is.
After the era of junk bonds, the savings and loan debacle and the mass layoffs on Wall Street, the appropriate tag for this generation is bellyuppies.
GENE GRAMM New York, Jan. 31, 1992


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Retail Sales . . .
Jan. 10-Day Auto Sales . . .
Early Feb.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  Producer Price Index . . .
Jan.
Industrial Production . . .
Jan.
Business Inventories . . .
Dec.


Fujinomiya Journal; 'Money, Greed and Power': Japan's Religious War
The silent courtyards, pine groves and temples here at the foot of Mount Fuji hardly look like a battleground.
But there is an atmosphere of siege among the monks rustling about in gray silk robes at the headquarters of Japan's most prominent Buddhist sect.
After simmering for years under the surface, a bitter war has erupted in recent months between Japan's largest religious organization, the Nichiren Shoshu sect of Buddhism, and its main lay organization, known as Soka Gakkai.


News Summary
International A2-10  HAITIANS TELL OF TERROR
Dozens of refugees forcibly returned to Haiti by the United States have fled a second time.
The reason, they told United Nations officials, is that they faced beatings, imprisonment and death threats.
A1
Haiti's exiled President also tells of the refugees' travails.
A8  OPEC SEEKS HIGHER PRICES


Cutbacks at Libraries Dim Hopes and Dreams
FOR $50,000 a year, New York can imprison one convicted criminal.
Or, it can keep a branch library open for one more day each week.
Branch libraries were largely spared further cuts in Mayor David N. Dinkins's latest financial plan, though his act of enlightened charity reflects two political realities: the City Council would probably restore the cuts anyway and the branch libraries have already suffered enough.


Algeria Clamps Down Harder on Muslim Militants
Moving decisively against Muslim fundamentalists after a month of tightening repression, Algeria imposed a yearlong state of emergency today under which virtually all constitutional rights will be suspended.
Algerians close to the armed forces said the goal of the military-backed Government that took power on Jan. 11 was to wage a relentless war against the Islamic Salvation Front, the fundamentalist group that is the main opposition party.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Tsongas Surges as Voters Focus on Economics
The New Hampshire Democratic primary enters its final week with all the ingredients of a political cliffhanger: Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas is pulling even with Gov.
Bill Clinton in the public opinion polls and experts say the race is still very much up for grabs.
Even a veteran of the New Hampshire primary wars like Joseph Grandmaison, a former state Democratic chairman and a supporter of Mr.
Clinton, confesses, "I've had a terrible time figuring out the dynamics of this race."


Worth Weight in Goal, Terreri's Tireless, Too
Chris Terreri presented more concrete evidence today that he has regained the goaltending form that brought the Devils so much success late last year and early this season.
After a solid performance in Boston a day earlier with 38 saves, Terreri was solid again this afternoon in a 2-1 triumph over the Nordiques at the Colisee.


Iraq Refinery Reopens
Wartime damages to Iraq's second-largest refinery, al-Dora, have been repaired and the refinery is now fully operational, the Government daily newspaper Al-Jumhouriyah reported Saturday.
The refinery has annual production capacity of five million metric tons of crude, about 36 million barrels, and 150,000 metric tons of lubricants, about 1.1 million barrrels.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Iowa; A Lot to Be Said but No One to Listen
John L. Moeckly, a sixth-generation cattle breeder in the gentle hills here north of Des Moines, has a message for President Bush: "I don't know why he took his junk car people with him to Japan and didn't take beef and pork producers. The Japanese are tired of eating fish heads and rice."
Edith Southwick of Milo, a Burger King employee, wants the Democratic Presidential candidates to know that all is not tranquil in her southeast Iowa town: "We have gangs, drugs, racial problems. We have rapes, shootings, murders -- all in a small town."


New Awards for N.F.L. Kickers
DAVE JENNINGS, who punted so long (1974-1987) and so well for the Giants and the Jets, has been long critical of the way the National Football League statisticians rank punters.
He was recently joined by JAN STENERUD, the Hall of Fame kicker, and they derived new formulas, on punting and place-kicking.
The result was the Desenex Most Valuable Foot awards, which for the 1991 season go to JEFF JAEGER, the place-kicker for the Los Angeles Raiders, and JEFF GOSSETT, the Raiders' punter.


Companies Press U.S. on Vietnam
At a time when American competitiveness, or lack of it, in Asia is much debated, corporations and business organizations in the United States are pressing for an end to the trade and investment boycott of Vietnam, a country where American companies say they believe they could do very well.
The quiet lobbying -- led by the petroleum, construction, telecommunications and consulting industries -- is prompted by the perception that the Japanese have been positioning themselves in Vietnam for decades and will grab many of the contracts when Vietnam becomes integrated in world trade.


Testimony Ends in Tyson Trial
Jurors will begin deciding the fate of Mike Tyson on Monday, nearly seven months after a sexual encounter between the former heavyweight champion and an 18-year-old woman.
After nine days of testimony in the rape trial, the defense and the prosecution rested this afternoon, but not before calling a total of seven rebuttal witnesses to repair any damage done to their key witnesses in earlier testimony.


Pipkins Slips to 26th As Luge Proves Rocky
To those who had marveled at his meteoric rise, it was horrible, embarrassing and downright sad.
To 18-year-old Robert Pipkins of Staten Island, the world junior champion and the only black in international luge racing, it was just a bad day at the office.
Today, when luge competition began at this tiny mountain resort in the XVI Olympic Winter Games, Pipkins had the rockiest run of anyone.
Five times in the first 5 seconds of his first run, his sled banged into the high icy wall of the twisting chute.


Egorova a Winner in Women's Cross-Country
Lyubov Egorova, a freestyle expert from the United Team, showed her versatility today by winning the women's 15-kilometer classic-style cross-country race to claim the first medal in the 1992 Winter Olympics.
Egorova, 26 years old, the reigning world 30-kilometer freestyle champion, led the race from start to finish and beat Marjut Lukkarinen of Finland by 1 minute 9.1 seconds.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about Pakistan's acknowledgment of its ability to make an atomic bomb misstated the year in which India exploded a nuclear device.
It was 1974, not 1964.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY DINKINS PUSHES MINORITY CONTRACTS
Asserting that the time had come to correct decades of rampant discrimination in the city's procurement process, Mayor Dinkins announced a sweeping policy initiative to award more than 20 percent of the city's contracts to businesses owned by minorities and women.
A1.
ARREST IN CROWN HEIGHTS KILLING
A 23-year-old unemployed handyman who the police said might have offered to do odd jobs so he could case houses he wanted to burglarize was charged yesterday in the stabbing death of a Hasidic woman in Crown Heights.
The killing had pushed the troubled Brooklyn neighborhood to the brink of another racial confrontation.
A1.
LIFE AND ART
The National Gallery of Art has liberated Herbert and Dorothy Vogel's one-bedroom Manhattan apartment from their collection of 2,500 sculptures, drawings and paintings.
But the retired postal clerk and the retired librarian are still doing what they have done for 30 years -- devoting their lives to contemporary art.
A1. 50 HOMELESS AFTER GAS BLAST
A natural gas explosion rocked and heavily damaged a problem-plagued Harlem apartment building, touching off a raging fire that drove hundreds of tenants into the cold, injured 23 people, one critically, and left more than 50 people homeless.
B3.
A SEA OF ILLEGAL GUNS
The only thing unusual about the gun that the police say killed Ruth Mitchell in Coney Island on Saturday is that it was a rifle in a sea of illegal handguns.
The rest of its story is told with increasing frequency these days as drugs and guns continue to ravage poor and working-class neighborhoods.
B3. 2 woman found slain in Brooklyn apartment.
B2.
Fernandez joins the battle for M.A.C. funds.
B3.
Woman gets 7 1/2 to 15 years for fatal beating of son.
B3.
Band shell in Central Park gets reprieve.
B4.
REGION  TWO VIEWS OF TEANECK CASE
The jury in the manslaughter trial of a white Teaneck police officer accused of killing a black teen-ager heard sharply contradictory closing arguments about the events surrounding the shooting and the officer's motives for firing.
The defense lawyer contended that the officer, Gary Spath, was threatened by the 16-year-old youth, Phillip Pannell, who had reached into a pocket containing a handgun.
But the prosecutor argued that Mr.
Pannell was attempting to surrender when he was shot and that Officer Spath and his partner had concocted a story to justify the shooting.
B6.
MONEY AND MELODRAMA
This time, the volunteer firefighters and laid-off probation officers starred in the Nassau County budget melodrama.
The firefighters, 1,000 strong, paraded past the County Executive Building in more than 100 polished red and lemon fire trucks, blaring horns and sirens, to protest county cuts in training programs, inspectors, and investigators.
Inside, the probation officers sat in glum silence, as an officer due to be laid off after eight years on the job tried to turn in his gold shield in protest.
B6.
Our Towns B6  Neediest Cases B6


M.T.A. Selects Korey, Kay
The Metropolitan Transit Authority has awarded a three-year contract to Korey, Kay &amp; Partners in New York to serve as its agency, after a review of 15 shops that included Bergelt Litchfield, New York, the incumbent.
Estimated billings were $5 million for the account, which includes advertising for Metro-North, the Long Island Rail Road and the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority.


Bridge
On an amateur level, many golfers are bridge players and vice versa: The games go well together.
This columnist once played in a combined golf-and-bridge event in which the golf scores were match-pointed with a traveling slip in each hole, just as if it were a duplicate board.
Joan Campbell of Hobe Sound, Fla., is a leading golfer whose husband, William Campbell, is a former national amateur champion.
She is also a bridge enthusiast and showed her talent on the diagramed deal from a private game played in her home town last Tuesday.
The North-South hands reveal a rare situation: after bidding three suits, it is correct to play in a slam in the fourth.


Reorganization at Dow Corning Surprises Experts
Business consultants today expressed surprise at the timing of the executive changes announced at the Dow Corning Corporation yesterday and uncertainty about how to interpret the demotion of Lawrence A. Reed, the company's chief executive.
But most felt that the changes could help the company's image.
"From what little I know, it looks good," said Gerald C. Meyers, a consultant based in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., who had been among the sharpest critics of the company's management of the controversy on breast implants.
"They have identified the crisis manager at the highest level and told everyone else to go back and run the business."


The President's Sleeping Pill and Its Makers; Benefit vs. Risk
To the Editor:
Benjamin Stein's "Our Man in Nirvana" (Op-Ed, Jan. 22) is a slanted and partisan attack, concerned less with President Bush's use of Halcion (triazolam) than with one medicine and the company that manufactures it.
While triazolam is not without side effects, particularly in the elderly, those with impaired kidney or liver function, or multiple drug users, hundreds of thousands of patients have safely and effectively used it.
Yet, as Mr.
Stein fails to note, no medicine, even seemingly innocuous substances such as aspirin or iron, is without potential dangers.
What needs to be weighed before use, by both the physician and the patient, is the benefit against the risk.
Mr.
Stein paints a devilish, hallucinatory picture of the use of triazolam -- as if Circe comes in Morpheus's place.


Mr. Bush's New York 'Victory'
The New Hampshire Presidential primary is still a week away.
But President Bush has already frozen out his Republican challenger Patrick Buchanan in the race to get on the ballot for New York's April 7 Republican primary.
That means the primary is over.
Mr.
Bush has won it without the bother of an election.
Sadly, his victory comes at the expense of voters, and democracy.
Many states reserve a spot on the primary ballot for all nationally recognized candidates.
But not, alas, the Empire State.
New York persists in forcing Presidential candidates to spend scarce time and early resources collecting petition signatures in support of their delegate candidates -- a tedious process that puts a premium on clubhouse support and penalizes lesser-known contenders.


Clinton Speaks In New York
Speaking at a fund raiser in New York City last night, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas offered his strongest condemnation so far of the attacks on his character.
"It is clear what is going on," he said.
"People know if they can make the election about my past or about any other politician's past, if they can dump on people and kill their enthusiasm and their feelings and hopes and demean this whole process, they can make this election about yesterday and then the same old crowd can stay in power."


Suspect Is Arrested In Woman's Killing In Crown Heights
A 23-year-old unemployed handyman, who the police said may have offered to do odd jobs so he could case houses to burglarize, was charged yesterday in the brutal stabbing death of a Hasidic woman in the Crown Heights neighborhood in Brooklyn.
The slaying on Thursday was followed by a rock-and bottle-throwing incident between Hasidim and black and Hispanic residents -- a brief echo of the violence that erupted there last summer after a black child was killed by a car driven by a Hasidic man and an Australian rabbinical student was slain.


A.T.&amp; T. Discount
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said it was offering a new pricing plan that could cut the cost of short-duration international calls by about 30 percent.
The company said the service, called the International Business Alternative, would be sold with its Small Business Option Service.
The company also said it was offering a new discount schedule for A.T.&amp; T.'s International Pro WATS Service that would allow small businesses to qualify for volume discounts that were previously available only to higher-volume users.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Larry McConkey, a Hollywood cameraman who specializes in operating a camera platform that prevents shaky images, misidentified the actor in the opening sequence of "The Bonfire of the Vanities." It was Bruce Willis, not Tom Hanks.


The President's Sleeping Pill and Its Makers; False Charges
To the Editor:
In "Maker of Sleeping Pill Hid Data on Side Effects, Researchers Say" (front page, Jan. 20), you give credence to the false charges by Ian Oswald against the Upjohn Company and our product Halcion tablets.
Dr.
Oswald, a Scottish psychiatrist, charges Upjohn with fraudulent concealment of important data.
He is entirely free, of course, to criticize us, which he has done, garnering much attention.
He cannot with impunity, however, charge us with fraud.
That must be and will be settled in court.


Times of London Makes Changes for Europeans
European readers of The Times of London found their newspaper sporting a different logo and a new European arts page today.
On the European continent the paper's new logo is The European Times.
In an interview today, Simon Jenkins, editor of The Times since 1990, explained that he had developed the change as a way to let readers on the Continent know that "there's something in this paper particularly" for them.
He stressed, though, that basically "it's still the good old Times of London."


Unlocking More Secrets of Nubian Civilization
"THE waters were coming up as we were still working, and my feet were getting wet," mused Dr.
Nicholas Millet, curator of the Egyptian department at the Royal Ontario Museum, recalling his last dig at Aswan on the Egyptian Nile in 1963.
It was on the eve of the full-scale flooding of the Aswan desert for a big internationally financed dam and power project, and he had just found a 2,000-year-old sandstone tablet near the settlement of Adda that held promise as a key to deciphering the Meroitic writing system of ancient Nubia.


U.N. Plan for Croatia Inching Forward
The last resistance by Serb rebel leaders to a United Nations proposal to deploy peacekeeping forces in Croatia appears to have waned significantly, despite a defiant last stand today by opponents.
At a special session on Sunday in the town of Glina, over two-thirds of the Parliament of the rebel Serb Krajina Republic voted to accept the United Nations peacekeeping plan in spite of fierce resistance to it by Milan Babic, Krajina's president, and other local rebel leaders.


Some Decide To Pass Up Olympics
THE Winter Olympics are in full swing, but many of America's largest advertisers and their agencies are sitting this one out.
While some mega-marketers are spending tens of millions of dollars to link themselves in consumers' minds to the 1992 Games in Albertville, France, companies like General Motors, Mastercard and Coors, which in the past were eager sponsors, are shunning the quadrennial spectacle.


Review/Fashion; At Scaasi's, The Greening Of a Season
Spring may just
not
be a little late this year; it wafted into Arnold Scaasi's couture salon yesterday afternoon.
A green suit the color of the first shoots of grass, a bunch of daisies scattered on a thin silk dress with a capelet collar, and a long pleated column of golden chiffon -- all these gave the illusion that winter had passed.
The pastel shades of lavender, lemon and many tones of pink lent a romantic glow to clothes that were, as usual, frankly feminine.


Lost Money May Produce Donations to the Neediest
Losing a wallet was enough to turn some contributors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund into playwrights.
Their brief productions went like this:
CHARACTER WHO DISCOVERS WALLET: Finders keepers, losers weepers.


Classical Music in Review
Thomas Hampson  Baritone Alice Tully Hall
Music critics are paid, in part, to carp, so I am confident that those of my colleagues who heard Thomas Hampson sing on Sunday night are, like me, sitting before their word-processors at loose ends.
The young American baritone's performance demonstrated why he seems to command the international opera stage these days.


Gorbachev Enabled Party Money To Be Invested, a Hearing Is Told
A month before the failed August coup attempt that broke the Communist Party's grip on the Soviet Union, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev signed a document authorizing the party to put its money into small enterprises, joint stock companies, private banks and other capitalist ventures, according to testimony today at a Russian Parliament hearing.
The document, disclosed by the Russian Deputy Prosecutor, Yevgeny K. Lisov, confirmed a trend under way by last summer, as party functionaries scurried to shelter themselves and their money from a conversion to a market economy.
But Mr.
Lisov said there may have been other reasons why Mr.
Gorbachev approved the change.


Review/Music; Distinguishing the Grandiose From the Charming
Jessye Norman's voice is an astonishing instrument.
In a recital on Sunday night in Avery Fisher Hall, it seemed a grand mansion of sound.
It defines an extraordinary space.
It has enormous dimensions, reaching backward and upward.
It opens onto unexpected vistas.
It contains sunlit rooms, narrow passageways, cavernous halls.
Ms.
Norman is the regal mistress of this domain, with a physical presence suited to her vocal expanse.
And throughout the recital, ably accompanied by the pianist Philip Moll, she invited listeners to admire her power and her vocal furnishings.
It was, for example, impossible to listen to her performance of Tchaikovsky's "Melodies Francaises" and not be amazed at how, within a single phrase, the voice seemed to move from Ms.
Norman's head to her throat, to her nose and into her chest.
In selections from Hugo Wolf's "Italienisches Liederbuch," the German words took on a sensuous sound, resonating in vocal space.
And in an encore performance of Carmen's paean to love, the word "l'amour" seemed coated in velvet.


Books of The Times; Growing Up as Colored Becomes Negro, Then Black
1959  By Thulani Davis  297 pages. Grove Weidenfeld. $19.95.
For 12-year-old Katherine (Willie) Tarrant, the captivating heroine of Thulani Davis's new novel, 1959 is a year of momentous change, a year that will witness her initiation into the confusions and disillusionments of the grown-up world.
In the course of that year, she will start dating her first boyfriend, confront the consequences of her mother's death and learn about the mysterious and threatening world that lies beyond the boundaries of her hometown.


23 Injured in Natural Gas Explosion in Harlem Building
A natural gas explosion rocked and heavily damaged a problem-plagued Harlem apartment building yesterday, touching off a raging fire that drove hundreds of tenants into the cold, injured 23 people, one critically, and left more than 50 people homeless.
The explosion, whose cause was not immediately determined by fire marshals, occurred shortly before 11 A.M. on the top floor of the seven-story building at 35 Hamilton Place, at 139th Street, as a utility crew tried to restore a gas line that had been shut down for three months because of leaks.


Recipe for Love: A Boy, a Girl, A Spacecraft
ONE of the most delicate and secret topics of the space age is beginning to go public, at least a bit: sex in space.
Astronauts duck questions about it and officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration often wince at its mention, fearful of appearing to condone eroticism in the heavens at public expense.
For years they have avoided the topic in public, even while struggling with it in private.


New Salvadoran Police Force Is Off to a Slow Start
The creation of the civilian-run police force that is a major element in the Salvadoran peace accords is waiting for money, a headquarters and recruits, and the civilian named to be police coordinator acknowledges that it will be difficult to meet a May 1 deadline for opening a new police academy.
The official, Ernesto Arbizu Maat, said he had drawn up a tentative budget but was waiting to see the results of a collection to be taken among members of the United Nations Security Council.


Illustrated Data Base of Ecology
FOLLOWING a bunch of vegetables around the computer screen may not be everybody's idea of fun, but it is a feature of a program that teaches the principles of ecology and environmental awareness.
The program, Earthquest Explores Ecology, is a product of Earthquest, of Palo Alto, Calif.
It is for Macintosh computers and people 10 years old and older.
A conscientious adult would also learn a lot from it.


1,000 Firefighters Parade And Probation Officers Sit
This time, the volunteer firefighters and laid-off probation officers starred in the Nassau County budget melodrama.
The firefighters, 1,000 strong, paraded past the County Executive Building here in more than 100 polished red and lemon fire trucks, blaring horns and sirens, to protest county cuts in training programs, inspectors and investigators.


Sports of The Times; The 'Animal' In Mike Tyson
THIS is what Mike Tyson once said about himself in an interview about five years ago:
"When I fight someone, I want to break his will. I want to take his manhood. I want to rip out his heart and show it to him. My manager tells me not to say those things, but that's the way I feel. People say that's primitive, that I'm an animal. But then they pay $500 to see it. There's so much hypocrisy in the world.


Official Leaves Trump To Return to Marriott
Stephen F. Bollenbach, the financial expert hired in 1990 to help improve the finances of the imperiled Trump Organization, announced yesterday that he would soon return to the Marriott Corporation as its chief financial officer.
Mr.
Bollenbach, who was the Trump Organization's first official chief financial officer, helped change the financings behind Donald J. Trump's empire of apartment buildings, Atlantic City casinos, hotels and an airline.
Mr.
Trump teetered on the edge of bankruptcy for much of 1990 and through some of 1991, but partly through a series of marathon negotiations and debt-for-equity swaps designed by Mr.
Bollenbach and bondholders, Mr.
Trump avoided seeking personal bankruptcy protection.


Con Ed Nears Rate Increase In 3-Year Plan
After nine years of electricity price freezes and even a cut, Consolidated Edison and the staff of the New York Public Service Commission have reached an agreement that would, if approved by the commission, give the utility a 19.8 percent rate increase over the next three years.
But the Consumer Protection Board, which by law represents consumer interests before the Public Service Commission, argues that three-year deals are inherently unfair to customers, and that for several reasons, the increase should be smaller.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Says He's Victim of G.O.P. 'Attack Machine'
Gov.
Bill Clinton rolled back into New Hampshire today with a full-scale political attack: He presented himself as the victim of a "Republican attack machine," asserted that the relentless focus on his character was cheating the voters and promised to "fight like hell" in the last eight days of this primary campaign.
Mr.
Clinton, who returned from a weekend in Arkansas to a suddenly tight Democratic race with former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, delivered his speech on a snowy hill in a suburban subdivision, and he sought the high ground in more ways than one.
He tried to present himself as the candidate rewarded by the voters for his emphasis on "the real problems of real people," who had then paid a heavy price for his success.


Roots of the King Crab
KING crabs may be majestic in their dimensions and princely in the sums their succulent legs command at the fish market, but their origins turn out to be quite humble.
Scientists have learned that the giant shellfish evolved from mere hermit crabs.
Some biologists examining the details of their anatomies had long believed they were distantly related, but a new molecular comparison of their genes shows that they are much more closely linked.
Rather than being members of the same superfamily, they should be counted as first cousins in the same genus.
Scientists now suggest that king crabs began evolving from a hermit crab progenitor about 19.5 million years ago.


Head of Licensing Unit Is Appointed by Revlon
Revlon Inc. has appointed Lynn Krominga, formerly its vice president for law and general counsel to its executive committee, to head up the cosmetics company's new licensing unit.
As president of the Revlon Licensing division, Ms.
Krominga, 41, is overseeing the licensing of Revlon's brand names and trademarks, like Ultima II and Charlie, which have only been used on health and beauty aids made by the company.
Now manufacturers of other goods, like accessories or luxury gift items, can purchase the use of a Revlon brand name and apply it to their products.


Collecting Priceless Art, Just for the Love of It
Now that the National Gallery of Art has liberated Herbert and Dorothy Vogel's one-bedroom Manhattan apartment from their collection of 2,500 sculptures, drawings and paintings, Mrs.
Vogel can retrieve her clothes from the terrace and hang them in the closet, which was only one of the places the art had been stashed.
Friends who happen to be tall, or on the heavy side, can venture from the living room to the bathroom without colliding with the galvanized steel rectangle by Donald Judd or the paintings by Robert Mangold.
Their rent-controlled apartment on the East Side has been transformed, but the retired postal clerk and the retired librarian are still doing what they have done for 30 years -- devoting their lives to contemporary art.
Last Thursday night, at yet another opening, at the Marisa del Re Gallery on West 57th Street, they were greeted warmly by people like the art historian Barbara Rose, the SoHo art dealer Annina Nosei and the artist Paul Manes, whose paintings were on the walls.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Democrats' Hopes Fade As Front-Runner Slips
Only a couple of weeks ago, senior people in the Democratic Party were telling each other that this time they would not waste their energies squabbling.
This time they would choose a nominee early.
Then they could unite, plot the strategy and raise the money needed to beat President Bush.
That soothing vision was fading fast today as the Iowa caucuses took place and the New Hampshire primary campaign entered its final week.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  OIL FUELS SIBERIAN CAPITALISM
Oil may ooze in parts of Tyumen Province, but the wealth has not been pumped back into Russia.
In a capitalistic game with few rules, entrepreneurs are trying to model Western-style oil conglomerates from the old state-run operations.
A1  AIRLIFT BRINGS HINTS OF MORE AID
Planeloads of food and medical aid began arriving in the Commonwealth of Independent States, accompanied by hints that the U.S. may take part in a longer-term, multibillion-dollar stabilization fund for the Russian economy.
A14  Party was investing in capitalist ventures before the coup.
A15  Finns travel back in time to Karelia, now part of Russia.
A4  WHAT WENT WRONG IN ZURICH?
Iron fences now bar Zurich's experimental open drug market in a public park, but the closing leaves many questions unresolved.
A10  CUTTERS RESCUE, THEN RETURN
The Coast Guard cutter Mohawk is carrying rescued Haitian boat people to Cuba, then ferrying home others forced back by the U.S.
A7  THORNBURGH OFFERED U.N.
POST
President Bush wants former Attorney General Dick Thornburgh to be the American to fill a new top post at the United Nations overseeing budget and administration, officials say.
A5  THWARTING MARCH ON KASHMIR
Pakistani soldiers set off landslides, dismantled bridges and erected barricades today to stop Muslim militants from marching into the Indian-controlled area of Kashmir.
A12  FIRE AND BLOOD IN VENEZUELA
Coup plotters in Venezuela were inspired by 19th-century military writings and by Thomas Jefferson's statement, "the tree of liberty should be irrigated from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants," documents say.
A6
Argentina officially opens its files on Nazis.  A8  POLICE AMBUSHED IN ALGIERS
Islamic fundamentalists killed eight police officers today, six of them in an ambush in the Casbah, in the heaviest assaults since the military took power a month ago.
A13  National A16-23  SHAKE-UP AT MAKER OF IMPLANTS
Hours after Dow Corning made public internal company documents suggesting that some officials had been informed that its breast implants might be hazardous, the company replaced its chief executive.
A1  SPECULATIONS ON DOW CORNING
The naming of a new chief executive at Dow Corning may not be the last leadership change in the company as it struggles to deal with the issue of breast implants.
A18  THE POST-SUNUNU WHITE HOUSE
Two months after he replaced John Sununu as chief of staff, Samuel Skinner is given some good marks, but Administration officials and Republican advisers say the problems Mr.
Sununu left behind continue to plague the White House.
A1  CHANGES IN FOOD LABELING
The Government offered revisions of its proposals for stricter food labeling, prompting criticism that it was making the labels more confusing rather than simplifying them.
A16  UNCERTAINTY IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
New Hampshire's voters, proud of their independence and ability to surprise, next week may gladden the hearts of senior Democrats who hope for an early end to the 1992 campaign, but it doesn't appear likely.
Political Week.
A22  CLINTON ON OFFENSIVE
Calling himself the victim of a "Republican attack machine," Governor Clinton went on the political offensive and promised to "fight like hell" in the last eight days of the primary campaign.
A22  HARKIN WINS AT HOME
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, to no one's surprise, won decisively in his home state's Democratic Presidential caucuses.
A23
Amidst low turnout and less attention, Iowans speak.  A23  BUSH AND HIS FOE
In the battle for Republican voters in New Hampshire, President Bush attacked, while his challenger, Pat Buchanan, tried a softer approach.
A22
Lawyers debate extent of Noriega's assistance in the drug war.  A16
The U.S. still leads the world in per capita imprisonment.
A16  Metropolitan Digest, B1 MORE CONTRACTS FOR MINORITIES
Mayor Dinkins announces a plan to award more than 20 percent of the city's contracts to businesses owned by minorities or women, in what he says is an effort to correct decades of discrimination in the city's procurement process.
A1  UNLIKELY COLLECTORS
They are an ordinary couple, who live in a one-bedroom rent-controlled apartment in Manhattan.
He is a retired postal clerk; she is a retired librarian.
But Herbert and Dorothy Vogel have dazzled the art world with their collection of contemporary art.
A1  ARREST IN WOMAN'S KILLING
A 23-year-old black man was charged in the slaying of a Hasidic woman in Crown Heights that pushed the troubled neighborhood to the brink of another racial confrontation.
A1  Neediest Cases B6  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-10  Protein as origami, with folding "chaperones." C1  Of love in space, with NASA uneasily exploring the implications.
C1  Sports B10-17  TYSON GUILTY OF RAPE
Mike Tyson, one of the most recognizable figures in sports, was found guilty of raping an 18-year-old beauty-pageant contestant last July in Indianapolis.
The 25-year-old former heavyweight boxing champion will be sentenced on March 6.
A1  Boxing: How Tyson's conviction changes the picture.
B11  LAST STAND ON ICE
The name isn't the only thing that has changed about the hockey team from what was once the Soviet Union.
At the Winter Olympics, the team that once ruled the world's ice is making what could be its last stand.
A1
Olympics: Blair repeats in speed-skating 500.
B11  Fashion Page B9  Obituaries B8  Alex Haley, Pulitzer prize winning author of "Roots."  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Some blunt words on ballet, from Erick Hawkins.
C11  Theater: "George Washington Dances." C16  Music: Jessye Norman.
C11  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  Side with Haitian refugees.
Not so fast, Mr.
Fernandez.
Bush's New York "victory." Topics: Miami terrorism.
Letters A24  A. M. Rosenthal: Letter to two men.
A25  Patrick J. Leahy: Loan guarantees for Israel -- it's their choice.
A25  Zeev B. Begin: Stop the coercion of Israel.
A25  George M. Woodwell and Kilaparti Ramakrishna: Forest scapegoats.
A25


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Dow Corning replaced its chief executive within hours after making public more internal documents suggesting it knew that its silicone gel breast implants might be hazardous.  [ Page A1. ]  Business consultants supported Dow's change of leadership.  [ A18. ]


Ballet on Snow


Global Plan To Rescue Species Set For Release
Moving beyond a "Save The Panda approach," an international team plans to make public here on Tuesday a comprehensive strategy to protect the world's diversity of plant and animal species and to tap this diversity for human benefit.
The fruit of a three-year effort involving 500 advisers around the world, the "Global Biodiversity Strategy" addresses growing concern that the extinction of species will deprive future generations of new medicines and new strains of food crops.


Time Warner Has a Profit Before Its Preferred Payout
Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that its latest quarterly results swung to a profit for the first time since it took on $11 billion in debt when Time Inc. acquired Warner Communications in January 1990.
The company reported a profit of $45 million in the fourth quarter, compared with a loss of $34 million in the comparable period a year earlier.


Germany Won't Ban Sledder Who Informed
Harald Czudaj will be allowed to compete in the Winter Games, even though the German bobsledder admitted that he was once an informer for the East German security police, German Olympic officials said today.
The German Olympic Committee president, Willi Daume, said that the clearance came after Czudaj's teammates appealed to German officials to let him compete because they had not been harmed by his work for the Stasi, the security agency, which was dissolved when the Germanys united in 1990.


Compaq-Dell Suits Settled
The Compaq Computer Corporation and the Dell Computer Corporation said today that they had reached a worldwide settlement of all pending litigation between the companies.
Last year, Compaq sued Dell and its ad agency, Goldberg Moser O'Neill, contending that Dell's advertisements comparing the two companies' prices and performance were false and misleading.
Dell filed counterclaims against Compaq and its agency, Oglivy &amp; Mather.


The Talk of Hollywood; Though a Year Old, Disney Memo Still Provokes Gossip
One year ago, Jeffrey Katzenberg, the chairman of the Walt Disney studios, wrote the memo that rocked Hollywood.
Not that Mr.
Katzenberg said anything startling or even surprising.
Far from it.
But the 28-page document, which criticized the movie industry's "tidal wave of runaway costs and mindless competition" and chastised his own company for making the big budget, low-profit "Dick Tracy," served for months as a source of anger, resentment, debate and jokes within Hollywood.
Mr.
Katzenberg may have stated the obvious but -- like so much else in a world of fantasy, hype and vast wealth -- his comments stirred an outsize reaction.


Fort Lauderdale Rides New Wave
Next month, hundreds of thousands of college students will besiege sandy shores and snowy slopes around the country to celebrate the rites of spring.
But just a handful will head for this beach resort, which for 35 years was the spring-break capital of the world.
That is just fine with local officials and most business owners, who say they could not be happier, even though it means the loss of $140 million generated by spring break.


When Proteins Come to Life, 'Chaperones' Show the Way
When a new protein slides off the tiny molecular assembly line within the cell, it is nothing more than a droopy string of amino acids, not yet fit for its designated profession.
Only upon being coiled and pleated and braided into its proper three-dimensional conformation will a protein burst to life, seizing up oxygen if it is hemoglobin, shearing apart sugars if it is an enzyme or lashing cells together if it is a stout twine of collagen.


Shawmut Fills A Top Position
The Shawmut National Corporation today named David L. Eyles vice chairman and chief credit policy officer.
Mr.
Eyles, who spent the last four years at the Mellon Bank Corporation in Pittsburgh, is also expected to serve as director of Shawmut National's two principal bank subsidiaries, Connecticut National and Shawmut Bank.


Alex Haley, 70, Author of 'Roots,' Dies
Alex Haley, the Pulitzer Prize-winning author of "Roots: The Saga of an American Family," which chronicled his ancestors' origins in Africa and their passage from slavery to freedom in America, died yesterday at Swedish Hospital Medical Center in Seattle.
He was 70 years old and had homes in Knoxville, Tenn., Norris, Tenn., and Seattle.
He died of cardiac arrest, said a spokeswoman for the hospital, Jane Ann Wilder.
Mr.
Haley's son, William Alexander Haley, said at a news conference in Seattle yesterday that his father had apparently suffered a heart attack and been taken to the hospital by ambulance.
He was scheduled to speak today at the Bangor Naval Submarine Base at Bremerton, Wash., 15 miles from Seattle.


Massachusetts Program to Aid Middle-Class Home Buyers
In a home-mortgage program that a state official said would benefit "the forgotten middle class" and serve as a national model, Massachusetts began to offer fixed-rate mortgages last week that low-to-middle-income residents can more easily qualify to receive.
The Middle Class American Dream program, introduced by the Massachusetts official, State Treasurer Joseph D. Malone, is the first of its kind in the nation, although Connecticut and Pennsylvania have narrower programs.


How Tyson's Conviction Changes the Picture
Is there heavyweight life after Mike Tyson?
That question lingers today in the aftermath of Tyson's trial in Indianapolis.
The jury that found Tyson guilty last night of raping an 18-year-old woman last July, removed boxing's biggest marquee attraction from center stage with its verdict.


Mother Gets Prison Term in Fatal Beating of Boy
A judge yesterday sentenced Shulamis Riegler to 7 1/2 to 15 years in prison for fatally beating her 8-year-old retarded son Yaakov and assailed New York City's child-protection system for failing to protect the boy despite repeated reports of his abuse.
"The warnings were there for three years," said Justice Francis X. Egitto of State Supreme Court as Mrs.
Riegler stood in his Brooklyn courtroom.
"This child should not have died in New York City in 1990."


Not So Fast, Mr. Fernandez
Give the New York City Schools Chancellor, Joseph Fernandez, a B for Bravado.
With Mayor David Dinkins's new budget proposal not even due until April, Mr.
Fernandez made a pre-emptive strike, seeking about $50 million a year from the city and the Municipal Assistance Corporation.
He would use the money for new and enhanced programs, including innovations like a longer school day and longer school year for some students.
Mr.
Fernandez, as usual a forceful advocate for the schools, knows how to capture the imagination.
And no New Yorker can object to his desire for more and better instruction.
But recession-pressed City Hall must weigh the relative importance of education against many other worthy services, like keeping libraries open or providing better foster care and drug treatment.
The Chancellor will have to justify his provocative ideas with a full-scale proposal and details on cost.


Wine Institute Is Accused of Anti-Gay Bias
A San Francisco man has filed a $3 million lawsuit against the American Institute of Wine and Food, claiming he was denied the organization's executive directorship because he is homosexual.
In his suit, Daniel P. Coulter said that during a job interview the chairwoman of the institute's board, Dorothy Cann, told him "that because of his sexual orientation he would be unable to be successful as executive director."


Tyson Found Guilty on 3 Counts As Indianapolis Rape Trial Ends
Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion and one of the world's most recognized figures in and out of boxing, was found guilty tonight of raping an 18-year-old woman last July.
In a verdict handed down almost 10 hours after the case went to the jury, Mr.
Tyson was found guilty on one count of rape and two counts of criminal deviate conduct.


Classical Music in Review
Borodin Quartet
Alice Tully Hall
When sophisticated artists from a far-off place bring their own culture with them, everyone is served.
The Borodin Quartet came to New York on Sunday afternoon in this same spirit, bearing works by Prokofiev, Schnittke and Shostakovich.


The President's Sleeping Pill and Its Makers
To the Editor:
"Implants and Halcion: the Shadow" (editorial, Jan. 24) points out that the Food and Drug Administration depends on information submitted by drug companies in the new drug approval process.
You do not make fully clear, however, that the data submitted by the manufacturers is generated by investigators who are paid by the drug companies.
Typically, these researchers are hired for each specific project but sometimes they are regular employees or paid consultants to the company.
Furthermore, controlled scientific studies of drug safety and effectiveness do not continue over many months or years, as the public tends to believe, but usually only about six or eight weeks.
Long-term safety is monitored more haphazardly, typically through anecdotal reports from the drug companies.


TOP MANUFACTURER OF BREAST IMPLANT REPLACES ITS CHIEF
Trying to gain control over a growing business and public relations calamity, the Dow Corning Corporation, the nation's leading maker of silicone gel breast implants, replaced its chief executive today.
The move came only hours after Dow Corning made public company documents suggesting that some of its officials had been informed that the implants might be hazardous.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
3.93
6.37
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.72
3.72
5.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.80
3.75
5.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.75
6.76
7.63
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.78
7.75
7.96
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.84
9.22
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.75
6.74
7.17
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Accounts
*
Kemper Financial Services, Chicago, to Tatham/RSCG, Chicago, for its advertising account, previously at BBDO Chicago.
Billings were estimated at $8 million to $10 million. *
Furr's Inc., Lubbock, Tex., to Tracy-Locke Inc., Dallas, for advertising, promotions and local marketing for the restaurant chain.
Billings were not disclosed.
The account had been at Levenson, Levenson &amp; Hill Inc., Irving, Tex.


Fernandez Makes 'Grab' For Part of M.A.C. Funds
By proposing to use some of the hundreds of millions of dollars that New York City hopes to tap from the Municipal Assistance Corporation to lengthen the school year, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez has joined the competition for cash the city is not yet assured of receiving.
The M.A.C. chairman, Felix G. Rohatyn, and the Dinkins administration had tentative praise yesterday for Mr.
Fernandez's sketchy notion.
But they said that using some of the M.A.C. money to finance the idea would depend on whether it could help generate long-term savings.


EXECUTIVES
*
Apple USA, Cupertino, Calif., a unit of Apple Computer Inc., named Cheryl Vedoe vice president of product marketing. *
The Broadway, Los Angeles, a unit of Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., named William Podany senior vice president.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a speech by Patrick J. Buchanan attacking President Bush referred incorrectly to the event at which he spoke.
It was a $30-a-plate dinner in Manchester, N.H., not a $430-a-plate dinner.


Tonka Helps Hasbro Net
The toy maker Hasbro Inc. said today that its acquisition of the Tonka Corporation and the revival of some classic toy lines helped push fourth-quarter earnings up 61 percent, to record levels.
Sales were also a record for the year, Hasbro said, but full-year profits were depressed by a $59 million second-quarter charge for the Tonka acquisition and other restructuring.


A Cheap Gun Takes a Precious Life in Brooklyn
The only thing unusual about the gun that the police say killed Ruth Mitchell on Saturday is that it was a rifle in a sea of illegal handguns.
The rest of its story is told with increasing frequency these days as drugs and guns continue to ravage poor and working-class neighborhoods in New York City and across the nation.


How Tyson's Conviction Changes the Picture
Is there heavyweight life after Mike Tyson?
That question lingers today in the aftermath of Tyson's trial in Indianapolis.
The jury that found Tyson guilty last night of raping an 18-year-old woman last July, removed boxing's biggest marquee attraction from center stage with its verdict.


Nintendo Is Ruling Out A New Home in Seattle
After creating a stir in Japan, the Nintendo Company today revised the statements of its president that the company hoped to move its headquarters to the United States.
It said today that while it would run the company's worldwide strategy from Seattle, it would keep a formal headquarters in Kyoto.


Repeat for Blair Gives U.S. Its First Gold of '92
The celebration actually began long before Bonnie Blair made it official, when nearly 50 of her friends and relatives piled onto a double-decker bus outside the Cafe de la Gare for the short trip to the speed-skating oval.
Upon arrival, they learned the event had been delayed an hour, in deference to the bright sun and temperatures in the low 50's, which made the ice too soft for competition befitting the Olympics.
That simply gave Blair a chance to climb into the stands and issue instructions: No screaming until her race began.
Standing at the start line, she needed absolute quiet.


Nubian Treasures Reflect Black Influence on Egypt
IN a race against the rising Nile waters impounded by the Aswan Dam, the world's archeologists joined forces 30 years ago to salvage the monuments, tombs and other remnants of ancient Nubia, a black African culture long overshadowed in history by Egypt but brilliant and innovative in its own right.
The best-known achievement of the international operation was the dismantling and reconstruction safely above the water line of the splendid temple at Abu Simbel, erected by Ramses II in the 13th century B.C.
The temple symbolized the Nubia of familiar reputation: the remote upriver land prey to Egyptian conquests and the source of gold, ivory and slaves that embellished the downriver kingdom of the pharaohs.


How You Can Stop Feeling Helpless About the Homeless
To the Editor:
Your report that many are turning away from the homeless because they are numbed by the severity of the problem (front page, Jan. 20) is off the mark.
Certainly, many feel powerless when they see so many homeless people begging for money and food.
But rather than throw up our hands, many of us are doing something about it.
Thousands of people in hundreds of organizations in New York City are giving time, money and effort to help the homeless, serving meals to the hungry, sleeping over night at shelters, raising the money the government should be providing.
Together we are having an impact.


Tyson Found Guilty on 3 Counts As Indianapolis Rape Trial Ends
Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion and one of the world's most recognized figures in and out of boxing, was found guilty tonight of raping an 18-year-old woman last July.
In a verdict handed down almost 10 hours after the case went to the jury, Mr.
Tyson was found guilty on one count of rape and two counts of criminal deviate conduct.


First Medal for U.S. Team
Bonnie Blair won the 500-meter speed-skating title in Albertville, becoming the first American woman to win gold medals in an event in consecutive Winter Olympics.
Page B11.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Bush Steps Up Campaign as Buchanan Lays Out an Agenda
Criticized by his opponent in the Republican primary for supposedly ignoring New Hampshire's economic problems, President Bush today sought to make his presence felt in the state through long-distance interviews on Manchester radio and television stations.
In telephone interviews from the White House on two morning radio programs, Mr.
Bush promoted his economic and health-care plans.
He was also critical of proposals put forward by some Democrats, as well as by his Republican challenger, the conservative columnist Patrick J. Buchanan, for broader tax reductions for the middle class.
The President said the country "doesn't need these broad proposals to cut everybody's taxes at a time when we've got these enormous deficits."


Problems at White House Persist 2 Months Into New Chief's Tenure
Two months after John H. Sununu's removal, Administration officials and Republican advisers say the organizational and political problems that the former chief of staff left behind still plague the White House.
The new chief of staff, Samuel K. Skinner, has tried to make his mark by smoothing relations between the White House and the campaign and by undertaking a much-advertised reorganization of the White House staff.


A Preview of the Confusion to Come
They call it the Preview Stakes because it's supposed to provide a preview of the 3-year-old colts who are taking early steps on the road to the Kentucky Derby.
But after they staged it on Sunday here at Gulfstream Park, and after three long shots outran three favorites, everybody agreed that the only preview it provided was a preview of the confusion that's likely to reign right up until post time at Churchill Downs on May 2, when the first race of the 1992 Triple Crown series will be run.
It's not that the 3-year-old herd lacks a leader.
It has a leader who threatens to become a legend: Arazi, the Kentucky-bred colt who dazzled in France last year, flew the Atlantic and dazzled in the Breeders' Cup Juvenile in his debut in the United States on Nov. 2.
Then he flew back to France for the winter, won the Eclipse Award as the best of the juvenile bunch and waited for his next appearance in America: in the Kentucky Derby, returning to the scene of his Breeders' Cup triumph.


Clarence Barnes, 85, Author and Illustrator
Clarence A. Barnes Jr., an author and advertising agency art director, died at his home in Manhattan on Feb. 2.
He was 85 years old and also had a home in Edgartown, Mass.
He died of emphysema, his family said.


New Process To Recycle Old Motor Oil
The Lyondell Petrochemical Company said today that it had found a way to recycle used motor oil and other lubricants into gasoline and heating oil.
Many large refiners for years have converted used commercial oils into lubricants or industrial fuels.
But Lyondell seems to be the first to produce what it says is high-quality gasoline from recycled lubricants.


Free-Trade Talks Assessed
Trade negotiators from the United States, Canada and Mexico met on Sunday and today to review progress in talks on a North American free trade pact.
The United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, and her counterparts -- Mexico's Commerce Secretary, Jaime Serra Puche, and Canada's Minister for International Trade, Michael H. Wilson -- refused to discuss specifics of their review.
But a senior American trade official who insisted on anonymity said on Friday that no fundamental differences among the three countries had been resolved, an assertion that none of the three ministers disputed today at a news conference.


Second Medical Procedure Is Performed on Parcells
For the second time in two months, BILL PARCELLS, the former Giants coach, has undergone a non-surgical procedure to unblock a clogged artery.
The procedure was performed last Thursday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
The artery was the same one cleared in December, said Dr.
MICHAEL KESSELBRENNER, the cardiologist who has done both angioplasty procedures.
"No matter what you do, one-quarter to one-third of these recur," he said.


Closing Arguments Conflict on Killing by Teaneck Officer
The jury in the manslaughter trial of a white Teaneck police officer accused of killing a black teen-ager heard sharply contradictory closing arguments today about the events surrounding the shooting and the officer's motives for firing.
In an hourlong summation, the defense lawyer, Robert L. Galantucci, contended that his client, Gary Spath, was threatened by the 16-year-old youth, Phillip Pannell, who had reached into a pocket containing a handgun.
Officer Spath shot to protect himself, Mr.
Galantucci said.


Review/Theater; Washington's Nephew On a Trip Through Time
With rags wrapped around his feet and dirt encrusting his face and clothing, the derelict would provoke any passer-by to cross to the other side of the street.
But when this disreputable-looking man begins to speak, we immediately take notice.
He says he has been in this city since 1861.
As the dates and names begin to tumble, it is soon clear that he is from another era, or at least that is what he believes.
He is, he confides, the nephew of George Washington.
In some strange time trip he has become one of New York's present-day homeless.
What follows in "George Washington Dances," written and performed by David Margulies, is a rodomontade journey through America's past, as recounted by a very vocal oral historian.
The play is at the Ensemble Studio Theater, as part of that company's continuing series In Pursuit of America.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON THE CHARTER -- 10 A.M.
UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM GOVERNING COUNCIL, ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING -- 10 A.M.
And 3 P.M.
SECURITY COUNCIL -- meets at 11 A.M. on the admission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Johnson Makes a Big Point in Style
One of Magic Johnson's unique qualities is his ability to make people feel better, whether they be teammates, opponents, supporters or critics.
Johnson did it again on Sunday, when he capped a memorable performance by being named the most valauble player of the National Basketball Association All-Star Game.


A New Film Distributor Is Planned
At a time when some film companies are going out of business and all are complaining about rising costs, the team that started Tri-Star Pictures Inc., and ultimately took over Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., said yesterday that it planned to start a new motion-picture distribution company.
The pair, Victor A. Kaufman and Lewis J. Korman, will serve, respectively, as chief executive and chief operating officer of the new Savoy Pictures Entertainment.


Mengele an Abortionist, Argentine Files Suggest
The Argentine authorities were either unwilling or unable to bring Nazi war criminals to justice even when they had them in custody, archives made public for the first time today show.
The archives on five Nazi war criminals that were made available by Argentina show a pattern that confirms what many have said for years, that war criminals found a safe haven here and that this country was probably one of the easiest in which to disappear and escape justice.


Silver-Medal Winner Reviews Misfortunes
If Ye Qiaobo of China felt cheated today, she did not say so directly, only that "it's a pity" officials of the speed-skating competition did not allow her to skate again after Yelina Shoushnyakova of the Unified Team impeded her progress during the 500-meter competition.
As the skater in the inside lane through the first half of the race, Shoushnyakova did not yield to the faster Ye, moving in from the outside at the crossover, and they nearly collided.
Ye finished in 40.51 seconds to win the silver medal behind Bonnie Blair of the United States, whose time was 40.33.
Positive Steroid Test
While it was the first medal for China in the Winter Olympics and the first for an Asian woman, it was just another unfortunate incident for Ye, a 28-year-old skater from the Jilin province.


Bear Tackle Recovering
Chicago Bears' tackle STAN THOMAS, the team's first pick in last year's draft, was in good condition yesterday and expecting release from Scripps Memorial Hospital in San Diego today after sustaining a head wound early Sunday morning when someone fired several shots at his car as he and two companions left a nightclub.


Quotation of the Day
"Herb knows he has an eye. It's like the arm of a great pitcher. That's why when he walks into an artist's studio, the artist gives him his best drawing for nothing." -- RICHARD TUTTLE, sculptor, on Herbert Vogel, postal clerk and art collector.  [ B4:1. ]


How Tyson's Conviction Changes the Picture
Is there heavyweight life after Mike Tyson?
That question lingers today in the aftermath of Tyson's trial in Indianapolis.
The jury that found Tyson guilty last night of raping an 18-year-old woman last July, removed boxing's biggest marquee attraction from center stage with its verdict.


Lawyers Clash On Noriega Aid To U.S. Agents
In some of the sharpest exchanges so far in the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, lawyers today clashed repeatedly over the extent, usefulness and motivation of the cooperation the deposed Panamanian leader offered the United States in its war against Colombian drug traffickers.
In four separate rounds of questioning, James Bramble, the Drug Enforcement Administration's top agent in Panama from 1982 through 1984, testified that General Noriega's assistance was incomplete at best and that American agents were repeatedly blocked when they tried to build cases against friends and business associates of the general.


Search for Black Hole
Scientists say they have uncovered new evidence that a great black hole lurks at the center of the Milky Way galaxy: a bubble of hot gas there that is growing by perhaps 200 miles a second.
The bubble, nearly 4 trillion miles across, is apparently being inflated by a powerful wind from a celestial object that was already considered a possible black hole, researchers said.
They said they also detected infrared energy that appeared to be coming from the object, called Sagittarius A*.


An Overdue Correction for Real Estate
To the Editor:
In "The Tinkerer: Mr. Bush's New War, and Paper Sword," your Jan. 30 lead editorial, I believe you are inaccurate and misleading in your comments concerning the portions of President Bush's State of the Union Message that deal with real estate.
You state that "Mr. Bush proposes lavish tax breaks on real estate investors." You state furthermore that "the tax code already subsidizes real estate."


Vyborg Journal; Finns Are Coming, Wistfully. This Was Home.
As he walks the crumbling steets of this ancient city, pursued at almost every turn by young Russians begging for handouts, peddling bottles of black-market vodka or selling religious icons, Per Erik Floman wrestles with the memories he left behind nearly 48 years ago.
Here is the apartment where he was born, and the bank where his mother worked; there, the pond where he skated with friends, and the yellow church where his grandfather was the pastor.
"Ah, if you could have seen it then," said Mr.
Floman, a retired 71-year-old businessman from Helsinki, pausing before the ruins of the old city hall.


Tyson Found Guilty on 3 Counts As Indianapolis Rape Trial Ends
Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion and one of the world's most recognized figures in and out of boxing, was found guilty tonight of raping an 18-year-old woman last July.
In a verdict handed down almost 10 hours after the case went to the jury, Mr.
Tyson was found guilty on one count of rape and two counts of criminal deviate conduct.


Amid Growing Crime, Zurich Closes A Park It Reserved for Drug Addicts
After years of steadily rising crime and other drug-related problems, this city once associated more with banking and solid civic virtue than with marauding groups of addicts has ended its innovative experiment with an open drug market in a public park here.
The smashed windows of a Chanel store and a central branch of Credit Suisse, as well as the shooting of an unidentified man on Thursday, betray the sharp tensions that have stemmed from the closing last week of the Platzspitz, a park where the illicit activities of thousands of drug addicts and dealers were tolerated in recent years in a policy of containment of the drug problem.


CBS Is Fast Out of the Gate
CBS packaged figure skating and downhill skiing Sunday night and recorded a 23.4 Nielsen rating and a 33 share, significantly higher than its Saturday night rating of 14.5 and a 24 share for the opening ceremonies in Albertville, France.
The Saturday night rating was nearly the same as ABC's opening ceremonies telecast for the 1988 Games in Calgary, which drew a 14.4 rating and a 35 share.


Bull Mastiff Is Surprise Finalist at Westminster
In a major upset, a dark-red bull mastiff, Ch.
Mr.
U's Music Man became the first finalist at the 116th annual Westminster Kennel Club show last night.
Before an enthusiastic crowd of 6,700, the powerful 141-pounder was singled out for the blue rosette for working dogs by Alice Downey of Libertyville, Ill., as Westminster opened its two-day run at Madison Square Garden.


Salomon's Renovation Enters New Phase
Salomon Brothers juggled its senior ranks again yesterday in moves that seemed to be aimed at wiping away vestiges of its former management and at lifting the firm's sagging image and morale.
As part of the top-to-bottom renovation that began after a Treasury auction scandal battered the firm's reputation last year, Salomon has retooled its investment banking section and promoted executives from the London and Tokyo offices to the firm's executive committee.


Dr. John Ashmead, 74, Professor; Applied Computers to Humanities
Dr.
John Ashmead, a professor emeritus of English at Haverford College who was a pioneer in the use of computers in humanities research and was also a scholar of Japanese, died on Friday at Bryn Mawr Hospital in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
He was 74 years old and lived in Haverford, Pa.
He died of lymphoma, said his daughter, Theodora W. Ashmead of Haverford.


Times Has Gain in Quarter But Profit Drop for the Year
The New York Times Company reported a sharp rise in fourth-quarter earnings yesterday but said that for all of 1991 its profits were down, as the recession continued to cut into advertising revenue.
The results included various one-time adjustments, including costs linked to a staff reduction and interest expenses on a new printing plant, without which earnings would have risen for the year.


Blunt Words on Ballet From Erick Hawkins
"I'm sure a lot of people are going to be disconcerted by what I say about ballet," Erick Hawkins said with a certain amount of quiet relish, talking of his book of essays, "The Body Is a Clear Place," newly published by the Princeton Book Company.
"But the theory of ballet is wrong, and someone has to say it." He talked happily, too, of "3,000 young kids in San Diego" who had seen one of his company's recent performances, and of a national tour that will take the dancers near Trinidad, Colo., where Mr.
Hawkins was born.
"They're trying to bring some people, about 50," he said, "from my little town, which hasn't grown, I'm sure, since I was a baby."
Mr.
Hawkins, who is 82 years old, would seem to have it made.
His company opens tonight at the Joyce Theater in a one-week engagement filled with recent dances that have established Mr.
Hawkins, long the contemplative poet of modern dance, as a master of hurtling, high-energy dance of the sort generally created by choreographers a quarter his age.


Chess
You can tell more from an opponent's moves than from his face.
Many years ago, in the early stage of a game, my opponent, the Hungarian grandmaster Laszlo Szabo, wrinkled his brow, frowned deeply, shifted in his chair and sighed from time to time.
Young and naive, I supposed that he did not like his position, but I could find nothing wrong with it and, as a kindly move, offered him a draw.
To my astonishment, he snarled, "No." All that face and body language had really meant that he was blissfully agonizing over the problem of how to tear me apart. (After many adventures, the game was drawn.)
But let an opponent advance, retreat and look as though he is going nowhere, and the interpretation that something is going wrong in his thinking is probably true.
That is the time to attack with everything you've got.
And that is just what the Russian grandmaster Boris Gelfand did in his game with his compatriot and colleague Lev Polugayevsky in the second round of the Reggio Emilia International Tournament, which finished on Jan. 6 in northern Italy.


Amateur Brain Surgery
YOU can never be too rich or too thin, or have too much memory in your computer.
Last year a 40-megabyte hard drive and two megabytes on the motherboard may have been plenty, but, as with money, it now seems paltry.
How do you get more?
You can take the computer back to the store, but computers are heavy and fragile and besides, computer shops will charge $50 or more for the job.
At the going mail-order price, that could buy you 10 more megabytes of disk space.
With chips for the motherboard, the proportion of the cost represented by labor can be even larger.


Two Women Are Killed In Crown Heights Home
A young mother and her mother-in-law, their hands and feet bound, were discovered shot to death in their apartment in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn Sunday night in what the police were calling a possible push-in robbery.
A 1-year-old boy, crying but unharmed, was found in the apartment when police arrived.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Agreed to terms with Bill Spiers, infielder, and Angel Miranda, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with Alvaro Espinoza, shortstop, and Melido Perez, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Branson, infielder, and Victor Garcia and Jason Satre, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Agreed to terms with Wally Ritchie and Darrin Chapin, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
Basketball  ational Basketball Association
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Placed Felton Spencer, center, on the injured list.
Activated Tom Garrick, guard, from the injured list.
Continental Basketball Association
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Activated Leon Wood, guard, from the suspended list.
ROCKFORD LIGHTNING -- Traded Scott Meents, forward, to Yakima for Jim Rowinski, forward.


Help From Above for the Crush Below
It is just past 8 A.M. on a crisp winter morning, and Pete Tauriello is effortlessly darting in and out of the metropolitan region's worst traffic jams, all without leaving his tiny, soundproof studio in an office complex here.
His eyes glued to a computer screen crammed with updates on major roadways, Mr.
Tauriello embarks on a rapid succession of live, one-minute broadcasts.
With the push of a button, he tells motorists tuned to radio station WINS that an accident on the Cross Bronx Expressway has shut down all but one lane.


United Air Cuts Back Spending
In the face of persistent recession, United Airlines took a big step back from an ambitious expansion strategy yesterday, announcing that it was cutting its capital spending by $6.7 billion over the next three years and postponing the delivery of new aircraft.
The airline, one of the nation's strongest, had sought to keep its expansion drive going in spite of hard times, but continuing poor traffic and heavy fare discounting forced it to pull back.


Review/Television; Castro's Road of Economic Failures
"The Last Communist" is an unsparing account of the rapid rise and long decline of Fidel Castro and his romantic revolution.
The "Frontline" documentary, at 9 tonight on Channels 13 and 49, uses veteran Castro watchers like Tad Szulc and Georgie Anne Geyer and former Cuban and American officials to explore the qualities that made the dictator an enduring hero of his country and a faded favorite of left-wing intellectuals around the world.
An acquaintance tells of the young Castro's admiration for Mussolini -- not his Fascism but his emotion-stirring Latin style -- and newsreel clips capture resemblances of arm-flailing speechifying.
Mr.
Castro's great years came early, when he led the revolt that toppled Fulgencio Batista, the corrupt Cuban dictator who long enjoyed the support of Washington and accommodated American business interests like the United Fruit Company and the shady characters who ran the country's casinos and brothels.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Iowa; HARKIN DOMINATES STATE'S CAUCUSES
Senator Tom Harkin, as expected, overwhelmed his opponents inthe first test of strength in the 1992 Presidential primary season tonight on his home turf in the Iowa Democratic caucuses.
Since Mr.
Harkin was the favorite son in Iowa, the other Democrats -- Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California -- ceded the state to him.
Because of that the question was not whether he would win but whether he would amass a sizable margin of victory to give his campaign a boost before the more critical New Hampshire primary on Feb. 18.


By Design; Hearts for All Seasons
Are you ashamed to admit you have a black heart?
It shouldn't be such a problem if the one you are referring to has a zipper top, is made of silk shantung and was designed by Paloma Picasso.
This heart is meant to reside in your handbag or pocket all year round as a coin purse.
At $115, it has been flying out of Bergdorf Goodman.
Ms.
Picasso is one of several designers who continually concoct heart-shaped objects, not just as one-shot salutes to this coming Friday.
"The heart is a nice shape in itself," she said.
"It's a modern way to say something sweet."


As Iran Celebrates, Economic Problems Grow
Amid elaborate ceremonies commemorating the 13th anniversary of Iran's Islamic revolution, public anxiety over economic problems is growing after a period of strikes and protests.
But so far, Iranian experts say they do not see a major threat to the fundamentalist Islamic Government, which nonetheless is trying to come to grips with public demands for a greater say in economic and social affairs.


Study May Explain How Eye Achieves Link With Brain
FOR nearly a century, scientists have been trying to understand how developing nerve cells of the eye find their way to their distant destination, the brain.
Now researchers studying embryonic rats have identified a molecule that appears to be crucial to understanding how the eye becomes connected to the brain.
The researchers say their findings also offer intriguing clues to why nerves do not regenerate after injury and why some animals are born blind.


Clinton: The Personal Approach


Another Blue Ribbon for Leo
Leo the Komondor, probably the most imposing and unusual of the 91 returning breed winners from 1991's Westminster, put his white dreadlocks in motion and kept his winning streak alive yesterday by capturing his 260th consecutive best-of-breed blue ribbon.
Ch.
Snokote's Aliyah, who weighs 110 pounds, now has 277 best-of-breed victories.
Three have come at Madison Square Garden, where he shocked his owners, Steve and Alice Lawrence, last year by taking third place in the working group.


Sports of The Times; The 'Animal' In Mike Tyson
THIS is what Mike Tyson once said about himself in an interview about five years ago:
"When I fight someone, I want to break his will. I want to take his manhood.  I want to rip out his heart and show it to him. My manager tells me not to say those things, but that's the way I feel. People say that's primitive, that I'm an animal. But then they pay $500 to see it. There's so much hypocrisy in the world.


BRIEFS
*
Adage Inc., West Chester, Pa., a maker of computer-graphics terminals, said its directors had approved the repurchase of up to 500,000 common shares. *
Comarco Inc., Anaheim, Calif., a computer systems concern, received two contract extensions from the Army, valued at over $7 million.


CHRONICLE
It may have been more than 40 years since the Opera Ball was held in Prague, but partygoers had no difficulty catching on to some customs of the 1990's at the newly resuscitated event.
A crowd of more than 1,600 members of the former aristocracy, the socially ambitious and the simply curious gathered in the Smetana Theater in the center of the city on Saturday for the black-tie ball, the first to be held since January 1948, one month before the Communist takeover of Czechoslovakia.


GERMAN ON TRIAL IN 1931 SLAYINGS
The longtime head of East Germany's dreaded secret police, Erich Mielke, now a shadow of the man who enthusiastically repressed dissent in his country for more than 30 years, was brought to trial today on charges of murdering two policemen in 1931.
Slumping in his chair in the courtroom, occasionally moaning and calling out appeals like "I want to go home," Mr.
Mielke, who is 84 years old, appeared seriously ill.
Judge Theodor Seidel said he would decide later whether Mr.
Mielke was truly sick or simply pretending.


Kerrey: Promoting Vision and Courage


Topics of The Times; Targets in Miami
Cuban exiles, waging a peculiarly ugly campaign against The Miami Herald, have called in with death threats and vandalized the newspaper's vending machines.
Cursing Herald distributors as "Communists," the vandals clearly take their cues from Jorge Mas Canosa, chairman of a major exile organization.
Mr.
Mas Canosa accuses The Herald's Spanish-language sister newspaper of "manipulating information just like Granma," the official organ of Fidel Castro's regime.
In Miami, those are fighting words.
Cuban exiles behaving like thought police have bombed art galleries, trashed shops and threatened entertainers.


Careers; Special Training For M.B.A.'s
CORPORATE managers have been complaining that new holders of master of business administration degrees lack communication skills, both oral and written.
Often they have to be trained on the job.
The complaints are not new, and almost every graduate business school dean has heard them.
Some have taken action, providing special training, either required or optional.
For example, the Amos Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth College was one of the first to require a course in communications a decade ago.


Side With Refugees, Not Thugs
Even now, knowing that the United States has slammed its doors on their outstretched fingers, desperate Haitians flee their homeland in rickety boats.
With seeming similar desperation, the Bush Administration forces them onto Coast Guard cutters and drags them back home.
How are Americans to account for this cruelty?
Surely not out of any misunderstanding of the facts.
If there were any doubt, it has now been put to rest by interviewers for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
They tell of "double-backers" who fled a second time after being jailed, beaten and threatened with death after the U.S. forcibly returned them to Haiti last year.


Tuberculosis Could Become Major Threat, Top Scientist Warns
The top Federal AIDS scientist, Dr.
Anthony S. Fauci, raised the possibility today that the spread of drug-resistant tuberculosis might become as serious a public health threat as AIDS unless a major new research effort was begun against tuberculosis.
Although the immediate tuberculosis threat is chiefly to people infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, participants at a meeting here expressed alarm that the spread of tuberculosis from such patients also threatened the health workers who care for them and ultimately healthy people who are not infected with H.I.V.
Many health-care workers are infected with the virus.


Classical Music in Review
Takacs Quartet  Carnegie Hall
The Takacs Quartet, a Hungarian ensemble that now conducts an international career from its residence at the University of Colorado, represents the mirror opposite of the tight, precise and somewhat dashing young quartets that came out of postwar America.
In place of wondrous intricacy, there is an expansive indeterminacy, a broadness that draped itself loosely around the Haydn D-major Quartet from Opus 76 on Friday night.
At its best, the Takacs exhibits a musicianly relaxation; at its weaker moments of ensemble playing, it can sound a little blowzy, especially when resonating in a 2,800-seat hall.


Siberia Is a Failed Cliche: Rich in Oil, Not 'Oil Rich'
Few towns in the world are wealthier than this one, if wealth is measured in oil coming out of the ground.
But instead of fine homes and shops, downtown Raduzhny is block after block of eight-story apartment buildings whose outer walls are drab gray concrete slabs, giving the impression that Raduzhny is a huge, rundown housing project.
The town's leading citizen, Anatoly Sivak, lives in one of these buildings.
Because he is director general of the oil company that runs this Siberian community, his apartment is less cramped than most, and he has three telephones to connect him to his many lieutenants.
They are a necessity for his company, which pumps 160,000 barrels a day from the swamps and fields around Raduzhny, a production level that matches that of all of Ecuador.
He Who Would Give Orders
But little of the wealth stays in this town, 1,000 miles east of Moscow.
Mr.
Sivak is maneuvering to change that.


Corrections
An article yesterday headed "SoHo Journal," about the Children's Museum of the Arts in Manhattan, referred erroneously to the painter Willem de Kooning.
He is alive.


Bill Passed to Bar Raise for a Health Chief
In a bit of high-stakes brinkmanship, the State Senate passed legislation tonight that would prohibit Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo from using a state-controlled corporation to pay the salary increase needed to hire Dr.
Mark R. Chassin as the new State Health Commissioner.
The last-minute maneuver threw Dr.
Chassin's confirmation process into at least temporary disarray.
After the vote, aides to the Senate's Republican majority leader said tentative plans to hold a vote on Dr.
Chassin's confirmation at a Senate Health Committee meeting on Tuesday would almost certainly be scrapped.


As Food Airlift Starts, Baker Hints U.S. Might Agree to Role in a Ruble Fund
An international airlift with food and medical aid for the former Soviet Union got under way today, with the aim of providing critical short-term help as well as hope for the newly independent countries struggling through the winter, the organizers said.
Shortly before the airlift, which is being called Operation Provide Hope, began in a hailstorm at Rhein-Main Air Base outside Frankfurt, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, who attended the opening, hinted for the first time that Washington might be prepared to take part in a longer-term, multibillion-dollar stabilization fund for the Russian economy.


Corrections
An article on Friday headed "Pittsburgh Journal," about local filmmaking, referred incorrectly to a film now being made.
The film, "Hoffa," is a 20th Century Fox property, not an HBO film.
The article also misattributed a quotation praising Pittsburgh as a film location.
It was from Ron Bozman, a producer of "Silence of the Lambs," not from Chris Brigham.
Mr.
Brigham, a film production manager, had no connection with "Silence of the Lambs."


Business Scene; American Oilmen Wary on Russia
WITH oil exploration and production in decline in the United States, American companies are stepping up these activities abroad.
But companies that risk millions elsewhere in the world on new wells -- many of which come up dry -- are showing unusual reluctance to invest in Russia's rich fields.
Several reasons are offered by American oil executives.
One, of course, is political instability.
Another is high Russian taxes on oil exports.
A third is the huge costs of roads and pipelines to ship the oil and housing and schools for workers, which companies are expected to finance.
Finally there is a gnawing doubt: Even though the commonwealth needs foreign capital and oilfield technology now, will it still need the help a few years from now?


In Pairs Event, Favorites Seem Good as Gold
A long and cherished Olympic tradition is expected to continue Tuesday night with the likely victory by two former Soviet athletes in the pairs competition of figure skating.
After leading 17 other couples through the original program Sunday night, Natalya Mishkutienok and Artur Dmitriyev of the Unified Team of athletes from five former Soviet republics are strong favorites to become the eighth consecutive pair from their homeland to win the gold medal.


Cellular Pact By Motorola And Telecom
Two of the world's largest telecommunications companies, Northern Telecom Ltd. of Canada and Motorola Inc. of the United States, said yesterday that they planned to market their equipment jointly to large operators of cellular telephone systems, many of which have been buying equipment from rivals like A.T.&amp; T. and LM Ericsson A.B. of Sweden.
The move is intended to strengthen the competitiveness of both companies, which had competed directly in some kinds of digital switches, the giant multimillion-dollar computers that can field thousands of calls.


ALBERTVILLE: Sports of The Times; Speed Skating Into Olympic History
EVERY four years they move in and out of the American sports consciousness as quickly as they move on their long blades.
Their celebrity is usually measured in their time on the ice.
Even when Eric Heiden flashed through Lake Placid in 1980 with a record five gold medals, he soon seemed to vanish.


Pearle Confirms Report on Review
Pearle Vision Centers has put its $42 million account into review, a spokeswoman in Dallas said yesterday, confirming a report in Adweek.
For the review, which will begin within three months, five agencies will be asked to make presentations, she added.
The identities of the shops were not disclosed, other than that the incumbent agency, Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago, would be included.


Yankees Sign Melido Perez and Espinoza
While the Mets finished their preparations for a salary arbitration hearing with Kevin Elster today, the Yankees eliminated two-thirds of their remaining arbitration cases yesterday, reaching agreement with Melido Perez and Alvaro Espinoza.
The activity of the New York teams came on a day when Dann Bilardello, a catcher with the San Diego Padres, learned he had lost his case and wound up with the smallest salary in arbitration since 1986.


Honeywell Plans Fund
Honeywell Inc. said yesterday that it intended to organize a fund to help entrepreneurs and owners of small businesses fight foreign competitors who infringe their patents and other intellectual property.
To start the fund, Honeywell, based in Minneapolis, said it would donate $1 million from the $96.3 million award it won on Friday in a patent infringement case against the Minolta Camera Company and would seek support from other large American companies that depend heavily on technological innovation.


Market Place; A Drug Flunks, a Stock Collapses
Another biotechnology stock ran into Wall Street turbulence yesterday, again reminding investors that what goes up can come down, and much faster.
Shares of MGI Pharma Inc. lost more than half of their value after the company said it had halted clinical trials of its most important drug.
The move came only a week after the company issued a statement saying all was going well in tests of the drug, MGI 136.
The drug is intended to make chemotherapy treatments easier to take for some cancer patients.


The President's Sleeping Pill and Its Makers; Depression Worsened
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 20 front-page article:
In 1985, while visiting England with my wife, I was introduced to Halcion by my British physician.
I was in good health, except for severe nerve pain in my left hand.
We were enjoying our stay, but I was unable to sleep well because of the pain.
My English doctor had treated me for minor reasons over 20 years on previous visits.
My prescribed dosage of Halcion was two .25 milligram (blue oval) tablets at bedtime.
It worked.
Soon I was enjoying restful sleep.
But it took more and more to do less and less.
Before many weeks, I upped the dosage.
Five months later, when we returned to the United States, I was taking 12 to 15 a day to relieve stress and pain, and to sleep.


Another Spill Knocks Girardelli Out of Another Event
Helmut Girardelli first had some choice words for race officials.
Then he turned to address his 28-year-old son, Marc.
"It's dangerous, be careful," Helmut Girardelli said.


Once Bitten, Twice Shy: A Bouvier Advances Warily
His owners say their dog must have read the page in the American Kennel Club's book of breed standards that describes the bouvier as resolute.
Ch.
Galbraith's Iron Eyes is, in fact, so resolute that he returned to Madison Square Garden yesterday with his muzzle held high.
This despite the shock there last year, when he went into Westminster as the undisputed national champion but departed without even winning his group, never mind going best-in-show.


Holiday Tomorrow
Tomorrow is Lincoln's Birthday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal and state open, city closed.
POST OFFICES: Regular service.
BANKS: Option to close.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION: No pickups, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Open.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Open.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses, subways, Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North on regular schedules.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal open, state closed, local option to close.
POST OFFICES: Regular service.
BANKS: Option to close.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit on regular schedules.
CONNECTICUT GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal open, state closed except for unemployment offices, local option to close.
POST OFFICES: Regular service.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: New Haven Line on regular schedule.


On Making Double Plays, Not War
To the Editor:
Fay Vincent, commissioner of baseball (and anyone else inclined to engage in ill-informed Japan-bashing), would be well advised to study the century-old history of the game's arrival in Japan.
Undergraduates in courses on the history of sport at American colleges and universities have learned much about the origins of baseball in Japan from Prof.
Donald Roden's study (American Historical Review, June 1980).
Between 1896 and 1904, the baseball team from Tokyo's First Higher School, known as Ichiko, played 10 games against squads of United States sailors.
The Japanese students won nine times, scoring 230 runs against 64 for the sailors.


Fiery Nationalism Drove Venezuelan Plotters
A violently nationalist ideology inspired army officers who mounted an unsuccessful coup last week and came close to killing the President of Venezuela, the second-largest net supplier of oil to the United States after Saudi Arabia.
According to documents made available here, the officers drew on writings by 19th-century Venezuelan military leaders to advocate redeeming the "lost" 20th century by wiping away "the so-called democratic experiment."


U.S. Expands Its Lead in the Rate of Imprisonment
The United States, which imprisons a larger share of its population than any other nation, has widened its lead over the second-ranking country, South Africa, a private research and advocacy group said today.
The group, the Sentencing Project, which is based in Washington, said there are 1.1 million inmates in American prisons, a 6.8 percent increase from 1989 to 1990.
That gives the United States an incarceration rate of 455 people per 100,000, while the South African rate declined by 6.6 percent and is now 311 per 100,000, according to a report by the Sentencing Project based on statistics provided by various countries.


DINKINS PLAN GIVES MINORITY CONCERNS MORE IN CONTRACTS
Asserting the time had come to correct decades of rampant discrimination in the city's procurement process, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced a sweeping policy initiative yesterday to award more than 20 percent of city contracts to businesses owned by minorities or women.
Mr.
Dinkins said that he had instructed city agencies to develop a program to increase the amount of business the city gives to companies owned by minorities and women.


In Switch, F.D.A. Offers Looser Rules on Labels
The Food and Drug Administration, which last November issued proposals to make food labeling less confusing, offered some alternatives yesterday that critics contend would make regulations more confusing.
The new proposals, published in the Federal Register, would eliminate some of the earlier proposal's stringent criteria regarding label claims like "less sodium" or "reduced fat."


Even Without the C.C.C.P., It Skates Like a Soviet Team
Here, in an arena in Meribel, the Big Red Machine is making its last stand with flashing steel blades, young legs and patchwork quilts for uniforms.
These Olympic hockey players skate like the old Soviet Union.
They move the puck like the Soviet Union.
They still beat up on inferior competition, as they did again today during an 8-1 victory over Norway.


Toney-Tiberi Rematch
The International Boxing Federation has ordered a rematch between middleweight champion JAMES TONEY and DAVE TIBERI after Toney's split-decision victory over Tiberi on Saturday in Atlantic City.
"Under ordinary circumstances we don't encourage rematches," said BOB LEE, the I.B.F.'s president.
"But we felt someone was short-changed here because of the wide disparity in scoring on the part of the judges."


Police Seek Suspect In 3 East Side Rapes
The police said yesterday that they were seeking a man who they believe committed at least three rapes on the Upper East Side of Manhattan since last month.
All of the victims were single young women who lived alone in apartment buildings in the 70's between Park Avenue and First Avenue, the police said.


U.S. Settles for Moral Victories, Not Medals, in Luge
For Duncan Kennedy and Robert Pipkins, the day was a mixed blessing.
For Wendel Suchow, it was surprisingly good.
This was the second and last day of men's singles in the Olympic luge competition on this mountain course.
It was a day with positives for the Americans and medals for the Germans and the Austrians.


Thornburgh Is Seen as Likely to Take a U.N. Job
President Bush wants former Attorney General Dick Thornburgh to take a new top post at United Nations overseeing the organization's budget and administration, United Nations and American officials say.
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Ghali, asked Mr.
Bush to find an American to fill this job when he attended the summit meeting of the Security Council here last month and the President then offered the job to Mr.
Thornburgh, the officials said.


Play It Again . . . and Again . . . and Again . . .
The Winter Olympics via CBS and TNT is a visual exercise in time travel confusion, an experience like that of Billy Pilgrim, the protagonist in Kurt Vonnegut's novel "Slaughterhouse-Five," who was "unstuck in time," shifting back and forth uncontrollably between the past and present.
Keeping track of time is difficult.
Nearly everything is on tape because of the six-hour difference between France and the Eastern time zone.


CHRONICLE
Developments in Eastern Europe will reverberate in a different way at the 10th anniversary benefit dinner for the Institute for East-West Security Studies tonight at the Pierre hotel in Manhattan.
The institute is an independent public policy and educational organization with headquarters in New York, and.
Since 1990, it has operated a European Studies Center at Stirin Castle, near Prague.
The institute provides theoretical and practical assistance to the former Communist countries in such areas as minority rights, privatization, market economics and security.


Haitians Face Perils of Sea To Reach U.S.
For the second time in two days, this Coast Guard cutter today pulled alongside a sailboat full of Haitians, who clambered up a swaying rope ladder to safety, but to an uncertain future.
The 31 refugees, including a one-legged man on crutches and another who could only crawl because of severe deformities of the hips and spine, were given medical care, food and water before being turned over to an agent of the Immigration and Naturalization Service for preliminary questioning.


On My Mind; Letter To Two Men
Since this column is written on the chance that it will come to the attention of President Bush or Secretary of State James Baker, it is addressed directly to them, with hope.
Dear Mr. President and Mr. Secretary,


Corrections
A front-page article on Feb. 3 about the prospects for department stores misidentified the United States' largest department-store operator.
It is the May Department Stores Company, with more than 300 department stores and annual sales of more than $8 billion.


Mixed Day For Stocks; Dow Up 19.68
Stocks closed mixed yesterday, as blue-chip issues rose on the strength of oil stocks and secondary issues faded on weakness in the biotechnology sector.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 19.68 points to close at 3,245.08, but the American Stock Exchange and Nasdaq composite indexes fell.


Dialogue: The Coming Showdown; It's Israel's Choice
For 25 years, every President, Democratic and Republican, has opposed Israel's policy of building settlements in the territories occupied in the 1967 war.
But Israel has refused to curtail or halt the settlements.
America's opposition has been largely diplomatic and rhetorical -- until now.
Both countries can no longer paper over this fundamental disagreement.
More than 300,000 Jews from the former Soviet Union have gone to Israel in the last two years.
Israel desperately needs our help to absorb them and the hundreds of thousands expected in the next few years.


INSIDE
Harkin Wins at Home
Senator Tom Harkin led in the Democratic caucuses in Iowa and seemed certain to get a boost by obtaining a record vote.
Page A23.
Airlift to Former Soviets
An international airlift of food and medical aid for the former Soviet Union began, with the aim of giving short-term help and hope.
Page A14.
Retreat by United Airlines
With recession lingering, United pulled back from an ambitious expansion, cutting spending and postponing delivery of new planes.
Page D1.
Zurich Closes Drug Park
After years of crime and other drug-related problems, Zurich has ended its experiment with an open drug market in a public park.
Page A10.
Alex Haley Dies
The author of the Pulitzer Prize-winning "Roots," which chronicled his family's history in slavery and freedom, was 70 years old.
Page B8.


Q&amp;A
Frozen Falls
Q.
Does a waterfall ever freeze?
A.
To split semantic hairs, a frozen waterfall is by definition no longer a waterfall, said Fred Gadomski, a meterorologist at Pennsylvania State University, but it is possible for the water in some falls to freeze over so that the flow stops.
A large waterfall, with a large amount of water moving fast downhill, is harder to freeze than a comparable amount of water in a still pond, he said, because of the internal friction the flow generates.


Classical Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony
92d Street Y
Stephen Albert's "Distant Hills" arrived in a new version with orchestra at Saturday night's New York Chamber Symphony concert led by Gerard Schwarz.
The settings are from Joyce's "Ulysses": the amorous reveries of Leopold and Molly Bloom set side by side by Mr.
Albert.
The music is in the composer's easygoing style, where cozy harmonies, colorful instrumentation and a generally untroubling rhetoric place immediate audience involvement at a premium.


2 Institutions Solve Common Problem
AGNES is 96 years old.
She lives in Room 109 of a Westchester County nursing home.
Most days Agnes sits quietly in her wheelchair.
She reads.
She snoozes.
She stares.
She waits.
Then comes Tuesday. Agnes is up. She dresses. She eats. She's alert. She's ready.


Viking Aide Joins Giants
DICK REHBEIN has joined the Giants as tight ends coach, the club announced yesterday, replacing MIKE POPE, who is now with the Cincinnati Bengals' coaching staff.


Topics of The Times; The Almost Justice
Paul Freund, who died last week at 83, was one of the ablest legal scholars who never sat on the U.S.
Supreme Court.
Yet from his cluttered office and packed classroom at Harvard Law School, he quietly and authoritatively interpreted the Constitution.
Through four decades, future lawyers and judges, and sitting justices and legislators, learned his vision of the high court -- and what made its giants, like Louis Brandeis and Charles Evans Hughes, his own revered heroes.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; At Last, Iowans Have Their Say, But With a Quiet Voice This Year
"He doesn't care whose toes he steps on," said Gertrude Harter.
"I like the things he stands for," said Judith Fitzgibbon.
"I like his support and commitment for women."


Sports of The Times; The 'Animal' In Mike Tyson
THIS is what Mike Tyson once said about himself in an interview about five years ago:
"When I fight someone, I want to break his will. I want to take his manhood.  I want to rip out his heart and show it to him. My manager tells me not to say those things, but that's the way I feel. People say that's primitive, that I'm an animal. But then they pay $500 to see it. There's so much hypocrisy in the world.


Bond and Note Prices Are Mixed
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were mixed in slow trading yesterday, as dealers continued preparations for three days of quarterly refunding auctions, beginning with the sale today of $15 billion of new three-year Treasury notes.
Traders said there was light selling by dealers of 10-year and 30-year securities to make way for the $21 billion worth of new long-term notes and bonds to be sold later in the week.


Patterns
Let the Tags Hang Out
It used to be the ultimate fashion faux pas, but now it's kind of a fad: wearing clothes with the hangtags on.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Esprit de Corp., a San Francisco sportswear company, completed a $90 million private offering of 8.27 percent unsecured senior notes, due 1999, through Paine Webber Inc. and Citicorp Securities Markets Inc.
Common Stock *
Williams Cos., Tulsa, Okla., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for 3.5 million common shares.
No underwriter was named by the company, an energy-transportation and telecommunications concern.
Ratings *
Phillips Petroleum Co.'s $4 billion in unsecured and subordinated debt has been placed on Credit Watch with positive implications by Standard &amp; Poor's, which noted that the company had filed for an initial public offering of 51 percent of the common stock of its gas-gathering and processing subsidiary.
This, S.&amp; P. said, will give Phillips cash proceeds that could be used to reduce debt.
Current ratings are BBB on Phillips's senior unsecured debt and BBB on the subordinated debt. *
Union Pacific Corp.'s $200 million of 7.875 percent notes, due 2002, part of a $500 million shelf registration filed a year ago, has been given an A rating by Standard &amp; Poor's.
The company, whose major business is operating the large Western railroad, will be helped by workers' buyouts, which will lower costs, and by other operating efficiencies, S.&amp; P. said.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Savard Scores 400th Goal  Denis Savard scored three goals, including the 400th of his career, as the Canadiens beat the Vancouver Canucks, 8-3, in Montreal to win for the first time in four games.
Savard was parked at the side of the net on a power play when he one-timed Petr Svoboda's pass behind Kirk McLean 18 minutes 31 seconds into the first period for his 400th goal, which prompted a standing ovation from the crowd of 16,838 fans.
Savard, in his 12th National Hockey League season and his second with Montreal, became the 37th player in N.H.L. history to record 400.
It was his 12th career three-goal game. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Florida State Triumphs  Bob Sura and Douglas Edwards each scored 25 points and No. 23 Florida State survived a record-setting 3-point effort by North Carolina State to gain an 87-79 victory last night in Raleigh, N.C.
North Carolina State broke its own Atlantic Coast Conference record for 3-pointers by hitting 18 against the Seminoles, attempting 40.
Florida State has a record of 16-6 over all and 8-4 in the A.C.C.
The Wolfpack is 9-13 and 3-6. (AP) Pittsburgh 77, Villanova 68: Eric Mobley scored 15 points and was among five Pittsburgh players who scored in double figures last night as the Panthers won at Fitzgerald Field House in Pittsburgh.
Sean Miller, Ahmad Shareef, Chris McNeal and Orlando Antigua each added 12 for Pitt (15-9, 7-4 Big East).
Lance Miller led Villanova (8-12, 5-6) with 21 points. (AP) TENNIS  Easy Victory for Curren  Kevin Curren scored an easy first-round victory yesterday at the Federal Express International tournament in Memphis.
Curren of Austin, Tex., advanced to the second round of the $780,000 event with a 6-2, 6-4 victory over Peter Doohan of Australia. (AP)


Flash Floods Inundate Los Angeles Area


Youth Serves Boston U. In Beanpot Tourney Final
A young Boston University team that has constantly surprised its veteran coach, Jack Parker, won the championship game of the Beanpot Tournament tonight with a 5-2 victory over Harvard at Boston Garden before a capacity crowd of 14,448.
Mike Prendergast, one of eight freshmen skating for the Terriers, scored two goals and so did Mike Bavis, a junior center.
Prendergast, from South Boston, also had two goals disallowed when officials' whistles stopped play as he shot.


Secession Fever Strikes Queens
They just want an even break, they say in Queens -- cleaner streets, a little respect, the old fire brigade back, that idyllic time when "the city" with all its pleasures and problems meant Manhattan, across the river, and Queens was a semisuburban refuge a short subway ride away.
So when three Queens lawmakers introduced legislation in Albany last week proposing that Queens follow the path of Staten Island and consider secession from New York City, they touched a chord among residents suspicious that their borough gets second-class treatment.


U.S.-Russian Explorers To Ride Polar Ice Floe
RUSSIAN and American scientists have begun setting up Antarctica's first drifting research station, on an ice floe in one of the least-known bodies of water on earth, the Weddell Sea.
The station, with 10 American and 10 Russian scientists, plus 12 support personnel, will drift for the next four months, making a broad range of scientific observations regarding that sea and the floor beneath it.
On Feb. 4, the Federov, a Russian icebreaking supply ship, aided by mapping of the ice cover done by satellites in earth orbit, pushed its way deep into the ice-clogged Weddell Sea and found a floe 1.7 miles long, a mile wide and seven feet thick.


For Central Park Band Shell, a 90-Day Reprieve
Wanted: New home for a 69-year-old, neo-classical, limestone band shell.
Once answered to the name "Temple of Music." Available for immediate inspection in Central Park.
Please reply within 90 days.
Such was the effect -- if not the exact wording -- of a vote yesterday evening by New York City's Art Commission, which moved to delay the impending demolition of the Naumburg Bandshell long enough to consider proposals for removing and reassembling it elsewhere.


On Being British and Being Marooned
Considering the dearth of sunshine in Britain, it is perhaps not hard to understand why "Desert Island Disks," a radio program that asks celebrities to imagine themselves marooned on a desert island, is such a beloved radio institution here.
Each Sunday afternoon, as Britain prepares for its traditional Sunday roast, "Desert Island Disks" floats on, heralded by Eric Coates's "By the Sleepy Lagoon" and the cries of herring gulls.
The show, begun in 1942, was created by Roy Plomley, who served as its host until his death in 1985.
Last month, the BBC's Radio 4 program celebrated its 50th year on the air.


Japanese May Raise Auto Prices
Some Japanese auto makers said today that they were considering raising their prices in the United States.
Such a move could prove costly to consumers, but analysts said it could provide an opportunity for the Big Three to win back market share and perhaps relieve some trade tensions.
Executives of the American sales arm of the Toyota Motor Corporation said they were considering a price increase "due to the continued appreciation of the Japanese yen, which has risen 9 percent since last summer." A stronger yen erodes the value of profits made in dollars.
Toyota has already raised the base price of its redesigned 1992 Camry sedan by almost 18 percent from the 1991 level, to $14,368.


Albertville
SKATING PROWESS IS INTACT
The land that was the Soviet Union produced the two top pairs in figure skating.
U.S.
VICTORY IN HOCKEY
Ray LeBlanc, a 27-year-old journeyman, may have found his way out of the minors in a 2-0 victory over Germany.
ITALY'S ALPINE ADVENTURE
Josef Polig and Gianfrano Martin were as surprised as anyone to find themselves with medals in the Alpine combined.
SportsWednesday, page B9.


Track Federation Urges End To Gene Test for Femaleness
The world's leading track and field federation is urging athletic organizations to abandon the genetic tests that have been used for 25 years to prove that female athletes are really women.
The only fair test, it says, is simply to look at an athlete's genitals.


Fewer Ad Students For 4th Straight Year
The number of students studying advertising across the country has declined for the fourth consecutive year, according to a study by two professors at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge.
The study was conducted for the 1992 edition of "Where Shall I Go to College to Study Advertising?" by the professors, Billy I. Ross and Keith F. Johnson.
The study, which compiles data on advertising curriculums at 111 schools, counted 21,581 students last year, down 2.8 percent.


Elster, in Arbitration, Goes to Bat for Raise
Kevin Elster and the Mets argued their salary differences before an arbitrator yesterday, but Elster seemed to have little chance, if any, of winning.
Not only was the salary he sought more than double his 1991 salary, but the results of other cases involving shortstops this off season appeared to be working against him.
Elster's agent, Steve Linett, tried to convince Robert Creo, the arbitrator, that the shortstop should receive $1.35 million this year after a season in which he earned $625,000 while hitting .241 with 6 home runs and 36 runs batted in.
Al Harazin, the Mets' general manager, argued for $760,000.


Stocks Mixed, With Dow Rising 6.49
Stocks were mixed yesterday, as investor attention shifted from earnings to interest rates, and from secondary issues to cyclicals.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 6.49 points, to 3,251.57.
Investors cautious ahead of the Treasury's quarterly refunding that began yesterday with an auction of new three-year notes, moved to the sidelines as the Fed again declined to signal an easing at its normal intervention time.


The Pop Life
The Cloudy Lush Sound
Everything about the band Lush is blurry and insubstantial.
Female voices, piled up in layers, drift in and out of waves of indistinct guitar sounds.
As reserved as it sounds, with no single part daring to present itself clearly, the music isn't in any way minimal; instead, the clouds and fuzz come from an accretion of details.


Judge Dismisses Jury in Ex-Mayor's Trial
A Federal judge has dismissed the jury selected for the corruption trial of a former Waterbury mayor and seven associates, after lawyers for the defendants complained that confidential tax-return information had been used by the prosecution to screen prospective jurors.
The defense also argued that prosecutors had improperly excluded prospective jurors who were black or Hispanic.


Nets Tag Along for a While But Bulls Make Plans to Split
Things looked good for the Nets tonight for three quarters.
It didn't last.
It rarely does for teams that visit Chicago.
Beginning the fourth quarter with a 14-2 run, the Bulls broke open a close game and dumped the Nets, 133-113, at Chicago Stadium.


The Holy Land Is Losing Its Christians, Leading to Fears of Vacant Shrines
In the land of its birth, Christianity is gradually losing its followers.
Over the last four years, a growing number of Palestinian Christians have emigrated from East Jerusalem and the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, leaving a rump total of some 45,000 in a region that is home to nearly 4 million Israelis and 1.7 million Palestinians.


Tyson's Critics Stepping Forth
Matt Baranski was asleep at his home in upstate New York when his wife, Kate, awoke him Monday night to give him the news that Mike Tyson had been found guilty of raping an 18-year-old woman who was a contestant in a beauty pageant in Indianapolis.
Baranski, who was a cornerman of Tyson's when the fighter turned pro in March 1985, heard the news with a mixture of sadness and regret.
But given his familiarity with Tyson -- their relationship went back to the early 1980's, when Tyson was an amateur -- Baranski was not surprised that things had ended badly for him.


Washington Talk; Bush's Life-Long Credo: Low Capital Gains Tax
In his State of the Union Message, President Bush covered the gamut of domestic policy issues -- education and welfare, housing and health, crime and energy and trade.
For the most part, the treatment seemed perfunctory.
"We must do something about crime and drugs," he said at one point, without saying what he had in mind to do.
"I ask you tonight to fund our H.O.P.E. housing proposal," he said at another.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY PLEA BARGAIN IN ST. JOHN'S CASE
The last defendant in the St.
John's University sexual-assault case interrupted his trial to plead guilty to sharply reduced charges, then admitted that he had done virtually everything he had originally been accused of.
The plea, in an emotional court session, brought to an end a case that had rocked the 19,000-student St.
John's, the nation's largest Roman Catholic university, and emerged as one of a series of nationally publicized cases that underlined the legal elusiveness of charges of acquaintance sexual assault.
B3.
PROFILE OF A SUSPECT
The unemployed 23-year-old man charged with the brutal slashing murder of a Hasidic woman in Crown Heights had finished a six-year prison term for robbery in October, the authorities said.
They added that on several occasions over the last eight months, the suspect, Romane LaFond, had assaulted women in similar but less violent incidents.
B3.
A CALL FOR CHANGE
A City University report calls for wide-ranging changes in the supervision of student-sponsored events at City College as a result of a deadly crush that killed nine people at a celebrity basketball game in December.
The report also underlines criticism of the college's president, Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston.
B4.
PROTEST AT COLUMBIA
In a day that hinted briefly at the turmoil of the 1960's, students at Columbia University blockaded doors to the adminstration building for two hours, forcing professors to remain inside, then scaled a wall and occupied an office to protest a plan to limit financial aid to needy students.
B3.
REGION OF JUSTICES AND JUSTICE
A gubernatorial task force concluded that New York State's method of electing Supreme Court justices probably violates the Voting Rights Act because of its "uniformly poor" record of placing black, Hispanic and female lawyers on the bench.
By warning that the state's judicial system would not survive a legal challenge, the report served as both a confession and a call for change.
A1.
TEANECK OFFICER IS ACQUITTED
An all-white jury acquitted Gary Spath, a white police officer from Teaneck, in the fatal shooting of Phillip Pannell, a black teen-ager, in April 1990.
After deliberating for almost nine hours, the jury returned its verdict, finding the officer not guilty of manslaughter.
A1.
HANGING ON AT CITY HALL
For the seconde time in five days, Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City won a stay of a judge's order that he leave office immediately because of his conviction on Federal fraud charges.
B5.
IT'S TOUGH BEING A COMMUTER
The siege of the Ronkonkoma tow trucks started Monday, when railroad and township officials made good on a longstanding threat to tow away illegally parked cars that cover the lawns, block exit lanes and protrude haphazardly around the Ronkonkoma railroad station.
But the officials got more drama than they bargained for.
After 100 cars were towed on Monday, 80 commuters who returned Monday night in sub-freezing temperatures shouted, screamed and tried to storm an improvised impound yard to retrieve their vehicles.
B5.
About New York . . .
B6 Neediest Cases . . .
B2


Is Brushing Up and Down a Drudge? Try Brushing Upscale; The Teeth Have a Say
FOR those with a sleek-tech bathroom and a hankering for design eclat, ACESS TOOTHPASTE, made in Tokyo "with European Herbs" ($8.50 at Katagiri in Manhattan), is Japanese chic at its coolest.
The brand's silver-striped, blue, white and black package is decorated with silhouettes of chamomile, rhatania and myrrh plants.
A salmon-hued paste that smells like model cement, it has a curious bite with an exotic, though not unpleasant, aftertaste.
Acess would be unattractive to those who have just finished restoring their six-bedroom Victorian house.
Much better would be the quasi-Victorian green, orange and white packaging of ORIGINAL EUTHYMOL TOOTHPASTE , "A Scientific Dental Preparation" from England ($7.50 at Bigelow Chemists).
It's like something you might see in Victoria magazine.
The pinkish paste looks like Pepto-Bismol and tastes a bit like it too, if Pepto-Bismol had been mixed with an infusion of herbs designed to assault the mouth with its "unique strong taste," as the box says.


CHRONICLE
MARTIN KLEIN, who won a court battle to obtain an abortion for his comatose wife three years ago, acknowledged yesterday that he is filing for divorce, according to The Associated Press.
"Life changes, tragedy happens," he said. "It's all very complicated."
Mr.
Klein, 37 years old, of Upper Brookville, L.I., commented after BILL BAIRD, an advocate for abortion rights, announced at a news conference that he had learned Mr.
Klein was ending the 10-year marriage.


BAKER OPENS TOUR OF THE CAUCASUS
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d began a tour of the Caucasus and Central Asia today, pledging the United States to establishing diplomatic relations with Moldova, after the leader of that former Soviet republic vowed to uphold democratic principles.
After meeting in Kishinev, Moldova, with President Mircea I. Snegur, Mr.
Baker flew to the capital of Armenia.
In Yerevan, Mr.
Baker had dinner with President Levon Ter-Petrosyan, who told the Secretary that Azerbaijan, where Mr.
Baker will be going Wednesday, has not yet met the criteria for United States diplomatic recognition because of its harsh treatment of the Armenian minority in Nagorno-Karabakh, a region of Azerbaijan populated by Armenians.


Help Russia. Help Ourselves.
Beneath the veneer of competence, the Bush Administration's strategy toward the former Soviet Union is a dangerously ineffective response to the greatest democratic awakening and market-opening opportunity of the 20th century.
Just as Americans recognize how the Administration has mismanaged the economy, they must now comprehend how its hesitant foreign policy jeopardizes our national security and economic interests.
Boris Yeltsin recently told Congressional leaders that Russia is "in a fight for survival" and had only three months to turn things around.
Without more international aid, he said, there would be "an explosion."


Sports of The Times; Fame Itself Was on Trial With Tyson
MIKE TYSON must now be sentenced as if he were any other man, but there is a broader issue than one man being convicted of rape:
There is considerable doubt about whether Tyson's young accuser would have been in that hotel room that night if Mike Tyson had not been a celebrity.
Are other women paying attention?


Topics of The Times; Mike Tyson, Rapist
Athletes have groupies.
So do rock stars and politicians.
And so, as any observer of the college lecture circuit can attest, do poets.
Mike Tyson, then, is only one of many men to have been made attractive, however improbably, by fame.
The young Rhode Island woman who found herself in bed with Mike Tyson last summer, however, wasn't there because she wanted to share a carnal moment with a celebrity.
She was there because she had no choice.
Mike Tyson, an Indianapolis jury said this week, is a rapist.


Life Beyond Tomba On Italy's Alpine Unit
In an event almost impossible to score and made difficult to witness today by a steady snowfall, it was appropriate that the winners of the gold and silver medals were two virtually unknown guys from Italy.
The Italian men's Alpine Olympic team roster is supposed to, in effect, consist of Tomba, Tomba, Tomba -- as in Alberto, the flamboyant giant of the slalom.
Josef Polig and Gianfranco Martin, who were as surprised as anyone to find themselves on the medal stand of the men's Alpine combined, are not expecting to stop street traffic, the way Tomba can, when they return home.
Facing the news media after the race, they were, at times, almost sheepish.


Mitterrand Modifies Library Design
After President Francois Mitterrand personally selected the design for France's new national library 30 months ago, the architects, librarians and other experts who fiercely campaigned against it knew very well he would have the last word.
After all, with the glass pyramid at the Louvre Museum, the ultra-modern Bastille Opera and the dazzling-white Grande Arche de la Defense already in place, the Bibliotheque de France -- the world's largest library -- was intended to be the final architectural monument to Mr.
Mitterrand's tenure in office.


Free Ukraine's Nationalism: Will Pride Become Prejudice?
In a crowded pedestrian tunnel under Kiev's main square, two middle-aged men started making music, with a concertina and a bird whistle improvised from a strip of cellophane.
Some of the songs were religious.
Others were of Ukrainian freedom.
About 100 people gathered around the musicians, and finally a man and a woman in their early 60's began to waltz and polka to the tunes of independence as the crowd cheered and people took turns singing solos.


The Endless (1996) Campaign
What a difference a quadrennium makes: At this juncture in 1988, Iowans had been marinated in politics.
Representative Richard Gephardt of Missouri, after stalking the state for months, had surely earned his narrow victory in the famous Iowa caucuses.
Michael Dukakis and the other Democrats had probably shaken every hand twice.
The early scrambling made it seem, as in every election since 1972, like an Endless Campaign.
Not this year.
The Iowa caucuses, 1992-style, pumped up all the tension of a limp blimp.
That's not meant to minimize Senator Tom Harkin's achievement.
Even as a native son, he had to work to win 78 percent of the precinct delegates, a margin that reduced his rivals to reading very tiny tea leaves indeed.


Are the Canucks Really for Real?
As the last 60 seconds of regulation time ticked down against the Islanders late last week, Vancouver goalie Troy Gamble tried to leave his net to make way for an extra Canuck attacker.
There was only one problem: The Canucks weren't trailing; the score was tied, only Gamble didn't know it.
No damage was done, but some players might have been benched for a long time after such a faux pas.
Not Gamble.
In the next game he was a third-period mop-up man for starter Kirk McLean as the Canadiens beat the Canucks, 8-3, here on Monday night, one of the most embarrassing defeats of the season for the surprisingly successful Canucks.


I.B.M. Speeds Up Sales Plan For 5 Mid-range Mainframes
I.B.M. said yesterday that it would start selling five new models of its mid-range mainframe computers, one to four months earlier than it had planned.
The new machines are based on the same design as the International Business Machine's most powerful ES/9000 Model 820 and Model 900 mainframes, but have smaller processing capacities.
They will expand the line of computers sold to government agencies and large corporations for uses ranging from accounting to handling networks of automated teller machines.


State of Political Rhetoric Should Trouble Us; New Enemies?
To the Editor:
President Bush, in his State of the Union Message (front page, Jan. 29), again sets up straw men to demolish with his rhetoric.
Consider his words:
"We are going to lift this nation out of hard times inch by inch and day by day, and those who would stop us had better step aside."


INDIA IS PRESSED ON ATOM PROJECT
Strategically adrift after the collapse of the Soviet Union and in need of economic and technical assistance from industrial powers, India is coming under increasing international pressure to place its nuclear program under comprehensive safeguards.
An announcement by officials in Norway last week that they had finally obtained documentary evidence of secret Indian purchases of Norwegian heavy water from Romania in 1986 is expected to touch off new interest in India's nuclear program, which is now assumed by arms experts to have a large military component despite New Delhi's assurances to the contrary.


Tyson Case May Not Yield Lesson
Mike Tyson's rape conviction is unlikely to change what many people see as an entrenched attitude of privilege and power that has given some athletes the belief that they can take what they want and usually with no consequence.
That was the view expressed by many people in and out of sports yesterday upon learning that one of sports' most recognizable figures was facing the possibility of spending the next decade of his life in prison for raping an 18-year-old woman last July.


Elvis Presley, as a Pop Culture Icon, Deserves to Be on a Stamp
To the Editor:
I find it amusing and ridiculous that in "Nothin' but a Hound Dog Idea" (Op-Ed, Jan. 27) Ralph Schoenstein thinks it necessary to condemn the United States Postal Service for selecting Elvis Presley to commemorate on a stamp.
It seems unlikely that Presley's face on a stamp could have any effect -- adverse or otherwise -- on Mr.
Schoenstein's three daughters or today's youth.
Young people barely know who he was.
On the other hand, for the youth of yesterday, for my generation, seeing Elvis on a stamp would be somewhat vindicating, and a pleasant reminder of happy days gone by.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; OLD QUERIES GREET TSONGAS ON CLIMB
Paul E. Tsongas barely had time today to savor his surprise front-runner status before facing a round of renewed questioning about his health, his political strength outside New Hampshire and his ultimate ability to be elected.
At a news conference here, where a group of women endorsed him because of his support for the right to choose an abortion, the former Senator from Massachusetts joked about the sudden increase in his press coverage and about his climb in the polls.


Court Begins Process of Setting Tyson's Sentence
While Mike Tyson's lawyers predicted today that they would win a reversal of his rape conviction, the Probation Department here began taking steps toward recommending what sentence he will receive March 6.
Mr.
Tyson, the 25-year-old former heavyweight champion, arrived at the City-County Building here this morning for a pre-sentencing interview with a probation officer around the same time that the woman he was convicted of raping was arriving at the airport to return to her home in Rhode Island.


Hearing for Dykstra
LENNY DYKSTRA of the Philadelphia Phillies appeared briefly in court in Media, Pa., yesterday and was placed in a first-offender program for his drunken-driving arrest last May.


Guinness Peat's Net at Record
Guinness Peat Aviation, the world's largest aircraft leasing concern, today announced record third-quarter profits but gave no news on when it might float the company on the world's stock markets.
Guinness Peat said its net profit for the quarter ended Dec. 31, 1991, was $73 million, up 32 percent from the previous year.


Senior Sets Points Mark
CASEY KUTNER, a senior at the Dwight-Englewood School in Englewood, N.J., scored two goals and an assist in a 7-6 loss to Newark Eastside yesterday to bring his career totals to 228 goals and 377 points.
That surpassed the career points total of 375 accumulated by JAMES DOWD, who before this season held the national high school record for career goals with 186 and was second in assists with 189.
Dowd played for Brick Township High School from 1983-87.


Review/Theater; Play About AIDS Uses Fantasy World To Try to Remake the World
"To the memory of Carl -- because I cannot sew," reads the Playbill dedication of Paula Vogel's new play, "The Baltimore Waltz," at the Circle Repertory Company.
Who Carl is we can only imagine, but can there be much doubt about what kind of memorial Ms.
Vogel would like to sew for him?
Her play is about an elementary-school teacher named Anna (Cherry Jones) who learns that her brother, a young San Francisco librarian named Carl (Richard Thompson), is terminally ill.
Anna's response is to sweep her brother and herself into a fantasy world -- a crazy-quilt patchwork of hyperventilating language, erotic jokes, movie kitsch and medical nightmare -- that spins before the audience in Viennese waltz time, replete with a dying fall.
The result is a dizzying evening at several levels, and the fact that "The Baltimore Waltz" is performed without an intermission did not prevent several Circle Rep subscribers from walking out at a critics' preview.
This is not only a rare AIDS play written by a woman but also a rare AIDS play that rides completely off the rails of documentary reality, trying to rise above and even remake the world in which the disease exists.


Panel Pushes For Investing In the Future
A mayoral task force committee is calling for a sharp increase in the amount New York City spends on its economic future and a fundamental shift in the way those funds are invested.
The panel's report, which reflects a consensus in a group that includes real-estate developers, business executives and union leaders, argues that unless such changes are made in the city's policies, New York "will experience a painful, long-term economic decline."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Edberg Begins Quest  Top-seeded Stefan Edberg, who is seeking to regain the world's No. 1 ranking he lost to Jim Courier, beat Sergi Bruguera of Spain, 6-4, 4-6, 6-4, yesterday in the opening round of the Donnay Indoor Championship in Brussels.
Patrick McEnroe also advanced by defeating Andrei Cherkasov, 6-4, 7-6 (7-4).
Boris Becker, seeded third, needed only 66 minutes to defeat Jonas Svenson of Sweden, 6-4, 6-0. (AP)


Sports of The Times; Fame Itself Was on Trial With Tyson
MIKE TYSON must now be sentenced as if he were any other man, but there is a broader issue than one man being convicted of rape:
There is considerable doubt about whether Tyson's young accuser would have been in that hotel room that night if Mike Tyson had not been a celebrity.
Are other women paying attention?


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire; Cuomo Backers Plan Late TV Drive
With as many as half the potential voters in the Democratic Presidential primary here describing themselves as undecided, supporters of Mario M. Cuomo said today that they would launch a sizable television campaign on Thursday following a speech by the New York Governor on economic issues at Harvard University on Wednesday.
Mr.
Cuomo's long-scheduled speech at the John F. Kennedy School of Government has attracted widespread attention because of the unsettled political situation here and the write-in campaign being waged on his behalf.


Suspect in Crown Heights Killing Was Released From Prison in October
Several times over the last seven months, the unemployed 23-year-old man charged in the stabbing murder of a Hasidic woman in Crown Heights entered homes or assaulted women in similar but less violent incidents, according to the police and allegations by neighbors.
Leah Kopel, 35, who lives near the man, Romane LaFond, on President Street said in an interview yesterday that he followed her 4-year-old son into her living room with a screwdriver in his hand last August and asked for water.
Mrs.
Kopel said she escorted him out.
Twenty minutes later, she said, he returned and tried to knock down the door.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Democratic Race Grows Fiercer In Last Days in New Hampshire
Elbows were flying in the Democratic primary race today.
In a rough new phase of the New Hampshire campaign, there were sharp attacks, emotional radio and television ads, last-minute image shaping and in every camp a keen recognition that unpredictable New Hampshire was living up to its reputation as the days ticked down to the Feb. 18 primary.


CRAFT DISCOVERS CHANGE IN JUPITER
The Ulysses spacecraft, traversing the region of space dominated by Jupiter's magnetic field, has found marked differences in the turbulent environment there since the last spacecraft visit 12 years ago.
Scientists reported yesterday that Ulysses had discovered that the planet's region of magnetic influence, or magnetosphere, pulsates in and out and is now almost twice as extensive as it was when two Voyager spacecraft surveyed the region in 1979 and 1980.


CUNY Report Urges Shifts In Running Student Events
A City University of New York report released yesterday calls for wide-ranging changes in the supervision of student-sponsored events at City College in the aftermath of a deadly crush that killed nine people at a celebrity basketball game in December.
The release came as a report by Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown found no impropriety by the police captain and the rest of the police contingent outside the gym.
The Commissioner put all of the blame on the organizers, college officials and the Emergency Medical Service.
Nevertheless, the captain, Daniel Carlin, was removed on Monday as executive officer of the 34th Precinct in northern Manhattan and transferred to a post in the Organized Crime Control Force.


Tyson Case May Not Yield Lesson
Mike Tyson's rape conviction is unlikely to change what many people see as an entrenched attitude of privilege and power that has given some athletes the belief that they can take what they want and usually with no consequence.
That was the view expressed by many people in and out of sports yesterday upon learning that one of sports' most recognizable figures was facing the possibility of spending the next decade of his life in prison for raping an 18-year-old woman last July.


U.S. Network Is Planned For Cellular
The GTE Corporation and three regional Bell companies have announced plans to form a nationwide mobile telephone network that customers could use to send and receive cellular calls anywhere in the country.
Industry analysts said the move, announced Monday, appeared to be an attempt to play catch-up with McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., which, with 1.3 million subscribers, is the nation's largest cellular company.
McCaw announced plans last fall to link its system with that of the Southwestern Bell Corporation to form the nationwide Cellular One service.


Democrats Try to Foil Bush's Tax Agenda
As President Bush urged House Republicans to stick with him on his "short-term" economic growth package today, Democrats set the political stage to force them to vote against other parts of his plan.
At a meeting at the White House, Mr.
Bush told Republican members of the tax-writing Ways and Means Committee that the country wanted action on a cut in taxes on capital gains from 28 percent to 15.4 percent, on faster depreciation for new investments and on various steps to encourage home buying.
Action on the other proposals in his State of the Union address and budget request could come later, he said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  CHARITY BEGINS IN MOSCOW
The American-led airlift of international aid this week is nurturing grassroots charities in Moscow long forbidden under Soviet rule.
A1  FREED FROM THE GULAG
They might be the last bit-players from old spy thrillers: the Spy, the Missile-Targeter, the Cypher-Breaker, the Disgruntled Academic.
What united them was that all had turned on the police state they had served, all were convicted of treason and all were released last Friday under a Russian amnesty.
They were described as the last political prisoners of the dreaded Gulag.
A8  BAKER IN THE CAUCASUS
Secretary of State Baker began a tour of the Caucasus and Central Asia by promising to establish diplomatic relations with Moldova after the President of the tiny former Soviet republic vowed to uphold democratic, free market principles.
Mr.
Baker then flew on to Yerevan, the capital of Armenia.
A9  Quayle ends a turbulent European tour, warning about free trade.
A15  FEW CHRISTIANS IN HOLY LAND
In the land of its birth, Christianity is gradually losing its followers.
In recent years, a growing number of Palestinian Christians have emigrated from East Jerusalem and the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, leaving only about 45,000.
A3  Shin Bet chief is questioned on Palestinian who died in custody.
A13  In Iraqi Kurdistan, television is a morale booster.
A12  INDIA PRESSURED OVER THE BOMB
Strategically adrift after the collapse of the Soviet Union and in need of economic assistance, India is coming under increasing international pressure to place its nuclear program under safeguards.
A7  Guarded optimism that Chinese moderates are gaining.
A11  LIBYA TRIES TO COOL THINGS OFF
Libya is campaigning hard to persuade the American and British Governments to back off their demand for the extradition of two Libyan intelligence agents indicted in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103.
The most recent twist is a report that Colonel Qaddafi intends to announce the disappearance and possible kidnapping and execution of the two suspects to eliminate pressure for their extradition.
A5  Randburg Journal: The homeless, apartheid's vexing legacy.
A4  For now, Supreme Court won't block forced returns of Haitians.
A6  National A16-22, D25  DEMOCRATIC ELBOWS FLY
A week before the New Hampshire primary, the Democratic Presidential race entered a tough new phase.
Washington was attacked by Governor Clinton, who was the object of a swipe by Senator Harkin, who also attacked former Senator Tsongas, who was basking in the glow of his status as up-and-comer.
A1
New gains for the Tsongas campaign are bringing old questions.
A21  Cuomo supporters have undertaken a television campaign.
A21  In New Hampshire, new evidence of voters' high-mindedness.
A20  MOBILIZATION IN THE BUSH CAMP
In a sign of concern over the Buchanan challenge, the President has abandoned plans to ignore it and is expanding his schedule of appearances in New Hampshire.
A20  UNCLE SAM'S GOLD
While gold-mining has changed substantially since 1872, the Mining Act has not.
Under the law, which was originally intended to encourage settlement of the West, companies now take many millions of dollars in gold from public land but pay the Government nothing in royalties.
A showdown over the law is approaching in Congress, the latest battleground in the debate over public-land use in the West.
A1  THE PEACETIME WAR
Washington Memo: The Soviet Union and its military threat may be gone, but Capitol Hill is ringing with echoes of the old days.
Indeed, there are several signs that a number of lawmakers will try to restore to the Pentagon budget the money for weapons, no longer favored by the military, that are made in the legislators' districts.
D25  NEW DEADLINE ON OZONE DAMAGE
Responding to new evidence that the earth's ozone shield may be weakening over parts of the country, the President directed American manufacturers to end by Dec. 31, 1995, virtually all production of chemicals that destroy it.
A18  WHERE TO PUT THE AIRPORT?
Chicago's Mayor has staked lots of political capital on his plan to have a third Chicago-area airport situated within the city's borders.
Three alternative sites in rural Illinois have already been rejected by a site-selection committee.
The Mayor is now trying to conquer the only other contender, Gary, Ind.
A16  Rolling Hills Estates Journal: The curse of the peacocks.
A16  The police questioned Dahmer four times during his death spree.
A16  Education Page A23  BIAS IN THE CLASSROOM
Researchers at Wellesley found that school was still a place of unequal opportunity in which girls face discrimination from teachers, textbooks, tests and their male classmates.
A1  Metropolitan Digest, B1 CHANGING JUDICIAL MAKEUP
A gubernatorial task force said that New York's method of electing Supreme Court justices probably violates the Voting Rights Act because of its record of placing few black, Hispanic and women lawyers in judicial robes.
A1  TEANECK OFFICER ACQUITTED
A white police officer was acquitted of fatally shooting a black teen-ager in Teaneck, N.J., in a case that set off unrest in the racially mixed city in April 1990.
After the all-white jury, which deliberated about 8 1/2 hours, announced its verdict, supporters of the officer cheered and relatives of the slain youth erupted in anger.
A1  Neediest Cases B2  Business Digest, D1  Sports B8-16  GENETIC TESTING CHALLENGED
The world's leading track and field federation says that looking at genitals, not genetic testing, is the only fair test to determine if female athletes are really women.
A1  The Living Section C1-10
French food for the Olympics.
C1  Worry and love, hand in hand.
C1  Simple luxuries: toothpaste.
C1  Health Page C12
Personal Health: value of adjuvant therapy after breast surgery.
Obituaries D24  Arts/Entertainment C14-20
Theater: "The Baltimore Waltz" at Circle Repertory.  C15  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25
Editorials A24  Industrial policy as slogan.
Endless (1996) campaign.
Radicalizing Algeria.
Topics: Haley and Tyson.
Letters A24  Anna Quindlen: The good guys.
A25  Michael Mandelbaum: Bill Clinton and the draft.
A25  Jory Farr: The Nashville anthem.
A25  Richard A. Gephardt: Help Russia.
Help ourselves.
A25


Tyson's Critics Stepping Forth
Matt Baranski was asleep at his home in upstate New York when his wife, Kate, awoke him Monday night to give him the news that Mike Tyson had been found guilty of raping an 18-year-old woman who was a contestant in a beauty pageant in Indianapolis.
Baranski, who was a cornerman of Tyson's when the fighter turned pro in March 1985, heard the news with a mixture of sadness and regret.
But given his familiarity with Tyson -- their relationship went back to the early 1980's, when Tyson was an amateur -- Baranski was not surprised that things had ended badly for him.


Eating Well
FEW Americans know that a high-fat, low-fiber diet may promote breast cancer, a disease that afflicts one out of nine women.
Perhaps it is because public health groups do not find the evidence definitive enough to start a public education campaign.
In a nationwide survey of 509 women over the age of 18 that was conducted last fall, only 20 percent said it might be possible to reduce the risk of breast cancer by eating a low-fat or high-fiber diet.
Most of the respondents, confusing detection with prevention, mentioned mammograms, self-examination or a doctor's examination instead.


Court Begins Process of Setting Tyson's Sentence
While Mike Tyson's lawyers predicted today that they would win a reversal of his rape conviction, the Probation Department here began taking steps toward recommending what sentence he will receive March 6.
Mr.
Tyson, the 25-year-old former heavyweight champion, arrived at the City-County Building here this morning for a pre-sentencing interview with a probation officer around the same time that the woman he was convicted of raping was arriving at the airport to return to her home in Rhode Island.


Industrial Policy as Sloppy Slogan
The Presidential candidates have turned
industrial policy
into a meaningless mantra.
What they seem to mean is singling out high-tech industries for Federal assistance.
But which industries?
Bob Kerrey wants to support "high-value-added" industry.
Bill Clinton proposes steering production toward "high-wage" skills.
Paul Tsongas calls for investing in "economically critical" industries.
Even Pat Buchanan, conservative Republican, talks of targeted aid.


A Gulag Breeds Rage, Yes, but Also Serenity
They were presented as the last political prisoners of the dreaded Gulag.
But when they told their stories, it was more as if the Kremlin had released the last bit-players from an old spy thriller: the Spy, the Prison Guard, the Missile-Targeter, the Cypher-Breaker, the Disgruntled Academic.
The stories were as different and as intriguing as their former trades -- one had tried to hijack a plane, one wandered across to China and a year later came back, one spread disinformation in California.


Public &amp; Private; The Good Guys
You have to wonder, watching the videotape of four police officers beating Rodney King for an audience of their peers, how the injuries would have later been explained.
Would Mr.
King's broken leg, smashed teeth and fractured skull have been put down to a slip-and-fall in a holding pen, a fracas with other prisoners or an unsuccessful attempt to flail his way out of the back seat of the patrol car?
No matter.
An amateur cameraman captured in grainy detail the kicks and the nightstick blows.
Defense lawyers for the cops, whose trial began last week in Los Angeles, say that they will prove that what happened immediately before the camera opened its unforgiving eye justified the beating.
From what I've seen, this would be possible only if Rodney King had been ten Rodney Kings, each armed with an Uzi.


ALBERTVILLE


CHRONICLE
The artist and graphic designer PETER MAX said that whenever he meets RONALD REAGAN, the former President says the same thing, "Peter, I love your colors." Mr.
Reagan will have another opportunity to say it tomorrow when Mr.
Max goes to the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, Calif., to donate a painting of the Statue of Liberty.
It will not be the first time he has painted the statue for the Reagans.
In 1981 he was asked by NANCY REAGAN to paint the statue during the Fourth of July celebration at the White House, he said yesterday.
He painted six renditions of the statue that day.
The work he is taking to the library encompasses elements of all six, he said.


Dogs Seek Diversion as Owners Fret
While the owners and handlers at Westminster tried to control expectations, nerves and tempers, the actual prima donnas of this ultimate canine competition seemed unaware of blue ribbons and loving cups.
The dogs had their day and left the fretting to their human caretakers.
The bullmastiff dreamed of chocolate chip cookies, the chow chow of chicken, the Bouvier of ice cream; and the spirited wire fox terrier, confined to her cage, recharged her batteries for one more command performance, which turned out to be the one that closed the two-day show.


Corrections
The Metropolitan Almanac in the Weather Report yesterday misstated the net number of degrees by which the temperature has been above normal in New York this year.
Through Monday, the figure was 110.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
3.87
6.26
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.73
3.72
5.85
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.81
3.80
5.86
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.78
6.75
7.63
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.78
7.78
7.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.88
8.85
9.22
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.75
6.75
7.17
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Is Brushing Up and Down a Drudge? Try Brushing Upscale
AND now, at a specialty store near you, regard the leading-edge indicator of consumer chic in America, the brilliant new vehicle for environmental correctness, health consciousness and graphic self-expression: toothpaste.
Toothpaste?


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Alex Haley, the author of "Roots," misstated the year of his birth in some copies.
It was 1921, not 1924.


Bridge
One of the world's greatest women players died Saturday in London.
She was Fritzi Gordon, who won three world titles and seven European titles, and who twice captured Britain's Gold Cup, equivalent to America's Vanderbilt Teams.
Gordon was born in Graz, Austria, in 1916 by her own account but probably much earlier.
She learned bridge from her brother, Hans Leist, married Paul Gordon, and all three came to England as refugees shortly before World War II.
By the end of the war she was a world-class player, and became an automatic selection for British women's teams for the next three decades.
She was one of the first women to become a grandmaster of the World Bridge Federation.


Book Notes; About Dead Sea Scrolls, Deception and Blurbs
How the Dead Sea Scrolls were suppressed is not the only act of deceit associated with "The Dead Sea Scrolls Deception," by Michael Baigent and Richard Leigh, which was published in England last year by Jonathan Cape and is being published in this country now by Summit.
On the back cover, under a headline announcing praise for the book, there is a blurb by Hershel Shanks from the Biblical Archeology Review saying, "Baigent and Leigh write clearly and know how to tell an exciting tale." The problem is that the one compliment is from a clearly negative review, in which Mr.
Shanks says that though the authors write with flair, their basic thesis -- that the Vatican is suppressing publication of the scrolls for fear they will undermine Christian doctrine -- is "hogwash" and "ludicrous."


Quotation of the Day
"This latest report presents the truth behind another myth -- that boys and girls receive equal education. The wealth of statistical evidence must convince even the most skeptical that gender bias in our schools is shortchanging girls -- and compromising our country." -- ALICE McKEE, president of the American Association of University Women Educational Foundation.  [ A1:1. ]


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Drexel Burnham Lambert sued hundreds of former employees to recover more than $250 million in bonuses paid shortly before the company filed for bankruptcy in early 1990.  [ Page D1. ]
Honeywell insists that its $96 million award in a patent infringement case against Minolta is a vindication of American technological prowess.
But Minolta sees the case as a lesson in American industrial timidity.  [ D1. ]
Toyota and Honda are considering raising prices, which could be costly to consumers but may help the Big Three.  [ D1. ]
Goodyear Tire reported its best quarter in nearly four years.
Analysts gave much credit to its new chairman.  [ D1. ]
GTE, Nynex, Ameritech and Bell Atlantic plan to form a nationwide mobile telephone network like McCaw's.  [ D4. ]
I.B.M. will sell five new mid-range mainframe computers one to four months earlier than it had planned.  [ D4. ]
Craftmatic was prohibited from conducting what Massachusetts authorities called deceptive advertising.  [ D4. ]
Microsoft said Apple was seeking $4.37 billion in damages in its copyright infringment suit involving Windows software.  [ D5. ] The Economy
President Bush's passionate support of a lower capital gains tax has been a lifelong credo.
Washington Talk.  [ D1. ]
Alan Greenspan told bankers meeting in Texas that he would not rule out reducing interest rates further.  [ D2. ]
Democrats are arranging things so that Mr.
Bush cannot set the legislative agenda for his economic growth package.  [ D8. ]
An advisory panel drafting a strategy to help the American semiconductor industry has shut itself down.  [ D5. ]
A new set of rules that simplifies accounting for corporate income taxes might help earnings for many companies.  [ D22. ]
A Dinkins task force is calling for a sharp increase in the amount New York City spends on its economic future.  [ B1. ]
President Bush directed manufacturers to stop making virtually all chemicals that destroy ozone by Dec. 31, 1995.  [ A18. ] International
Bankruptcy administrators for Maxwell Communication hope to sell most of its minor non-U.S. assets within two months.  [ D18. ]
Business Technology
A quirk of nature discovered by Louis Pasteur may help create more potent drugs, chemicals, flavors and fragrances.  [ D7. ] Markets
Stocks were mixed, as investors focused on interest rates.
The Dow average gained 6.49 points, to 3,251.57.  [ D8. ]
The Treasury's new three-year notes were sold at an average yield that was the lowest in 27 years.  [ D15. ]
The dollar closed higher as expectations of another cut in interest rates subsided.
Gold prices rose slightly.  [ D16. ]
Wheat futures plunged their daily limit, as the speculation that had driven prices to an 11-year high suddenly broke.  [ D16. ] Today's Columns
A year after Ed McCabe and Patrick Hillman started McCabe &amp; Company, the advertising agency has yet to live up to its expected potential.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D1. ]
Economists say the real cost of the savings and loan debacle is a half-trillion dollars measured in lost output and the decline in national income.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Cable television stocks have languished because of the specter of tougher regulations.
Market Place.  [ D8. ]


Relaxation and Exercise Plan May Slow Pace of AIDS Virus
RELAXATION and aerobic exercise may strengthen the immune system and lengthen the lives of people infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, researchers say.
In a new study at the University of Miami Medical School, men who practiced relaxation techniques or who did regular aerobic exercise had higher blood levels of CD4 cells, the immune system cells that are attacked by the AIDS virus.
And two years later, those who had practiced the relaxation and exercise more often stayed healthier longer.


Randburg Journal; The Homeless Ask, Is Racism Lodged in the Heart?
Simon Skosana, a black laborer with four children, and Peter Bantock, a white schoolteacher with two children, share the dream of an affordable home in a stable, prospering neighborhood.
But Mr.
Skosana, who is 41 years old, and Mr.
Bantock, 26, have found themselves on opposing sides of a controversy that grows more volatile as South Africa moves through the twilight of apartheid.


Ralphs Grocery
The Ralphs Grocery Company, which earlier this month reorganized in a move related to the reorganization of its former parent company, said it planned to consider a capital restructuring.
Ralphs, the third-largest grocery chain in Southern California, was formerly a unit of the Campeau Corporation.
Campeau has been reorganized into a new company, the Camdev Corporation.
Under its reorganization, Ralphs Grocery stock is now owned by the Ralphs Holding Company.


Tyson's Critics Stepping Forth
Matt Baranski was asleep at his home in upstate New York when his wife, Kate, awoke him Monday night to give him the news that Mike Tyson had been found guilty of raping an 18-year-old woman who was a contestant in a beauty pageant in Indianapolis.
Baranski, who was a cornerman of Tyson's when the fighter turned pro in March 1985, heard the news with a mixture of sadness and regret.
But given his familiarity with Tyson -- their relationship went back to the early 1980's, when Tyson was an amateur -- Baranski was not surprised that things had ended badly for him.


Frustrated, Chip Group May Disband
A Government advisory panel charged with drafting a strategy to help the American semiconductor industry issued its final report yesterday and prepared to shut itself down, its numerous recommendations having gone largely unheeded.
"I expect that we will go out of business," said Ian Ross, the chairman of the National Advisory Committee on Semiconductors and the former president of Bell Laboratories, the research division of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.
"We don't really see that there is a role for NACS ongoing, under the present circumstances."


Panel Looks to Future
A mayoral task force in New York is calling for a sharp increase in the amount of money the city spends on its economic future.
Page B1.


Separating 'Mirror' Molecules for Better Drugs
A quirk of nature known to chemists since the mid-19th century has become the focus of one of the hottest areas of applied biochemistry, creating the prospect of purer and more potent drugs, agricultural chemicals, flavors and fragrances.
Researchers are seeking to harness and refine the tendency of many molecules to appear in two forms that are mirror images of each other.
The relationship of these so-called stereoisomers, first noticed by the French scientist Louis Pasteur in 1848, is commonly compared to a person's hands: just as a right hand does not fit into a left glove, these mirror-image isomers usually react quite differently from each other when exposed to other chemicals or placed in the human body.


PANEL CHALLENGES METHOD OF PICKING NEW YORK JUSTICES
A gubernatorial task force concluded today that New York's method of electing State Supreme Court justices probably violated the Voting Rights Act because of its "uniformly poor" record of placing black, Hispanic and female lawyers on the bench.
By warning that the state's judicial system would not survive a legal challenge, the report sent a message to state officials that the Federal courts would reorganize the state's judicial system if the Legislature and the Governor did not do so first.


Hunting for Votes in New Hampshire


Home Resales Rise 4.7%
Home resales rose 4.7 percent, and prices jumped in the fourth quarter.
Sales of existing homes rose in every region over the 1990 period, the National Association of Realtors reported today, adding that demand, especially among first-time buyers, was spurred by lower mortgage rates.
The national median price of an existing house was $99,000, 7.4 percent above the price in the 1990 period.


A Texas-Size Battle to Teach Rich and Poor Alike
The scenario has become annoyingly repetitive: The Texas Legislature devises a school financing plan that tries to close the spending gap between rich school districts and poor ones, only to have the State Supreme Court declare the plan unconstitutional.
It happened again last month, for the third time in three years, in a battle that reflects not only the politics of one state but also the difficulty in overhauling school finances.


Democrats Propose Ethics Rules
Saying he wanted to make state government more accessible to the public, the New York State Assembly Speaker, Saul Weprin, today announced a broad package of electoral and ethics changes that would make it easier for people to register to vote and harder for the Republicans, who have a majority in the Senate, to wield as much control over bills there.
Many of the proposals have been around in various forms for years, going nowhere.
But in releasing them as a comprehensive package in a re-election and reapportionment year when voters seem particularly aggrieved with government, the Assembly Democrats hope to turn ethics and electoral change into a major issue. 'Getting People Involved'
"We're trying to reform the government by getting people involved in government," Mr.
Weprin said.
"Adopting these proposals will forever change the face of elections and the face of government in our state."


Federal Land Sold for Very Little
Critics of the 1872 Mining Act note that the law has allowed buyers to take control of highly coveted Federal land for a pittance.
Under the law, anyone who finds a valuable mineral deposit can "patent" the land and assume ownership.
The patents cost $5 or less for a 20-acre mining claim.
Critics say one of the most flagrant cases involves the sale of 780 acres of Federal sand dune property along the Oregon coast for $1,950.


In Financial Aid Bid, Columbia Students Stage Takeover
In a day that hinted briefly at the turmoil of the 1960's, students at Columbia University blockaded doors to the administration building for two hours yesterday, forcing professors to remain inside, then scaled a wall and occupied an office to protest a plan to limit financial aid to needy students.
There were scuffles, broken doors and claims that campus security personnel used excessive force.
And there was chanting: "Keep financial aid; remember the promise you made!" and "The students united will never be defeated!"


Charity Helps the Russians Help Themselves
Not since the cold war ended has this city been so intently bombarded as this week, with foreign food and medicine raining down in a daily fusillade of charity.
As comforting as the badly needed goods are, Muscovites say the deeper value of the gifts is that they are priming scores of new self-help neighborhood groups to create the sort of private charities long forbidden across decades of tattered Communist parsimony.


Former Dinkins Aide Pleads Guilty to Two Charges of Theft
The former treasurer of Mayor David N. Dinkins's re-election committee, Arnold I. Biegen, secretly pleaded guilty on Monday to stealing not only $158,000 from the campaign but also about $850,000 from a mentally impaired widow whose estate he was managing, the Manhattan District Attorney announced yesterday.
Mr.
Biegen's guilty plea to the two charges, which each carry maximum sentences of 5 to 15 years in prison, was initially sealed to give him an opportunity to work undercover in a continuing investigation, prosecutors said.
But news leaks of the plea compromised the effort, they said.
The pleas were unsealed yesterday by Acting State Supreme Court Justice Daniel P. Fitzgerald.


60-Minute Gourmet
AN easy way to enhance broiled fish or meats is with flavored butters, which you can make ahead of time and store in the refrigerator.
These butters are usually made with fresh herbs or shellfish, but there are endless variations.
Just about any food that can be mashed or ground can be used to flavor butter.
Probably the best-known is maitre d'hotel, combining parsley, lemon juice, salt and pepper.
It generally accompanies chicken or fish.


Goodyear's Earnings Up Sharply
Helped by lower costs for raw materials and a push to limit expenses, the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company yesterday reported sharply higher quarterly earnings.
It was the company's best quarterly performance in nearly four years.
Analysts said the earnings demonstrated that the company was strengthening its competitive position, even as tire sales continued to be weak and pricing rivalry remained fierce.
Moreover, they saw strong signs of the influence of Stanley C. Gault, who became chairman of the giant tire maker nine months ago.
The company reported net income of $105.1 million for the fourth quarter, or $1.65 a share, compared with $11.6 million, or 20 cents a share, in the 1990 period.
Sales slipped to $2.78 billion, from $2.81 billion in the quarter a year earlier, a result of lower demand from automobile makers, the company said.
Goodyear's results for the quarter were helped by a $43 million after-tax gain from the sale of a tire-cord plant in Alabama.
As recently as nine months ago, the company was losing money while seeing its longstanding position slip away as the world's largest tire producer.
"They have gotten their costs down," said Harry W. Millis, an independent tire analyst in Cleveland.
"It looks like the company is becoming lean and mean."
In a telephone interview, Mr.
Gault said that the company "has come a lot farther a lot faster than anyone would have thought possible a few months ago." Mr.
Gault added that the company had been helped by the introduction of new products, a new advertising program "and reducing our debt by $1 billion in just a few short months."
Goodyear reported operating income of $783.3 million for the quarter, compared with $604.6 million for the quarter a year earlier.
For all of 1991, Goodyear earned $96.6 million, or $1.61 a share, compared with a net loss of $38.3 million in 1990.
On the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Goodyear was up 87.5 cents, closing at $61.25.
Several Painful Years
Goodyear's result in the last three months of 1991 come after several painful years, characterized by selling assets and widespread layoffs that left 13 percent of the company's work force furloughed in the last four years.
Since 1986, the company has been on a tumultuous roller-coaster ride, beginning with the takeover attempt by Sir James Goldsmith, the British-French investor.
Although Sir James failed in his efforts to win control, thwarting his initiatives led Goodyear into an expensive share repurchase program that left it with staggering debt.
To help reduce that debt, Goodyear sold its profitable aerospace division, its wheel and brake division and several other businesses.
Then, the consolidation of the global tire industry led to intense price competition.
Last summer, Goodyear took the unprecedented step of ousting its chairman, Tom H. Barrett, and bringing in Mr.
Gault, who had recently retired as chairman of Rubbermaid Inc.
Since then, Mr.
Gault has continued the restructuring begun by Mr.
Barrett and has done a great deal of personnel shifting and asset sales on his own.
Analysts contend that Mr.
Gault is making his mark, looking to sell off nearly everything in the company not directly tied to tire making.
Last summer, the company put its polyester and film products businesses up for sale.
Goodyear has reduced capital expenditures and cut its dividend.
So far the company's debt has been reduced from about $6 billion at the time of Sir James's advances to about $2 billion.
"Mr. Gault's impact on the company has been very significant," Mr.
Millis said.
"Although much of what we're seeing on the bottom lines goes back to Tom Barrett's days, Mr. Gault has raised the morale level significantly."
But Goodyear still maintains its troubled pipeline, which was built to carry oil from offshore California wells to Texas refineries.
The pipeline has been operating at a huge loss and is expected to do so for at least a few years.
Despite the decline in sales and sagging demand from automakers, Goodyear said its operating margins increased to 7.2 percent, from 5.4 percent in 1990.
Operating margins increased to 9.9 percent in the fourth quarter of last year.
The company said that sales in the United States increased by 2.7 percent in the quarter and that foreign sales were down 5.4 percent in the same period.


Miami Coach to Retire
RON FRASER of Miami, college baseball's winningest active coach, said yesterday that he would retire after coaching the United States Olympic team this summer.
Before he leads the United States team at Barcelona, Spain, the 55-year-old Fraser will finish the current National Collegiate Athletic Association season.
His 30th Miami team is off to a 3-0 start and is expected to be a national contender.
Fraser's teams have made 11 trips to the College World Series and won national championships in 1982 and 1985.


So What if It Looks Like an Old Shoe? Ciabatta Is Loved
CIABATTA means slipper in Italian.
It is also the name of a light and crusty bread from the Lake Como region in northern Italy.
The bread is called ciabatta (pronounced cha-BAH-ta) because its flattened oval form resembles a well-worn slipper.
The crust encloses a simple, rustic bread with an extremely porous texture, making for an unusually inviting combination of chewiness and lightness.


Elvis Presley, as a Pop Culture Icon, Deserves to Be on a Stamp; Honor Murrow First
To the Editor:
I am in complete agreement with Ralph Schoenstein's sentiments in "Nothin' but a Hound Dog Idea" (Op-Ed, Jan. 27).
A stamp to recognize Elvis Presley is a deplorable idea.
The Radio-Television News Directors Association, of which I am a former president, has repeatedly requested the Postal Service to issue a stamp honoring Edward R. Murrow.
The effort has been ignored.


Fight for Airport Shows Chicago Mayor's Mettle
For years, an obscure committee of political appointees from Indiana, Wisconsin and Illinois lumbered over where to build a new airport for the Chicago area.
The group settled on four possible sites, three in rural Illinois and one in Gary, Ind.
Then came Mayor Richard M. Daley of Chicago.
He had visions of international terminals rising from the landfills and abandoned steel mills in his city's southeast corner.
He knew that a new airport would bring jobs, businesses and political power to whomever managed to secure it.


Microwave Cooking
AS a child, when I read in history books about the plight of sailors crossing the Atlantic, I used to wonder why my Russian ancestors didn't die of scurvy during their endless winters.
It wasn't until I was well along as a cook that I realized the importance to all dwellers of northern climes of pickles, sauerkraut, potatoes and onions as providers of vitamin C.
Aside from their health benefits, onions and other strong-smelling allium plants like garlic and leeks are faithful flavor providers all winter long.
They can be used as components of dishes.
It is chives and true scallions (green onions) that have to wait for spring for a fresh crop.


Surgery for Fat Lever
FAT LEVER of the Dallas Mavericks underwent arthroscopic surgery to smooth out rough cartilage in his left knee yesterday at Baylor Medical Center.
The 31-year-old guard will be on crutches for several weeks.
Lever missed 78 games last season with problems in his other knee. (AP)


Sailing With a Simulator: Sea Legs Aren't Required
Eric Larsson, the training director of the Seamen's Church Institute, can put even the most seasoned marine officer to the test on the bridge of a computerized system simulating conditions a ship's pilot might face.
The trial can start simply, with dawn breaking as a cargo ship piloted by an officer begins to pass under the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge.
Mr.
Larsson can call in a second ship, moving in the other direction, piloted by another officer using another part of the simulator.
As it gets lighter, he can let fog roll in and put as many as 60 more ships into New York Harbor to test the officers' mettle.


Wine Talk
HUGH JOHNSON, the English wine writer, has taken on that most sacred cow of the American wine establishment: the 100-point scale.
The scale -- popularized by Robert M. Parker Jr. in his influential newsletter, The Wine Advocate, and later taken up by The Wine Spectator, the best-known wine consumer magazine -- is widely accepted in the United States as the easist way to rate a wine's quality.
Clearly, the system has its roots in the American educational system.
Almost unconsciously, Americans tend to judge quality on a scale of 100.
European schools grade on a scale of 20; understandably, most European wine ratings use the same system.


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Fall
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit continued to ease in the week that ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a publication that tracks bank rates.
"The next direction in savings yields will be influenced by the consumer confidence report due out on Thursday," said Robert K. Heady, The Monitor's publisher.


State of Political Rhetoric Should Trouble Us
To the Editor:
President Bush's proposals aside, there was something appalling about the State of the Union Message: its systematic, shameless untruth.
Equally disturbing is the acceptance of that permeating untruth -- as if it were now simply the key in which all political music is written.
Although you are critical in reports (front page, Jan. 29) and commentary (for instance, A. M. Rosenthal's Jan. 31 column) on the speech, you fall short of naming the essential problem: that distortion, pretense and manipulation are the foundation of American politics.


SOME CHINESE SEE RETURN TO REFORM
Some Chinese officials say they see momentum building within the leadership to step up economic change while toning down the hard-line oratory that has dominated the press and the airwaves for more than two years.
Since the reappearance of the senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, in southern China last month and on television last week, some Chinese say they are guardedly optimistic that moderates may be gaining ground.
Economists and other officials have been excitedly discussing the prospects for expanding reforms that have been almost stagnant for two years.


LeBlanc and U.S. Shut Out Germany for 2-0 Mark in Hockey
Ray LeBlanc would still be stopping minor league slap shots in some Indianapolis ice palace if Ed Belfour hadn't ended a holdout and signed with the Chicago Blackhawks, and if a string of hotshot Olympic prospects had not been recalled by other National Hockey League teams.
Circumstance elected LeBlanc as the United States Olympic hockey team goaltender and brought him to an ice rink in the French Alps.


Digging for Ore Still Pays; Should Miners Pay, Too?
Like the wizened old prospectors with a pick, a shovel and a dream, today's gold miners search for treasures in the public lands of the West.
But they use explosives rather than picks, carve holes 600 feet into the earth and haul ore on trucks so huge the tires are 13 feet tall.
Using the latest technology, the Barrick Gold Strike Mine here in the foothills of the Tuscarora Mountains recovered about 500,000 ounces of gold last year.
But like its pick-and-shovel forebears, Barrick did not pay a cent in Federal royalties on the $175 million worth of gold it took from public land.
An 1872 Law Endures
While mining has changed substantially, the 1872 Mining Act has not.
Under the law, which was signed by President Ulysses S. Grant to encourage settlement of the West, prospectors who stake a mineral claim are not required to pay for using the land or to pay royalties on the minerals it takes.


Wire Fox Terrier Takes Top Honor
Ch.
Registry's Lonesome Dove, a wire fox terrier more familiarly known as Lacey, stood alone in the center of the big kelly-green carpeted ring in Madison Square Garden last night, as the supreme winner of the 116th Westminster Kennel Club show.
From the entry of 2,568 champions, the hound-marked (white, black and tan) terrier restored the Best-in-Show award to a breed that has won it 13 times, but not since 1946.


Rate Cut Not Ruled Out, The Fed Chief Repeats
A gathering here of lenders to the nation's small towns and small businesses heard Alan Greenspan restate today that he would not rule out reducing interest rates further if the economony needed an additional spur toward recovery.
But unlike bond traders and Wall Street economists counting on Mr.
Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, to lower interest rates after last week's disappointing January unemployment report, many of the bankers at a meeting here of the Independent Bankers Association of America have different interests.
They fear that cheaper money at this point could damage the fragile economy.


Remember the Winter of '78?; Those Big Snow Stories Are Fading With the Years
A new generation gap is forming, between people whose childhood memories are hip deep in snow and children who have rarely seen snow deep enough to roll into a snowman.
After eight years of snowfalls that have been well below normal, New York City has had only 2.2 inches of snow midway through this winter.
That compares with the usual 17 inches by this time in February, and it is less than a tenth of the city's average of 28.3 inches a season.


Market Place; Cable Television Stocks Languish
WHILE the stock market has been soaring, the cable television stocks, particularly Tele-Communications Inc. and the Comcast Corporation, have languished, depressed by the specter of tougher regulations.
Neither is even near the highs they hit in 1989.
Tele-Communications closed yesterday at $15.50, off 25 cents.
Its high since 1986 was $21.625 in late 1989.
Comcast, too, closed yesterday at $15.50, up 37.5 cents.
Its high had been $19.938 in late 1989.


OFFICER ACQUITTED IN TEANECK KILLING
A white police officer from Teaneck was acquitted tonight of manslaughter in the fatal shooting of a 16-year-old black youth in 1990, touching off spontaneous outbursts of joy and grief in a cramped courtroom here.
The all-white jury deliberated eight and a half hours, announcing the verdict about 8 P.M.


Romanians Can't Afford Land That Is Theirs
When the agricultural cooperative here broke up this year, most members took a few animals and retreated to their homes to await the return of their land, seized in the Communist era.
But Liviu Dobroiu, head of the defunct cooperative, had bigger plans and more money.
So he bought 40 cows, and he now houses them in a stable in the old collective.
Although he is a squatter, Mr.
Dobroiu is one of the few farmers to have found security in Romania's agricultural sector.


St. John's Sex Abuse Case Ends With Plea Bargain
The last defendant in the St.
John's University sexual-assault case interrupted his trial yesterday to plead guilty to sharply reduced charges, then admitted that he had done virtually everything he had originally been accused of.
The wrenching case came to an end in an emotional scene in a Queens courtroom in which a female spectator yelled out that the 22-year-old defendant was a "rapist" and his mother responded with screaming vituperation.


Anthony Astrachan, Writer and Editor, 59
Anthony Astrachan, a writer, editor and former foreign correspondent for The Washington Post, died on Monday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 59 years old and lived in Hoboken, N.J.
He died of a heart attack, said his son Joshua, of Brooklyn.


Lincoln's Birthday
NEW YORK GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal and state open, city closed.
POST OFFICES: Regular service.
BANKS: Option to close.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION: No pickups, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Open.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Open.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses, subways, Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North on regular schedules.
NEW JERSEY GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal open, state closed, local option to close.
POST OFFICES: Regular service.
BANKS: Option to close.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit on regular schedules.
CONNECTICUT GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal open, state closed except for unemployment offices, local option to close.
POST OFFICES: Regular service.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: New Haven Line on regular schedule.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices in Tokyo closed lower today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 277.88 points, or 1.27 percent, to 21,541.64.


Honors
*
Bob Kresser, chairman and chief executive, and Jean Craig, president and executive creative director, at Kresser/Craig in Los Angeles, have been named "Leaders of the Year" for 1991 by the Western States Advertising Agencies Association.


Bush Orders End to Ozone Destroyers by 1996
In response to new evidence that the earth's atmospheric ozone shield may be weakening over parts of the United States, President Bush today ordered directed American manufacturers to end by Dec. 31, 1995, virtually all production of chemicals that destroy ozone.
The policy, authorized under a provision of the 1990 Clean Air Act, takes effect immediately.
Last Friday the Bush Administration reversed its opposition to such a plan and backed a Senate proposal to phase out the production of the chemicals as soon as possible, rather than by 2000.


For Harleston, '91 Was Grim Year
All college administrators seem to have their good years and bad years, but last year was an extraordinarily bad one for Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston, the president of City College.
His troubles began in the spring with a three-week-long student strike over tuition increases that closed the campus for 11,500 students.
Then his distress multiplied with a controversy over racially charged remarks by the chairman of the black studies department, Dr.
Leonard Jeffries, that brought the college nationwide notoriety.


Talk-Show Host as Mr. Nice Guy
Charlie Rose, who became Channel 13's late-night man this season, is in the early-morning mode.
His hourlong program, at 11 on week nights (the show is rebroadcast nationally the next night at 10 on the Learning Channel), may start with a discussion of an issue of moment and then ease into interviews with entertainers, writers, sports figures and other more and less prominent people, who are generally treated like adults.
Among the most prominent so far: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, Paul McCartney and Penn and Teller.
Tonight you can see a few of the less prominent: Ed McCabe, an advertising man; Charles Woods, identified as a candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination, and Diane Ackerman, a writer and naturalist.


Gotti Juror Panel Chosen
The panel of prospective jurors in the John Gotti trial was completed yesterday, preparing the way for selecting the final jury today.
The prosecutors and defense lawyers are scheduled to use their challenges to choose a jury of 12 members and 6 alternates from the 43-member panel, which was assembled in a painstaking three-week process of questioning more than 200 people, one at a time, in a tightly guarded conference room of Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
Opening statements in the long-awaited trial could take place as early as today or tomorrow.


Director Defies Odds With First Feature, 'Daughters of the Dust'
In her first feature film, "Daughters of the Dust," Julie Dash tells the story of a Gullah family on the Sea Islands off the South Carolina-Georgia coast at the turn of the century.
Ms.
Dash, who wrote, produced and directed the film in a 10-year labor of love, is delighted that audiences are responding to it in just the way she hoped they would.
"I wanted it to be healing, cleansing and empowering," Ms.
Dash said, "so when they leave the theater, people feel good about themselves."


Sale of Some Minor Assets Is Planned for Maxwell Unit
The court-appointed administrators of the bankrupt Maxwell Communication Corporation said today that they hoped to sell most of the company's minor holdings outside the United States in the next two months.
At a news conference here, the British administrators, who are overseeing the company with an examiner appointed by a United States bankruptcy court, said they had not yet decided what to do with Official Airline Guides and Macmillan book publishers.
The two American companies account for about 80 percent of Maxwell Communication's assets.


Theater in Review
After the Dancing in Jericho
York Theater Company 2 East 90th Street Manhattan Through Feb. 23
Written and directed by P. J. Barry; sets by Daniel Ettinger; costumes by Barbara Beccio; lighting by Mary Jo Dondlinger; technical director, John Miller; production stage manager, Alan Fox; choreography, Dennis Dennehy.
Presented by the York Theater Company, Janet Hayes Walker, producing director; Molly Pickering Grose, managing director, in association with One World Arts Foundation.
WITH: Pamela Burrell, James Congdon, Jack Davidson, John Kozeluh, Michelle O'Steen and Ginger Prince.
When Kate Driscoll and Jim Conroy, the central characters in P. J. Barry's "After the Dancing in Jericho" first appear, they are chirpy high school dancing partners polishing their jitterbug in a studio in a fictional town called Jericho, R.I.
It is the late 1940's, and the pair, played by Michelle O'Steen and John Kozeluh, epitomize the innocence of suburban teen-age life during the Truman-Eisenhower era.


No Longer Soviet Skaters, But They Are Still the Best
For all the political changes and economic deprivations that have recast the Soviet Union into a Commonweath of Independent States, one constant remains: However the remaining republics are aligned and whatever they call themselves for the moment, they still produce the world's best pairs in figure skating.
As Natalya Mishkutienok and Artur Dmitriyev performed a glorious free-skate program, rich in emotion, power, grace and elegance, they became the eighth consecutive couple from what was once the Soviet Union to win the gold medal in the Winter Olympics.


Paris Leader Survives No-Confidence Vote
Prime Minister Edith Cresson's Government tonight survived a parliamentary vote of no confidence demanded by conservative opposition parties after a radical Palestinian leader, George Habash, was allowed into France for medical treatment late last month.
Although Mrs.
Cresson's Socialist Party lacks a clear majority in the National Assembly, the Communist Party abstained from voting, leaving the conservatives with just 261 votes, 28 short of the number needed to topple the Government.


Men's Role Crucial In Genital Warts
To the Editor:
If the virus that causes the genital warts that can lead to cervical cancer is spread by men, it amazes me that anyone could think men should not be tested for the infection.
And yet "An Epidemic of Genital Warts Raises Concern but Not Alarm" (Health page, Jan. 22) quotes Dr.
Alex Ferenczy, a professor of gynecology at McGill University in Montreal, saying about testing men, "There's no point in checking them for the virus because you can't get rid of it."
If men were dying because this virus attacked some part of their anatomy and women were the carriers, do you think the medical community would deem it unnecessary to test women in trying to stem the disease's spread?
In all probability, testing would begin, and women would be urged to tell men if there was a possibility of infection.


Food Notes
Valentines for Everyone
A last-minute valentine is better than none.
But gift-givers still do not have to resort to variety-store chocolates or a few straggly flower stems.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Bush Ready to Step Up His Attacks on Buchanan
In a sign of lingering concern over Patrick J. Buchanan's Presidential challenge, President Bush's announcement of his candidacy on Wednesday will kick off a sharply accelerated New Hampshire campaign in which the Bush camp has added events and laid plans for an attack on Mr.
Buchanan if it proves necessary.
Initially hoping to reduce the importance of Mr.
Buchanan by ignoring him, the Bush organization had planned to keep the President's visits to the state to a minimum and to rely primarily on surrogate campaigners, like his wife, Barbara, as well as television advertisements and interviews conducted by satellite from the Oval Office.


Economic Scene;
WHEN accountants talk about the cost of the savings and loan debacle, they mean the budgetary cost -- the money Uncle Sam must borrow to pay off every insured depositor.
But when economists talk about the cost, they mean something else.
The act of shuffling funds from taxpayers to depositors, they note, does not create or destroy tangible wealth.
The real costs, they argue, are the losses in past and future output, the decline in national income from the diversion of savings from productive capital into everything from see-through office buildings in downtown Los Angeles to unrentable shopping malls in yet-to-be-built suburbs of Dallas.


Hungry and Cold, Kurds Turn to TV
Each evening, providing the Iraqi authorities have not cut electricity to the north, hundreds of thousands of Kurds sit down to watch an evening of Kurdish television.
The programming may be haphazard in its timing and the quality of reception a bit primitive, but the three stations, covering the four major cities in northern Iraq, have become the hottest form of entertainment in Iraqi Kurdistan.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Brown: Capitalizing on 'Outsider' Role
SCRIPT:
On-the-street interviews with people, identified at the end of the half-hour "infomercial"as Brown campaign workers, who denounce Washington and politicians with remarks like these:
"They don't give a hoot about us, except to get us to vote for them."


From Spark to Flame To a Roaring Blaze
Seven months before Mike Tyson was born, Cus D'Amato sat by the deserted, neon-splashed swimming pool of our Las Vegas hotel and reminisced about all the nights he had listened at the door of his gym on 14th Street for the footsteps of a boy who would be his next "contender."
This was the night before the heavyweight title fight between Muhammad Ali and Floyd Patterson, in November 1965.
D'Amato, who had managed Patterson and Jose Torres to championships, was out of the loop, a "walk-around guy" with his hand out and his mouth open.
He dreamed of another kid who would come up his gym's dark, narrow, twisting stairs at night, alone and running scared.


Austrian Women Leading In Luge
Austrians, who have been the dominant force in the early going of the Winter Olympics, positioned themselves to continue their run by placing team members one, two and three today on the first day of women's luge competition.
They had to survive protests by both the United States and Italy, but on the track here as at other venues, the Austrians hung on.
By the end of today, Austria had 7 medals and was poised to increase that to as many as 11 by the end of Wednesday if the three women here maintain position in the final two runs and their countryman, Klaus Ofner, maintains his lead in the Nordic combined.


Court Begins Process of Setting Tyson's Sentence
While Mike Tyson's lawyers predicted today that they would win a reversal of his rape conviction, the Probation Department here began taking steps toward recommending what sentence he will receive March 6.
Mr.
Tyson, the 25-year-old former heavyweight champion, arrived at the City-County Building here this morning for a pre-sentencing interview with a probation officer around the same time that the woman he was convicted of raping was arriving at the airport to return to her home in Rhode Island.


Topics of The Times; Alex Haley, Illuminator
Whatever its flaws, Alex Haley's "Roots" opened modern America's eyes to black heritage.
Mr.
Haley, who also wrote "The Autobiography of Malcolm X," died this week at the age of 70.
He never contended that "Roots" was more than the saga of his family.
While it was widely acclaimed, some critics dismissed it as romantic fiction.
But fact or fiction, history or popular drama -- it was all of these -- its impact was phenomenal.
"Roots" traced Mr.
Haley's own lineage to the Mandingo peoples of West Africa, and to one Kunta Kinte, who was sold into slavery in 1767.
With Kunta Kinte as heroic focus, the book breathed reality into the life of an African youth in the 18th century, kidnapped and shipped to America in chains, and into the experience of a slave and his family in this country.
Its lasting message, for blacks and whites alike, was that America's largest minority had a proud history.


Reviews/Television; Life and Work of a Modern Dancer
"Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane and Company," produced and directed for the BBC by Mischa Scorer, is the kind of performance documentary that works like a charm.
Mr.
Jones, serving as both host and performer, is an articulate guide through his own life and work in modern dance.
Seen in rehearsal and performance, his "Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land" is an imaginative choreographic creation, using the past to comment provocatively on the present.
Mr.
Jones is gifted, intelligent and persuasive.
The proof's to be had in this "Great Performances" presentation tonight at 10 on Channel 13.


Corrections
An article and a chart on the Health page last Wednesday about the timing of surgery for breast cancer incompletely stated the source of some data on differences in the menstrual cycle.
The chart was based on a study directed by Dr.
Ruby T. Senie, an epidemiologist at the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, using data from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.


Kashmir March Fails, Indian Governor Says
The governor of the Indian-administered part of Kashmir said today that Kashmiri militants had failed so far to make good on threats to march to the Indian side from Pakistani-controlled territory.
Decisive moves by Pakistan to block the march, held to mark the eighth anniversary of India's execution of the founder of the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front, were aimed at easing Indian-Pakistani tensions that had built up over the last days.


Theater in Review
Making Book
Primary Stages Company 354 West 45th Street Manhattan Through March 1
Written by Janet Reed; directed by Susan Einhorn; scenery and costumes by Bruce Goodrich; lighting by Spencer Mosse; sound by One Dream; production manager, Jerry Goehring; production stage manager, Christine Catti.
Presented by Primary Stages Company, Casey Childs, artistic director.
WITH: Daniel Ahearn, Catherine Curtin, Claudia Fielding, Percy Granger and Allison Janney.
Political correctness is only one of the pitfalls of modern life, but for anyone trying to create a new fifth-grade social-studies textbook that will sell to the California Board of Education, it is clearly the one most fraught with danger.
That, at any rate, seems to be the premise for "Making Book," a new comedy by Janet Reed.


Pirates End Drought Against Orangemen
On just another night in the Big East, just another step on the way to the serious business of March, hundreds of Seton Hall students surged onto the floor of Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight to celebrate just another victory over Syracuse.
The Pirates' second over the Orangemen in Big East history.
The first since a month and a half into the Reagan Administration.
After 23 consecutive losses in games against Syracuse.


Corrections
A picture caption on Jan. 30 about visitors to the Metropolitan Museum of Art relaxing in the Engelhard Court incorrectly described the statue of Diana shown.
It is a half-size copy of the statue that stood atop the first Madison Square Garden; the original is in the Philadelphia Museum of Art.


Olsten Chief Executive Is Elected Chairman
Frank N. Liguori, the chief executive of the Olsten Corporation, has been elected chairman, the company said yesterday.
Mr.
Liguori, 45, had been been vice chairman and chief executive of the temporary-services firm since April 1990.
The chairman's post had been vacant since the death of William Olsten, the founder, last November.


A Bus Accident Leaves News Media Guessing
Conspicuous by their absence at the Olympic Winter Games are any press materials from Russia and the other former Soviet republics.
Normally, guides providing background material on the athletes are readily available at events like this and become invaluable resources for the news media.
As it turns out, a full supply of guides, along with souvenirs like pins and banners, were on board a bus last week bound from Moscow to Albertville.
But upon reaching Poland, the bus collided with a Mercedes-Benz, and, according to one report, a man was killed in the accident.


Honda Protests Customs' Audit
The Honda Motor Company, stung by adverse rulings in a Customs Service audit, today accused the Federal agency of unfairly manipulating the audit to achieve "a politically correct conclusion" that its cars have less American content than the auto maker contends.
The accusations were contained in a letter to Carol B. Hallett, the Customs Commissioner, from Scott Whitlock, Honda's executive vice president of United States manufacturing.
Honda has extensive manufacturing operations in Marysville, Ohio, and at other locations in North America.


Yevtushenko Recites His 'Babi Yar'


After a Tourist's Death, Lingering Pain Remains
IN this time of dangling question marks, it is hard to say whether it helps to remember.
For some, it is impossible to forget.
On July 4, Rhona Lantin, a 26-year-old visitor to New York City, was killed by a stray bullet as she sat in a car inching through Chinatown.


Mercedes Gregory, Film Maker, Dead; Documentarian, 56
Mercedes (Chiquita) Gregory, a documentary film maker and an influential figure in experimental theater, died on Monday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
She was 56 years old and lived in Santa Ynez, Calif.
She had breast cancer for three years, said her husband, Andre, the stage and film director and actor.


Sports of The Times; Fame Itself Was on Trial With Tyson
MIKE TYSON must now be sentenced as if he were any other man, but there is a broader issue than one man being convicted of rape:
There is considerable doubt about whether Tyson's young accuser would have been in that hotel room that night if Mike Tyson had not been a celebrity.
Are other women paying attention?


Convicted Mayor Wins Yet More Time in Office
For the second time in five days, Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City won a stay today of a judge's order that he leave office immediately because of his conviction on Federal fraud charges.
A three-judge appeals panel lifted a temporary stay today on a ruling by Judge Arthur N. D'Italia of Superior Court, who held on Friday that Mr.
McCann had forfeited his office.
But Mr.
McCann was out of office for only a few minutes before his lawyer, Matthew P. Boylan, telephoned the clerk of the New Jersey Supreme Court and won another stay to give the state's highest court time to review the forfeiture ruling.


INSIDE
Former Mayoral Aide's Plea
The treasurer of Mayor Dinkins's re-election committee pleaded guilty to stealing from the campaign and from an 81-year-old widow.
Page B1.
Too Much, Too Late?
Drexel executives got more than $250 million in bonuses shortly before the bankruptcy filing, and now the firm is suing to get it back.
Page D1.
Countdown Begins for Tyson
Mike Tyson, facing up to 20 years in prison, was back in an Indianapolis court as a preliminary step toward being sentenced on March 6.
Page B9.


For Lovers, No. 1 Activity These Days Is Worrying
IF the billion Valentine's Day cards that are expected to be sold this week are any measure, love in the United States is robust and healthy.
But Cupid might throw away his arrows if love were measured by the highly publicized cases that have pitted men against women in recent months.
A kiss may still be a kiss, a sigh a sigh, but the fundamental thing that applies today when two lovers woo is, "Can I trust you?"


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Borden Inc., New York, sold its Sooner Snacks Ltd. subsidiary to Dalgety P.L.C., London. *
Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., London, said the European Community Commission had cleared the takeover of Cinzano International S.A., the Italian liquor company, by Grand Metropolitan's International Distillers and Vintners Ltd. subsidiary. *
Mercantile Stores Co., Wilmington, Del., a department store chain, completed the purchase of Maison Blanche Department Stores, Baton Rouge, La. *
Philips Petroleum Co., Bartlesville, Okla., sold its 50 percent partnership in an offshore drilling company for $21 million to Schlumberger Ltd., New York. *
Sun Co., Radnor, Pa., an energy holding company, made its second significant oil discovery in the Espinal block in Columbia's Magdalena Basin. *
Westinghouse Electric Corp., Pittsburgh, said its Westinghouse Electronic Systems group and TCOM L.P., Columbia, Md., had received an $100 million surveillance systems contract from the Customs Service.


From Spark to Flame To a Roaring Blaze
Seven months before Mike Tyson was born, Cus D'Amato sat by the deserted, neon-splashed swimming pool of our Las Vegas hotel and reminisced about all the nights he had listened at the door of his gym on 14th Street for the footsteps of a boy who would be his next "contender."
This was the night before the heavyweight title fight between Muhammad Ali and Floyd Patterson, in November 1965.
D'Amato, who had managed Patterson and Jose Torres to championships, was out of the loop, a "walk-around guy" with his hand out and his mouth open.
He dreamed of another kid who would come up his gym's dark, narrow, twisting stairs at night, alone and running scared.


Theater in Review
Appointment With a High-Wire Lady  Alice's Fourth Floor 432 West 42d Street Manhattan Through Sunday Written by Russell Davis; directed by Michael Mantell; set and lights by Michael Francis Moody; costumes by David Sawaryn; music composed and performed by Jane Ira Bloom and Jayne Atkinson; producer, Patricia Cornell; executive producer, Kate Baggott; production stage manager, Sally Plass.
Presented by Alice's Fourth Floor, Susann Brinkley, artistic director.
WITH: Ms.
Atkinson, Suzanne Shepherd and Victor Slezak.
Having flirted with death, a young man has crash landed into a state mental hospital, where he sits silently in the dayroom.
He has lost his sense of touch and his ability to focus his eyes and his attention.
In Russell Davis's "Appointment With a High-Wire Lady," the patient (Victor Slezak) is gradually drawn back into life by a friend from his past (Jayne Atkinson).
There are lapses in the play, including a second psychiatric patient who carries more metaphorical weight than her character can justify.
But Mr.
Davis is subtle and unsentimental in telling a story about two people trying to find a connection that has previously eluded them.


Our Haiti Policy Doesn't Help Anyone
To the Editor:
Neither of the two components of United States policy toward Haiti, the embargo and the forced repatriation of refugees, is serving the goals of either country.
The economic embargo (while well intentioned) has had no impact on changing the repressive political-military regime.
Rather, it has produced a colossal economic, environmental and health disaster for Haiti, the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, as you report in "Land and Health Also Erode in Haiti" (news article, Jan. 28).
The deforestation and soil erosion caused by the embargo will have repercussions for years, perhaps decades, and the famine it has caused is referred to in Haiti as "the curse."


Parish Gladly Accepts One-Year Celtics Pact
ROBERT PARISH, Boston's 38-year-old center, seems to find motivation where others in the National Basketball Association have found insult.
The league's oldest player, whose agent had sought a two-year deal with the Celtics, agreed Monday night to a one-year package for 1991-92 worth a reported $3.5 million, with a small amount deferred.
"I can live with that," Parish told The Boston Globe.
"I think it's fair. I'm really glad to have it done so I can get on with the rest of the season and not worry about it, and also so that I can enjoy my summer."


Libya Tries Intrigue to Avoid U.N. Sanctions
Since last November, when the United States and Britain demanded the extradition of two Libyans indicted in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jet that killed 270 people, Libya has campaigned to get them to change their minds.
The most recent twist in the campaign, which has blended conciliatory talk with threats against Western interests, all in the hope of staving off United Nations sanctions, came this week when Vincent Cannistraro, former chief of counterterrorist operations at the Central Intelligence Agency, was told by Arab intelligence agents in the Middle East that the Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, intended to announce the disappearance and possible kidnapping and execution of the two suspects.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Bloomingdale's, New York, a unit of Federated Department Stores Inc., has named Helane Blumfield operating vice president and creative director for advertising and design. *
Datakey Inc., Minneapolis, a maker of portable data devices, named Michael A. Carenzo president.
He succeeds John H. Underwood, who was named chairman. *
Norwest Equipment Finance Inc., Minneapolis, a unit of Norwest Bank Minnesota that specializes in financing industrial equipment, named James R. Renner senior vice president and general manager. *
Porter/Novelli, New York, a public relations unit of Omnicom Group, named Bob Druckenmiller president.
He had been executive vice president and general manager of the Washington office. *
Vista Chemical Co., Houston, named James R. Ball executive vice president and chief operating officer.
Bruce E. A. Larsen was named senior vice president-commercial.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 7
Jan. 31
Feb. 8
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
6.9
6.7
Distillate production, daily
2.7
2.8
2.8
Gasoline stocks
228.3
230.0
226.1
Distillate stocks
122.5
128.0
107.8
Crude imports, daily
4.8
5.2
5.6
Product imports, daily
1.5
2.3
1.7
Crude stocks
334.9
334.3
329.6
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
81.6
80.0
83.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Theater in Review
Disney's World on Ice Starring Peter Pan
Radio City Music Hall Manhattan Through Sunday
Theatrical director and writer, Jerry Bilik; skating director and choreographer, Bob Paul; music director, Mr.
Bilik; costumes by Arthur Boccia; production design by Keith Anderson; lighting by Marilyn Lowey; Disney characterization direction by Larry Billman and Roy Luthringer.
A Kenneth Feld Production presented by Radio City Music Hall Productions.
WITH: Bobby Davis, Michael B. Dolan, Jaimee Eggleton, Carla Ericson, Dawn-Ann Oliphant, Dawn Porter and Christopher Shrimpling.
The latest edition of "Walt Disney's World on Ice," this one starring Peter Pan, is a gentle romp for toddlers, with some dazzling scenic effects for adults.
The whole Disney crew -- including Mickey and Minnie Mouse, Donald and Daisy Duck and the singing Chipmunks -- is reassuringly on hand at the start of the show to lead the audience through Merrie London with an English bobby and a generic nanny type as guides.
A golden statue center rink proves to be a depiction of J. M. Barrie's "Peter Pan," which eases the audience nicely into this year's theme.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Journal; New Hampshire Voters Taking the High Road
Voters have kept telling pollsters that they care about substantive issues, not tabloid sex stories.
But the experts have been skeptical, because people often give falsely virtuous answers on delicate subjects.
This "social-desirability effect," as pollsters call it, prompts people in surveys to hide their racial animosities, exaggerate how regularly they vote, and underreport their interest in pornography.
From what people tell interviewers, you might conclude that one peculiar recluse somewhere is buying all 1.6 million copies of Penthouse magazine every month.


At Columbia University, a Glimpse of the 1960's


Arts Endowment Pays For Children's TV Series
A 10-part children's series that explains the creative process will begin on public television stations in September, financed by a $1.5 million grant from the National Endowment for the Arts.
The grant is the largest the endowment has ever awarded for a television project.
The prime-time series, which will be called "Behind the Scenes," will be co-produced by Channel 13 in New York City and the production company Learning Designs.
With the comedians Penn and Teller as hosts, the series will try to teach children between the ages of 8 and 12 how art, music and other aspects of culture are created.


2 Campaigns Take A Double Approach
Duality and dichotomy have become popular themes for magazine trade advertisements, thanks to the success of Rolling Stone's long-running "Perception/Reality" campaign by Fallon McElligott.
The two most recent titles to play on those themes are Better Homes and Gardens and Sports Illustrated for Kids
The Better Homes campaign, by Ted Chin &amp; Company in New York, presents situations before and after consumers read the monthly's coverage of home, food, gardening and other topics.
For instance, in a two-page print ad, a red chair appears on the left-hand side, above the words "Before Page 76." On the right-hand side, which reads "After Page 76," the chair is surrounded by a living room's worth of merchandise.


Washington Memo; Old Tactics Failing, a Handful of Lawmakers Hustle to Block Pentagon Cuts
The military threat from what was once the Soviet Union has all but vanished.
The Pentagon has grudgingly pointed its spending plans downward.
Opinion polls show strong popular support for diverting military dollars to domestic programs.
The question now is whether Congress will accept the change.
Or more precisely, whether a handful of lawmakers, following a familiar political script, can block proposed cuts in the Pentagon budget favored by most of their colleagues to protect particular districts and states from threatened economic losses.


More Than One Way to Eke Out a Living


Books of The Times; If the C.E.O. Were a Folksy Rail Splitter
Lincoln on Leadership  Executive Strategies for Tough Times  By Donald T. Phillips 188 pages.
Warner Books. $17.95.
Black Troops, White Commanders and Freedmen During the Civil War  By Howard C. Westwood 189 pages.
Southern Illinois University Press. $24.95.
On Lincoln's birthday, one's initial reaction to a book that uses his words and deeds simply as a guide for business leaders who want to develop "executive strategies for tough times" is dismay, especially when looking at the cover drawing of Lincoln dressed in a button-down striped shirt, with matching striped tie.


For Lovers, No. 1 Activity These Days Is Worrying
IF the billion Valentine's Day cards that are expected to be sold this week are any measure, love in the United States is robust and healthy.
But Cupid might throw away his arrows if love were measured by the highly publicized cases that have pitted men against women in recent months.
A kiss may still be a kiss, a sigh a sigh, but the fundamental thing that applies today when two lovers woo is, "Can I trust you?"


L.I.R.R. Nightmare: Impounded Cars at a Journey's End
When they got off the Long Island Rail Road here today, briefcases dragging, the waves of Manhattan commuters had to contend with something new after a long, tiring day -- the siege of the Ronkonkoma tow trucks.
It all started on Monday, when railroad and township officials made good on a longstanding threat to tow away illegally parked cars that cover the lawns, block exit lanes and protrude haphazardly around the Ronkonkoma railroad station.


Microsoft Discloses Apple Claim
The Microsoft Corporation today disclosed that Apple Computer Inc. was seeking $4.37 billion in damages in its long-running copyright infringment suit against the software company.
Apple sued Microsoft and the Hewlett-Packard Company in 1989, contending that Microsoft's Windows 2.03 and Hewlett-Packard's New Wave programs copied the look and feel of the Macintosh's visual displays.
Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., later amended its suit to include Windows 3.0, the version currently marketed by Microsoft.


Rolling Hills Estates Journal; Yard Ornaments of Beauty, and Beast
At the Olson house on Strawberry Lane, the day starts with a thump as the first of the roosting peacocks jumps down onto the roof before sunrise and begins shaking out its gaudy tail feathers.
It ends when gangs of the birds return to the tall Canary Island pines and Brazilian pepper trees, calling loudly to each other with a sound that local residents say reminds them of a woman shouting for help.


CHRONICLE
KATHERINE DUNHAM, the choreographer and dancer who brought the black dance heritage to a wide public, has gone on a hunger strike to protest the United States Government's policy of sending Haitian refugees back to their homeland.
"I have been close to Haiti for more than 50 years, and it is painful to see what is happening to the boat people," Miss Dunham said yesterday in an interview from her home in East St.
Louis, Mo.


Long Island District Illustrates Paradoxes Of School Financing
At the public school here, just a few blocks from elegant oceanfront summer homes, the largest class has 16 students, and parents say the education rivals that of the best private schools.
It may be public education at its best, but at a cost of almost $28,000 a student -- far more than most private schools -- it illustrates some of the excesses, anomalies and extravagant possibilities of a public school financing system based on property wealth.


Drexel Suit To Recover Bonus Pay
Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. sued hundreds of its former employees yesterday in an attempt to recover more than $250 million in bonuses paid shortly before the company filed for bankruptcy in early 1990.
The bonuses have been at the heart of some of the biggest controversies resulting from the collapse of the Wall Street powerhouse.
Indeed, the size of Drexel's bonuses was long a legend on Wall Street, but yesterday's lawsuit for the first time provides details of how rich those payments were, showing that many executives got between $100,000 and $1 million each month.


Bias Against Girls Is Found Rife In Schools, With Lasting Damage
School is still a place of unequal opportunity, where girls face discrimination from teachers, textbooks, tests and their male classmates, according to a report being released today that examined virtually all major studies on girls and education.
Girls and boys start school roughly equal in skills and confidence, but girls trail by the end of high school, said the study, "How Schools Shortchange Women: The A.A.U.W. Report," commissioned by the American Association of University Women Educational Foundation.


Tyson Case May Not Yield Lesson
Mike Tyson's rape conviction is unlikely to change what many people see as an entrenched attitude of privilege and power that has given some athletes the belief that they can take what they want and usually with no consequence.
That was the view expressed by many people in and out of sports yesterday upon learning that one of sports' most recognizable figures was facing the possibility of spending the next decade of his life in prison for raping an 18-year-old woman last July.


Olympic Challenge: Feeding 20,000 While Pacifying 190 French Chefs
In France, where chefs are kings, exalted in travel guides and heralded at the restaurants that bear their names, Jean Marchette is proud to call himself simply a traiteur -- caterer.
He has undertaken the job of feeding, oh, 20,000 people a day for 15 days.
He is the official caterer to the Olympic Family: that is, the sponsors, Olympic officials, politicians, Very Important Spectators, reporters, security workers and 8,000 volunteers.
In short, everyone who makes these Winter Games go, except for the athletes, all expecting to eat as if they are in, well, in France.


Chip Index Rises Again
On the strength of increased chip orders, the semiconductor industry's leading indicator climbed for the fifth straight month in January, a trade group reported today.
The Semiconductor Industry Association, based in San Jose, Calif., reported a book-to-bill ratio of 1.08 for the three-month period ending in January, up from a revised figure of 1.07 in December, and from 1.01 in November.
The book-to-bill compares orders to shipments and is considered a leading indicator of the industry's performance.
A ratio of 1.08 indicates that for every $100 worth of product shipped, $108 was ordered, indicating that demand has increased.


For Lovers, No. 1 Activity These Days Is Worrying
IF the billion Valentine's Day cards that are expected to be sold this week are any measure, love in the United States is robust and healthy.
But Cupid might throw away his arrows if love were measured by the highly publicized cases that have pitted men against women in recent months.
A kiss may still be a kiss, a sigh a sigh, but the fundamental thing that applies today when two lovers woo is, "Can I trust you?"


3-Year-Note Yields Up at Auction
New signals from the Federal Reserve Board that it would not soon lower short-term interest rates had an adverse effect on an auction of $15 billion worth of new three-year Treasury notes.
At the auction, the first of a series held four times a year by the Treasury, bids on the new notes produced an average yield of 5.54 percent, 11 basis points above the yield on the securities late Monday.
A basis point is one one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Jets' Contract Offer Isn't Designed to Sack O'Brien
The Jets' present course of action indicates they have no plans of pulling a Tony Eason on quarterback Ken O'Brien.
Last year, after Eason's contract expired, the Jets offered him less money than he had made the previous year, sending him a clear signal that they didn't value or want his services any longer.


Vitamin C Deficiency in a Man's Diet Might Cause Problems for Offspring
A MAN whose diet is low in vitamin C may increase his likelihood of fathering children with birth defects and certain types of cancers, according to a study recently published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
The study demonstrated a direct relationship between a diet low in vitamin C and increased DNA damage in sperm cells.
DNA is the basic molecule that functions to transmit hereditary traits.
Any damage to this genetic structure may predispose a man to having children with genetic anomalies.


Top Officers Shuffled At Tandycrafts Inc.
Tandycrafts Inc., a specialty retailer based in Fort Worth, said yesterday that R. E. Cox 3d had been named chairman and that John V. Sandlin, the interim president since last month, had been formally named president and chief executive.
It was the second round of executive changes for Tandycrafts in recent weeks.
In January, Kenneth L. Gregson, 63 years old, stepped down as president and chief executive.
The company said that Mr.
Gregson had retired from his senior posts, but would continue as a director and as a liaison between the board and employees.


Student Shot In Hallway Of a School
A 16-year-old student described as the principal's protege at Park West High School in the Clinton section of Manhattan was shot in the left ankle yesterday as he walked in a school hallway to his third-period class.
The student, Wilfredo Vega, was listed in stable condition at St.
Vincent's Hospital, where he was taken after the shooting.
The incident occurred shortly after 10 A.M. in a fourth-floor hallway filled with students changing classes.


For Lovers, No. 1 Activity These Days Is Worrying
IF the billion Valentine's Day cards that are expected to be sold this week are any measure, love in the United States is robust and healthy.
But Cupid might throw away his arrows if love were measured by the highly publicized cases that have pitted men against women in recent months.
A kiss may still be a kiss, a sigh a sigh, but the fundamental thing that applies today when two lovers woo is, "Can I trust you?"


A New Species of Donor Gives to Help the Neediest
File this one under "and you thought you'd seen everything."
With only two weeks to go in the 80th annual appeal of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, it seemed that the list of contributors to the fund this year had run the gamut: toddlers and octogenarians, residents of Caracas, Zurich and Dubuque, wealthy people who operate large companies and poor people who have been unemployed for months.
Poets, movie stars and mechanics.
Nevertheless, yesterday's mail brought a first for this appeal: a $100 check from a dog.


Syracuse to Release Report
Syracuse University has scheduled a news conference on campus for this morning to release the results of a 13-month internal investigation into its basketball program.
Among other things, the 37-page report, of which a copy was obtained by The New York Times, concedes that there were a number of minor violations committed.
But the report does not recommend that action be taken against Jim Boeheim, the head basketball coach, or his two main assistants.


Honeywell-Minolta Dispute Teaches Conflicting Lessons
In full-page newspaper ads, news conferences and public statements, Honeywell Inc. has been insisting that its $96 million award last week in a patent infringement case against the Japanese company Minolta Camera is less a victory than a vindication of American technological prowess.
Honeywell also asserts that the whole affair highlights how the United States has squandered the benefits of that prowess by failing to demand more international protection for patents and other intellectual property.


An Unlikely Pair Pursues a Dream
For the waitress and the truck driver, these Olympics are over.
But at Lillehammer, Norway, in two years, Calla Urbanski and Rocky Marval plan to skate together again.
"It's a matter of pursuing your dream," said Marval, the 26-year-old owner of a trucking firm in New Egypt, N.J., not far from Trenton.
"Being here was my dream. Our dream."


More Smoke Than Fire at McCabe
A year ago, when Ed McCabe opened his own agency, he and his partner, Patrick Hillman, made an audacious announcement in a newspaper article: they would quit smoking when McCabe &amp; Company opened for business.
Yet last week, a visitor to the shop's midtown Manhattan office saw Mr.
McCabe and Mr.
Hillman light up and puff away.


New Kids Sue Ex-Director Over Charges of Fakery
New Kids on the Block have filed a defamation suit against their former music director, who has publicly charged that the group was involved in musical fakery.
Leonard L. Lewin, the New Kids' lawyer, said the group filed a civil suit against Gregory McPherson on Monday in Massachusetts Superior Court in Boston.
The lawsuit contends that statements Mr.
McPherson made about the group to The New York Post were false and defamatory and were made to injure the New Kids for Mr.
McPherson's private gain.
It asks the court for an unspecified amount in punitive damages.


Quayle, Ending European Trip, Urges Trade Pact
Vice President Dan Quayle warned today that failure to complete an often-delayed global trade agreement would be disastrous.
He spoke as he wound up a European tour before flying back to the United States to be with President Bush when the President announces his candidacy tomorrow for a second term.
Referring to talks on a new treaty by members of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which are now at an impasse between Europe and the United States over agricultural subsidies, Mr.
Quayle said, "If we don't conclude the GATT negotiations, we run the risk of seeing the cold war being replaced by the beginning of a trade war."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Tsongas: Disdain for Rivals' Plans
SCRIPT:
Narrator: "Some candidates want to give you a tax cut of 97 cents a day. But will that create jobs? One candidate knows it's gimmicks and bigger deficits that got us into this mess. Paul Tsongas offers straight answers. He'll declare an economic emergency immediately to get America moving: Get business to invest in new jobs and plants. Rebuild industry. And make our workers the most skilled and productive in the world."
"Paul Tsongas won't short-change our future. He'll LEAD American back." ON THE SCREEN:
Slow motion of coins representing the 97 cents that Mr.
Tsongas estimates the various tax-cut plans of his rivals would save the average family.
Stills of an "out of business" sign, workers standing in unemployment lines.
Video of a Tsongas speech.
A final shot of coins with Mr.
Tsongas's book "A Call to Economic Arms" landing on top. (30 seconds.)


Personal Health
THE initial jolt delivered by a diagnosis of breast cancer is often followed by a great debate over how the disease should be treated.
Thanks to the efforts of some very tough women and a few courageous doctors who dared to challenge therapeutic dogma, radical mastectomies have been replaced almost entirely by less disfiguring but equally effective surgery, with or without radiation therapy.
But cancer specialists also realized that for a significant percentage of breast cancer patients, therapy cannot end with removal of the detectable tumor.
Too many patients with seemingly early disease that is confined to the breast area nonetheless suffer a recurrence and eventually succumb to the disease.


Corrections
An article on Monday about television mini-series misidentified the producer of "Scruples Two," which ABC plans to adapt from a novel to be written by Judith Krantz, the author of "Scruples" in 1978.
The mini-series is to be produced by Steve Krantz, Ms.
Krantz's husband, not by Ms.
Krantz herself.


Metropolitan Diary
VALENTINE GREETINGS Remember the Valentine Box -- Ribbons, red foil, paper doilies?
One of the sins committed By well-intentioned teachers, Bringing dread each February To two groups of kids: Those too poor to buy any cards And the unpopular ones Who received no valentines -- Except for the ones Sent by the teacher and by someone Who bought them for everyone.
This, then, is a Valentine In all who were forgotten, Now or any other year.
To those for whom the box was empty -- Sorry: I couldn't afford to mail A card to everyone.
LEWIS GARDNER
--------------------
R.
Chester Redhead is waiting for the No. 1 bus on 86th Street and Madison Avenue.
When it finally arrives, the woman in front of Mr.
Redhead hands the driver a transfer.
"Lady," he says, "this transfer is from yesterday."
"That tells you how long I've been waiting for this bus," she replies.
--------------------
Dear Diary:
While wandering through the Celebrating Calder exhibit at the Whitney Museum, I took a moment to step over to one of the big windows up there on the fourth floor.
I saw how exposed the neighborhood apartment buildings were to the museumgoer's view.
As I moved on, I heard a woman who was still standing at the window call out to her husband: "John, I left the bathroom light on." GWYN KORAHAIS
--------------------
Dear Diary:
I send out a lot of mail with 75 cents' postage.
I combine a Hubert Humphrey 52-cent with a Mary Cassatt 23-cent.
Mr.
Humphrey and Ms.
Cassatt look very nice together, but every time I stick them side by side I feel bad for Humphrey's wife, Muriel.
On the other hand, Mary Cassatt doesn't look very happy even with her silly hat, so maybe it's O.K.
G.
KAYE HOLDEN
--------------------
Heard in a Manhattan elevator: "My wife's boss needs the name of your dog's acupuncturist."
--------------------
Dear Diary:
When I cleaned out my closet and set aside, surprisingly, many unused household antiques, a friend suggested I share her booth at an antiques show.
I packed my parents' 1930's ceramic-lined thermos jug, Aunt Edith's crumbling Chinese embroidery, Aunt Bertha's Bible and added items I bought over the years and little used: the silver salts and peppers, a brass table crumber, a batch of Japanese baskets -- 184 items in all if I counted separately the 48 coins of my father's silver-dollar collection.
Instant dealer!
People looked, people lingered.
I've since thought it was the look of a home, a certain domesticity, that drew them.
Just as my life was revealed to them, they revealed themselves to me: a man bought three 1920's Kodak advertisements for his camera shop; a woman bought an etched decanter to hold her mouthwash; another bought the fragments of Hitler's house that my mother had picked up from the ground when she visited that bombed-out hideaway after the war.
"If you can have these pieces it means that he was defeated, doesn't it?" said the buyer.
I cleared about $1,000.
What was even more pleasing was to see so vividly how things have lives of their own, passing through many hands, serving well, going their own ways.
ANN KEELY
--------------------
A swank French restaurant in Manhattan (the French isn't translated on the menu).
John Savage of Old Greenwich, Conn., listens as a woman translatesfor her table.
She is apparently puzzled, by "huitres," for oysters.
"Oh well," she finally decides, "it's eight of something."
--------------------
Announcement, spotted by Peggy Cross, in the Biology Department at Princeton University: FRIENDS OF DORIS WHITE PLEASE COME AND HAVE  COFFEE AND DOUGHNUTS AND SAY  FAREWELL TO DORIS AND WISH  HER WELL IN HER RETIREMENT.
DATE: FRIDAY, JAN. 31  TIME: 10:30 A.M.
PLACE: ROOM 1 SOUTH  BRING YOUR MUG.


Corrections
A chart yesterday listing last week's top-grossing movies misidentified the studio that made "Beauty and the Beast." It was made by Buena Vista, a Disney subsidiary, not by Warner Brothers.


Restsova Wins the First Women's Biathlon
Dramatically, as if scripted for effect, women entered still another Olympic sport today: the biathlon, that military-based, Nordic-inspired combination of riflery and cross-country skiing.
And the first gold medalist, Anfissa Restsova, brought smiles to the troubled athletes from the former Soviet Union, known here as the Unified Team, as she overcame three penalty laps after missing three targets, and charged through a snowstorm to win convincingly.


Marjorie McKeown Clay; General's Widow, 94
Marjorie McKeown Clay, widow of Gen.
Lucius D. Clay, commander of American forces in Europe after World War II, died of pneumonia on Saturday at Walter Reed Army Hospital in Washington.
She was 94 years old and lived in McLean, Va.
Mrs.
Clay, a graduate of Barnard College, was living with her husband in Berlin in 1948 when one of the cold war's worst crises developed.
A Soviet land blockade cut off the divided city, leading to the American airlift that supplied West Berliners with food and fuel for 327 days.
As part of that effort, Mrs.
Clay, a longtime volunteer for children's and other charitable causes, organized Operation Vittles, in which supply planes dropped parachutes bearing packets of candy for West Berlin's children.


Radicalizing Algeria
Canceled elections.
A clumsy military coup.
Mass arrests.
And now a yearlong state of emergency.
These dismaying steps by the ruling National Liberation Front in Algeria have been taken ostensibly to prevent a takeover by Islamic fundamentalists who were expected to sweep a runoff vote on Jan. 16.
Such drastic repression is not only an affront to democracy, it is likely to radicalize an already aggrieved people and promote the very Islamic extremism that a rattled regime and its military backers seek to contain.
This martial response to discontent is all too reminiscent of the "dirty war" waged by France against the National Liberation Front in the 1950's.
By jailing, torturing and slaying Algerians, France lost a war and made a revolution.
And now the Liberation Front, corrupted by power it has refused to share since victory in 1962, descends into the same perilous defile.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON THE CHARTER -- 10 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Cuomo Misdirects His Aim at 'the Rich' for Heavier Taxes
To the Editor:
I'm quickly tiring of the repeated theme of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York that the 1980's witnessed an unfair reallocation of wealth in this country from "the hard-working, middle-income families to the rich" and that this trend should be reversed by higher taxes on these "rich."
First, this implies that only middle-income earners are hard working.
In most cases, the "rich" are rich because they work hard.
My wife and I are lawyers at large New York City law firms.
Together, we log more than 5,500 hours (2,750 hours each) at the office each year, involving most weekends and holidays.
The average middle-income earner spends 1,450 hours a year in the workplace.
Therefore, my wife and I work the equivalent of two jobs each.


From Spark to Flame To a Roaring Blaze
Seven months before Mike Tyson was born, Cus D'Amato sat by the deserted, neon-splashed swimming pool of our Las Vegas hotel and reminisced about all the nights he had listened at the door of his gym on 14th Street for the footsteps of a boy who would be his next "contender."
This was the night before the heavyweight title fight between Muhammad Ali and Floyd Patterson, in November 1965.
D'Amato, who had managed Patterson and Jose Torres to championships, was out of the loop, a "walk-around guy" with his hand out and his mouth open.
He dreamed of another kid who would come up his gym's dark, narrow, twisting stairs at night, alone and running scared.


Home Video
In video stores there are A movies and B movies.
The A's, as the designation implies, are the star vehicles and box-office standouts that get the best of everything in the way of studio promotion and store display.
B's, that ocean of material from well-made smaller films to the most exploitative toss-offs, have to settle for less space and attention.
Dealers often don't have the resources to carry many B titles, so the entrance requirements have gone up.
"In the stores, the B's need a lot more going for them than they did a few years ago," said Charles Moore of Commtron,the nation's largest distributor.
"Used to be stores raked in one of everything. Now they're very picky."


Review/Dance; Erick Hawkins, Beyond Metaphor and Symbol
"If I could write it, I wouldn't need to dance it." This remark, attributed to Isadora Duncan, appears to have been taken to heart by Erick Hawkins.
Just as poetry has a power of expression that prose does not, Mr.
Hawkins's dances seemingly could not be couched in terms other than their own.
His work avoids the literal and the linear, with a poetic element that reaches beyond metaphor and symbol.


Taraja Samuel, 41, Director of Program To Develop Mentors
Taraja Linda Fraser Samuel, an important figure in the development of the New York City Board of Education's Mentoring Program, died on Monday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
A resident of Brooklyn, she was 41 years old.
She died of cancer, her friends said.


Calendar: Auction, Antiques And Tours
Benefit Auction
Christie's New York, 502 Park Avenue (59th Street); (212) 247-5588.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment; Clinton's Candidacy Is Shaken, Again
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas desperately needed to make New Hampshire voters think about his message this week, not about him.
Instead, in a devastating piece of political timing, the spotlight is now fixed on a letter he wrote in 1969, thanking his R.O.T.C. officer for "saving" him from the draft.
Many of his allies today hailed the letter as the powerful expression of a man who, even at the age of 23, was wrestling with hard issues and trying "to prepare myself for a political life" that, in the language of the times, worked within the system but sought to change it.


Turk Cautions Bush on Toppling of Hussein
Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel of Turkey, a veteran of decades of political intrigue and the victim of military coups, offered some cautionary advice to President Bush on a visit here this week.
Toppling President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, Mr.
Demirel said today, would be a bad way to begin as the world's sole remaining superpower in the eyes of dozens of fragile new democracies.
"Many people aren't happy with Saddam," the Prime Minister said in an interview just before he met with Robert Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence.
"We are not happy with Saddam. But he is there, and it's the business of his country what to do with him."


Wooden Windows, Plain and Fancy
THE 1980s were big years for aluminum, at least where window frames were concerned.
Thousands of worn-out wood-frame windows were discarded throughout the city.
The popular replacement was the aluminum-frame double-hung (up-and-down) window, which tips in for cleaning.
But custom-made wood-frame windows are hardly obsolete.
They are the required replacement in designated landmark buildings where new windows need to look like the old.
And for many people, they are the replacement of choice.
"Wood has a look and richness that some people love," said Joe Doherty, owner of Precision Windows, a wood-frame window manufacturer in the Bronx.
"Some people also like the fact that you can change the color any time."


Hoyas Add to the List Of Connecticut Woes
In a city that has recently grown accustomed to dealing with emotional issues, the University of Connecticut Huskies tonight found themselves in a crisis even more shocking than the debate over a state income tax.
After eliminating a 16-point second-half deficit, the Huskies came apart in the final minutes of a fourth consecutive defeat, a 70-63 loss to Georgetown, at the Civic Center.


Penn Central President
The Penn Central Corporation said today that its directors had elected the vice chairman, Carl H. Lindner 3d, president and chief operating officer.
The board also approved in principle a plan to spin off the company's wire and cable, materials handling and marine-equipment manufacturing businesses into a separate company.


Four-Inch-Long Bees To Adorn Your Walls
WHAT does a painter of faux finishes do when he tires of the genre?
If he's Tim Goslin, a decorative artist in Manhattan, he starts designing wallpaper that is the graphic opposite of those subtle effects.
"I wanted to design super graphics, with bold colors and hard edges," said Mr.
Goslin, right.
Mr.
Goslin, 28 years old, designed his first wallpaper collection last year.
His new designs include four-inch-long bees, griffins, an oversized diamond pattern and five-inch fleurs-de-lis.
The golden bee, which looks lacy and delicate on a pale pink ground, seems slightly dangerous against black.
"Classic images will always be around," Mr.
Goslin said.
"Day-Glo spirals will not."


Dinkins Moves to Assert Control of Troubled Re-election Campaign
Mayor David N. Dinkins's campaign committee yesterday appointed a new treasurer, imposed strict new spending rules and announced a major fund-raising event for April, as the Mayor struggled to get his troubled re-election effort on track.
Dr.
Kevin C. Greenidge, a Manhattan ophthalmologist who has been active in Mr.
Dinkins's fund-raising efforts since 1985, was appointed treasurer at a meeting of the campaign's finance council yesterday, said Harold Ickes, the campaign committee's lawyer.


New Jersey Welfare Law Strengthens Families; Teaching the Children
To the Editor:
"Mr. Bush and New Jersey's Welfare" (editorial, Feb. 3) endorses Assemblyman Wayne Bryant's "welfare reform" package, including the controversial portion that denies any aid to a child born after a mother is already on welfare.
Assemblyman Bryant said he wanted to give the message that mothers had to work to support their children.
You say, "It's worth the risk if it teaches children that work is the order of the day." We can teach these children about the value of work, but first we must value the children.
What do we teach poor children?
*
Surely not the value of work.
The bulk of the poor in the United States already work -- at minimum wage jobs that give no hope of lifting a family out of poverty.
Past welfare-to-work programs have removed more parents from welfare by illegal sanction than by preparing them to work.
The pediatrician T. Berry Brazelton (New York Times Magazine, Sept. 9, 1990) concludes that welfare was really designed to punish the poor for failing to be self-sufficient.
Perhaps welfare creates "welfare dependency" by teaching parents (and their children) that it is nearly impossible to do anything right with regard to work.


Pannell Friends Call for Federal Charges Against Spath
A day after his acquittal on a manslaughter charge, Officer Gary Spath of Teaneck faced calls for his prosecution under Federal law today for the shooting of 16-year-old Phillip Pannell almost two years ago.
Speaking outside the Bergen County Courthouse in Hackensack, the Rev.
Herbert Daughtry of Teaneck, an adviser to the Pannell family, and the Rev.
Stanley Denison of Englewood, head of the local Black Clergy Council, called for the United States to bring criminal civil rights charges against Officer Spath.


Official Seeks Overhaul Of California Insurance
California's Insurance Commissioner today proposed a radical overhaul of the state's health insurance system, recommending the establishment of a government-industry partnership that would no longer tie coverage to employment.
The proposal, as outlined by Insurance Commissioner John Garamendi, a Democrat, centers on government-created corporations that would assess fees to be paid by companies and employees and use the proceeds to purchase health coverage for all residents of the state.


3 Form New Venture To Invest in 3d World
Donald C. Roth, the treasurer of the World Bank, is leaving to form the Emerging Markets Corporation, an investment management firm specializing in developing countries.
Mr.
Roth, chief executive of the new firm, will be joined by two other investment executives, Jay F. Higgins, a former vice chairman of Salomon Brothers, and Moeen A. Qureshi, a former senior vice president of the World Bank.
The Bankers Trust Company has agreed to invest in the new venture.


Albertville
HOCKEY FROM THE HEART
Czechoslovakia pressed hard for 60 minutes and came up with a surprise victory over the Unified Team.
SLOPES OF PERIL
After several skiers were injured, questions are raised about the dangers of the women's downhill course.
SportsThursday, page B19.


Court Decision Won't Let Convicted Mayor Stay On
The New Jersey Supreme Court refused today to allow Gerald McCann to remain as Mayor of Jersey City while he appeals his conviction of Federal fraud and income tax evasion charges.
The court refused to stay a lower-court ruling last Friday that under state law Mr.
McCann had forfeited his office because of the conviction.
Mr.
McCann had won two previous delays of the Superior Court order, but his lawyer acknowledged today that the Mayor's effort to fight his ouster had failed.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about Mr.
Clinton's trip to Londonderry, N.H., misidentified the farm he was visiting.
It was Stonyfield Farm.


T.W.A. Offers More Flights And Cuts Fares at Kennedy
In a move to attract business travelers and make Kennedy International Airport more of a domestic hub, T.W.A. announced yesterday that it would add new morning flights from Kennedy to six big cities.
Trans World Airlines also said it offer new low fares, like a $99 unrestricted one-way fare between Kennedy and Chicago, compared with $427 for the regular full coach fare.


Advice on Electrical Fires
To The Home Section:
I take exception to John Warde's Home Improvement column of Jan. 9.
Specifically, in the event of an electrical fire: (1) sound the alarm, (2) secure the electrical power and (3) fight the fire with an approved extinguisher.


Zany Children's Books
To The Home Section:
If Trish Hall believes that Maira Kalman pioneered "witty allusions and sophisticated ideas" in children's books  [ "For Young Readers, Picasso, Not Bunnies," Jan. 9 ] , she should read "Eloise" by Kay Thompson, illustrated by Hilary Knight, published in 1955.
Or William Steig's work, like "Gorky Rises" (1980) in which Gorky's cousin is named Gogol.


Donna Karan's Penthouse Showroom
DONNA Karan's newest showroom for her less expensive line, DKNY, is a 3,000-square-foot penthouse aerie at 240 West 40th Street in Manhattan.
Faced in glass, the barrel-vaulted space calls attention to itself like a billboard: jutting from the roof are five-feet high letters D.K.N.Y.
The space is designed to sell clothes, as well as to stage fashion shows without having to bring in extra cables and audio equipment.
Wiring for video equipment and a sophisticated sound system has already been installed, along with theatrical lighting.


Burrell Enters Meet
LEROY BURRELL has entered the Mobil Indoor Championships at Madison Square Garden on Feb. 28, assuring a continuation of the 60-meters duel with the new indoor world-record holder, ANDRE CASON.


Two Austrian Sisters Claim Top Luge Prizes
On this final day of women's luge in the XVI Olympic Winter Games, there was a gold and a silver medal for Doris and Angelika Neuner, the Austrian sisters.
There was a bronze medal earned the hard way for Susi Erdmann of Germany, the favorite.
There was a fifth place for Cammy Myler of Lake Placid, N.Y., the highest ever for an American in Olympic luge, and a ninth place for Erica Terwillegar of Lake Placid.


A Cure for Those Pesky Eavesdroppers
To the Editor:
"Eavesdropping: A Sly, Secret Sport in a Wide Open City" (Jan. 10) reminds me that I have participated in an even slier sport: creating conversations to entrap eavesdroppers.
One example involves a young man I knew in the 1940's, who often escorted me, after lunch, back to my desk on the 30th floor of the old Time-Life building.
He would turn to me in the crowded elevator (which moved more slowly than such elevators do now) and, pretending it was part of a previous conversation, say something like this:


METRO DIGEST
THE TEANECK VERDICT  PROTESTING THE ACQUITTAL
High-school students abandoned their classrooms and marched through Teaneck, N.J., and neighboring Hackensack, protesting the acquittal of Gary Spath, the white Teaneck police officer charged with manslaughter in the shooting of Phillip Pannell, a black teen-ager.
B1.
Officer says he was persecuted. B8.
U.S. is asked to weigh civil-rights charges. B8.
An anatomy of the jury selection. B8. NEW YORK CITY  JOHN GOTTI, IN HIS OWN WORDS
John Gotti's own words and the testimony of the man who was once his "most trusted aide" will provide the heart of the racketeering-murder case against him, United States Attorney Andrew J. Maloney told jurors in his opening statement.
B3.
OF JUDGES AND POLITICS
Making judges is a last vestige of machine politics in New York State.
And a state commission's recommendations to change that situation could run into trouble with the very same political leaders whose power it is seeking to diminish.
News analysis, B3.
STEMMING TB IN THE JAILS
A mayoral task force plans to recommend sweeping measures to help control the spread of tuberculosis in the city's jails and holding cells.
The measures include taking chest X-rays of every newly admitted inmate and beginning a screening program for the estimated 247,000 people arrested and held for arraignment in the city every year.
B3.
LIBRARY AIMS TO PLEASE
Librarians at the New York Public Library receive requests for research from patrons that range from the merely bizarre or obscure to the indecipherable.
The answers are just about always in the three million volumes on 88 miles of shelves, however.
And the workers say they enjoy the odd inquiries.
B11.
Brooklyn man held in 2 East Side rapes.
B2.
REGION  YOUTH TREATMENT CRITICIZED
Poorly trained workers in New York State institutions for emotionally disturbed children all too often handle disruptive behavior by putting youths in locked rooms, straitjackets or padded wrist cuffs, or controlling them through force, a report says.
B9.
BATTLE OVER A POST OFFICE
As the population of Sherman, Conn., has doubled, to 2,800, in the last 20 years, its friendly old post office has been overwhelmed.
Nevertheless, a proposal to move it into a more spacious building has set off a battle between townspeople, their local leaders and the Federal Government.
Sherman Journal, B6.
SCANDAL AND SUICIDE
The chief financial officer of the Colonial Realty Company, an investment company whose bankruptcy has shaken banks, businesses and thousands of investors in Connecticut, committed suicide at his home in West Hartford, the authorities said.
The executive, Frank M. Shuch, was to go on trial in May on charges that he embezzled $6 million from Colonial.
B6.


Look Before You Leap Over Moguls
Just when snow-grooming equipment reached the point where it can crush bumps to flat pancakes, skiers are showing a desire for moguls.
And now that mogul skiing is a medal sport in the Olympic Games, the popularity of this freestyle event seems destined to grow even more.
But weekend athletes would be well-advised to look into the demands of the sport before they leap off these often treacherous lumps.
Although Donna Weinbrecht, who is in second place after yesterday's moguls preliminaries in Albertville, France, makes mogul skiing look easy, the sport is at the top rung of skiing skill and one of the most difficult kinds of skiing to do well.


Canadiens Claim Nilan
The National Hockey League career of CHRIS NILAN came full circle yesterday when the Montreal Canadiens claimed their former right wing on waivers from the Boston Bruins.
Nilan had asked the Bruins to place him on waivers earlier in the week because he had been told his ice time would diminish and felt he had reached a dead end with the club.


Making Foreign Visitors Feel More Welcome
To the Editor:
Although tourism development officials and private tour operators print hundreds of pamphlets telling foreign visitors how to get around in New York City, there is still nothing like the human touch.
Therefore, this is to suggest that there should be a central place where foreign tourists could go to ask questions and get answers in their own language about getting around New York City.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
3.87
6.24
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.73
3.73
5.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.81
3.81
5.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.83
6.78
7.63
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.80
7.78
7.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
8.88
9.18
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.75
6.75
7.18
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Prodigy Makes Pitch To Marketers
THE Prodigy Services Company is intensifying its efforts to convince marketers that they should commit scarce advertising dollars to a venture that offers "on line" services like shopping and banking to owners of personal computers.
For the first time, the executives at Prodigy, a joint venture of I.B.M. and Sears, Roebuck, have hired an advertising agency to sell consumer-product companies on what they consider the benefits of the service as an alternative to television, magazines and newspapers.


Accounts
*
Avianca Airlines to Siboney Advertising, New York, to handle the Colombian national airline's American advertising account, following a review that excluded the incumbent, Font &amp; Vaamonde, New York.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Castrol Canada Inc., Toronto, to Scali, McCabe, Sloves Inc., Toronto and New York, to advertise its automotive lubricants.
Billings were not disclosed.
The account was previously handled by BWCK Corp., Toronto.
Scali is also the agency for Castrol Inc. in Wayne, N.J. *
Citicorp Global Insurance, New York, to Masterson Rothberg Advertising, New York, for a print campaign.
Billings were not disclosed on the account, for which there was no previous agency. *
Wells Lamont Co. to Coil Kase Ford &amp; Cheney, both Chicago, for the glove maker's advertising account, previously in-house.
Billings were estimated at $1.5 million.
James Earl Jones will become the company's spokesman. *
Keep America Beautiful Inc. to Rotando Lerch &amp; Iafeliece, both Stamford, Conn., for a campaign for the private, nonprofit group.
The account, whose last campaign was run in 1989, was previously handled by Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, New York.


Happy Birthday, Abe


Some Blacks Fault Teaneck Jury Makeup
From the first, some blacks in Teaneck were uneasy about the makeup of the jury that would hear the case of Officer Gary Spath, a white policeman accused of killing a black teen-ager.
All 12 jurors and both alternates were white.
Moreover, one juror was the son of a retired New York City police officer and another had two brothers-in-law who are police officers.


A Strike Is Postponed at Yale


For an Artist, a Jewel to Paint In
SOME artists paint in cold garrets; others, on street corners.
But William Bramhall, an illustrator, has built a tiny freestanding studio next to his house in southwestern Connecticut.
His studio (right), which measures 8 by 12 1/2 feet, is a miniature white Georgian-style clapboard house with columns, a gray cedar roof and windows on all sides.


No Russian Job For Volcker Yet
Paul A. Volcker, former chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said yesterday that his trip last week to Russia to explore acting as an adviser to the new Government had not produced any assignments.
"We're having a few conversations to see how much and to what degree it may be useful," he said in New York yesterday at a news conference after an economic award ceromony.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Buchanan: Luring Protest Votes


Te U.N. Today
General Assembly ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON THE CHARTER -- 10 A.M.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN GOVERNING COUNCIL ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


In South Africa, New Suspicions That Hired Assassins Are at Work
The latest wave of political violence, usually attributed to conflict between supporters of the African National Congress and the rival Inkatha Freedom Party, has assumed a sinister dimension because some of the killings were carried out with a professionalism characteristic of hired assassins.
Victims in the last week have included at least two officials of the congress and Inkatha who worked to overcome a longstanding hostility between their organizations that has contributed to the loss of 12,000 lives in Natal and the Transvaal since September 1984.


Allegory or Your Money Back
THE great leap forward in East-West relations is about to take a strange turn.
Three Russian emigres now living in New York have been shopping around for the real America.
They think they have found it.
At Sears.
Constantin Boym, a furniture designer, and his friends Vitaly Komar and Alex Melamid, the conceptual artists, have issued their two-part manifesto:
"Sears products exemplify the contemporary American esthetic for heavy-duty beauty." -- Komar and Melamid


Sports of The Times; A Medal Would Be A Miracle
WHEN the United States Olympic hockey team skates onto the ice in the little arena up here in the Savoy's snowy mountains, many of the 6,500 spectators chant "USA, USA" and at least two dozen wave American flags, large and small.
Shift by shift, shot by shot, save by save, the chanting is louder and the flag-waving is wilder.
Just like Lake Placid in 1980.


German Bobsled to Carry Reminder of Police State
When the German four-man bobsled team starts its run down the icy course at La Plagne, France, on Feb. 21, the man driving the sled will be a former secret police informer who once spied on his three teammates.
The driver, Harald Czudaj (pronounced SHOO-dye), recently admitted that he was one of the hundreds of thousands of people in the former East Germany who worked as an informer for the hated and feared secret police, the Stasi.


Toys and Fantasy Police
To The Home Section:
"Who Believes in Make-Believe? Not the New Toys" says the headline of a Feb. 6 article.
But isn't this headline misleading?


Review/Television; Black Conservatives Get A Chance to Be Heard
They are a minority within a minority, and until recently television scarcely acknowledged the existence of black conservatives.
But as hopes have faded that once-popular liberal programs can do much about the pathologies of the inner cities, critics of the welfare state have been getting more of a hearing.
"Black American Conservatism: An Exploration of Ideas," at 10 tonight on Channel 13, offers views that go smack against the policies of leaders of the major black organizations and the opinions of most black voters as well as the disposition of public broadcasting itself.
The hour, paid for largely by conservative foundations, does not have much visual kick.
It consists in the main of expositions of the conservative position by Dr.
Alan L. Keyes, who has served in the Reagan and Bush Administrations; Robert L. Woodson, a disenchanted N.A.A.C.P. member, who is now the president of the National Center for Neighborhood Enterprise; Joseph Perkins, an editorial writer for The San Diego Union, and like-minded exponents of black self-help.


Years Later, It's Finally Payback Time For the Czechs
It has been nearly 24 years since Soviet tanks rolled into Wenceslas Square, but the Czechoslovakia Olympic hockey team continued to memorialize the event tonight with a visceral 4-3 victory over the Unified Team.
The Czechoslovaks pressed hard for 60 minutes, giving up their bodies all over the ice until the final buzzer and the sing-song celebration in the locker room.
The effort was not unusual for the Eastern European underdogs, who usually come up big against the Russians, or their latest namesakes, in mid-tournament.
After that, it is a roll of the dumpling.


CHRONICLE
MEREDITH VIEIRA, whose departure from "60 Minutes" last summer caused a tempest about the situation of mothers with careers, will return to the airwaves on "CBS Morning News" in the next few weeks, ERIC OBER, president of CBS News, announced yesterday.
Ms.
Vieira will be an anchor, with CHARLES OSGOOD, of the news program that is broadcast weekdays between 6 and 7 A.M.
She will also contribute to the "Eye on America" segment of the "CBS Evening News." GISELLE FERNANDEZ, who has been an anchor of the morning program, will become a correspondent for the evening program.


Transit Protesters Lengthen the Rush Hour
In a demonstration that delayed rush-hour traffic for more than an hour, about 1,000 transit workers marched across the Brooklyn Bridge yesterday evening to protest a proposed agreement between their union and the New York City Transit Authority, the police said.
The police closed the Manhattan-bound lanes of the bridge about 5:30 P.M., shortly after demonstrators marched to the bridge from the Transit Authority headquarters at 370 Jay Street in Brooklyn, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman, said yesterday.
Traffic on the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway and other streets was backed up until the bridge was reopened at about 7:40, she said.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign visit to Portsmouth, N.H., referred incorrectly in some editions to the woman walking with him.
She was Barbara Dunfey, a local supporter, not Mr.
Clinton's wife, Hillary.


News Summary
International A3-17  U.N. PRESSED TO ACT IN YUGOSLAVIA
Worried that a cease-fire could break down, a special United Nations envoy recommended that a larger-than-expected peacekeeping force be deployed in Yugoslavia, Western diplomats said.
A1  ELDER REBUKES JAPANESE
The man described as the godfather of Japanese politics chided some of his country's leaders, saying that their criticisms of American work habits had seriously worsened relations with the United States.
A1


Disturbances Continue in Algeria


Covering His Right, Bush Joins '92 Race
President Bush formally declared his candidacy for re-election, invoking the bedrock Republican themes of the past in an effort to blunt criticism from his party's right wing that he has abandoned conservative principles for political pragmatism.


Sears Plans 600 Job Cuts; Closings Set
In a further effort to regain its competitive edge through cost cuts, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company announced yesterday that over the next year it would eliminate about 600 jobs, clamp down on compensation and close several offices.
The company said the cuts and closings, part of a reorganization of its retail operations, would save it about $50 million by 1993.
Its fourth-quarter earnings improved after the merchandising group, which runs Sears stores, eliminated about 40,000 jobs last year and converted many of its sales associates to non-commission pay scales.


Bridge
Switching from one form of bridge to another requires a number of adjustments in bidding and play.
In social games and most varieties of team play, the object is simply to make one's contract.
Making an extra trick is unimportant, and so also, unless the contract is doubled, is a two-trick defeat rather than a one-trick defeat.
But matters are quite different when match points are involved, as they are in most club and tournament play.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Bush Announces Candidacy, Claiming Reagan Mantle
Seeking to blunt the right-wing threat from Patrick J. Buchanan in New Hampshire, President Bush today reached for the conservative political mantle of Ronald Reagan in formally announcing his candidacy for re-election, then promptly flew here to campaign.
"In 1980 I came to Washington as part of a team," Mr.
Bush said in Washington this morning with Vice President Dan Quayle, a favorite of conservatives, standing at his side.
"We started a revolution to free America from -- you remember -- the politics of malaise and to set sail toward America's destiny." Bedrock Republican Themes
The President seemed intent on staking his conservative credentials on the bedrock Republican themes of the past: patriotism, anti-Communism, a strong military, family values, small government and deregulation.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Alex Chilton Tramps
Pacific jazz, Memphis rhythm-and-blues, cheesy motel cabaret, Beach Boys-style surf, rockabilly, 1970's funk and Frank Sinatra are not elements that usually converge in one artist, let alone a single performance.
But Alex Chilton brought them all together at Tramps on Monday night.
Playing what must have alternately been one of the most brilliant and awful shows of his recent career, this 41-year-old Memphis-based singer and songwriter, a pebble in the sneaker of rock-and-roll since 1967, by turns sank to horrible depths and raised himself up again.
He pulled so many weird moments of pop history out of his brain that he defied musical logic.


Harold Prince Bound For Off Off Broadway, And Happy About It
"What's the trouble?" asked Harold Prince, horn-rims at half mast on his brow, as ever.
A group of minstrels in the Dublin of the 1880's had missed their cue.
"All right now, try it again," said the director.
And then the minstrels exploded out to center stage, fiddling and dancing, then joining hands in a circle.
"Yes! Yes!" said Mr.
Prince, beaming.
"Fine tuning!" he called to them.
"That's what this is all about. And I love to watch you fiddle!"
About him, aswirl with action and alive with music, was an atmospheric re-creation of Victorian Dublin, the stage setting for "Grandchild of Kings," adapted by Mr.
Prince from two of the six volumes of Sean O'Casey's autobiography.
The play is a coming-of-age drama depicting the early years in the life of the gaunt, fiery playwright, who wrote more than 20 plays before his death at the age of 84 in 1964.
It will open on Monday, the first to inhabit the new performance space at the Theater for the New City, 155 First Avenue, near 10th Street, for an eight-week run.


Businesses Criticize F.C.C. on Phone Service Disruptions
Business groups rarely sound like consumer advocates, but now they are beginning to complain that the Federal Communications Commission is failing to protect the reliability of the nation's telephone networks.
The criticism has been building as Federal officials try to forge policy in the wake of the huge failures that disrupted local telephones for millions of customers in three cities last summer and long-distance services in New York and Boston last fall.


12 Are Killed as Pakistani Police Fire on Kashmiris Marching Toward Border
Alarmed over the possibility of conflict with India, Pakistan violently halted a march today by Kashmiri separatists trying to enter the Indian-controlled portion of Kashmir.
The march by Kashmiri militants toward the tense, mountainous border between Indian and Pakistan disintegrated when the police fired into oncoming protesters, killing at least 12 and wounding as many as 100.


Prize-Winning Economist Sees a Year of Sluggishness
Like a nagging winter cold, the economy is likely to continue to stumble along a path of slow growth this year, according to Richard D. Karfunkle, winner of this year's Economic Forecasting Award from the Sterling National Bank and Trust Company of New York.
Mr.
Karfunkle, president of Econoviews International in Kennett Square, Pa., is one of 50 economists whose records over the last three years were used as the basis for selecting the winner of the Sterling Bank award.
Of the 50, his predictions were the most accurate.


What Soviet Experience Doesn't Tell Us
To the Editor:
Milton Friedman supports his defense of Reaganomics by references to "experience throughout the world, from the United States to the former Soviet empire" (Op-Ed, Feb. 2).
There is a case for small government, but the collapse of the Soviet Union adds nothing of relevance to it.
The Soviet Union was not simply an extreme instance of government intervention in an economy, but of a government trying to run the whole economy.
It is absurd to oppose the Clean Air Act and Americans With Disabilities Act because of the inefficiencies of the Soviet bureaucracy.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Benton Oil and Gas Co., Ventura, Calif., signed a letter with a Russian company to conduct exploration in an additional area of west Siberia. *
Jacobs Engineering Group Inc., Pasadena, Calif., received a contract to provide engineering services for a $7 million environmental storage operation at a Union Carbide Corp. plant in Taft, La.


Knicks Resume Winning Ways
The Knicks did not allow the All-Star break to break their momentum.
Riding the capable shoulders of Patrick Ewing (35 points, 13 rebounds), New York overcame an 11-point third-quarter deficit to defeat the Indiana Pacers, 111-104, at Market Square Arena tonight.
It was the third consecutive victory for the Knicks (31-16) and it was their fifth consective triumph on the road.


Black Theater, Day by Day
NOT many calendars contain such interesting information that they see double duty as textbooks.
But this year's calendar from Aetna Life &amp; Casualty is so filled with facts and photographs relating to black history and culture that it is in demand in several schools in the New York area.
"In the Shadow of the Great White Way: Images from the Black Theater" is offered free to the American Federation of Teachers, whose members distribute it in their classrooms.
About half of this year's 150,000 copies have been earmarked by Aetna for use in schools and come with a teachers' guide.
Eleven public schools in the New York area have received copies in bulk.


Growing
MY eyeballs felt hot.
My throat was sore.
My head ached.
Climbing the stairs, I felt like an old, old woman.
I had end-of-the-world images.
The ozone hole.
Overpopulation.
Toxic waste.
Death of the manatee.
It was just the flu laying waste New York City.
When a virus does battle with my white blood cells, all extraneous matters fall away: deadlines, social engagements, petty jealousies, existential loneliness.
The world is a simple place of ginger tea and kale soup and the longing for carrots.
Sweet carrots of deep, deep orange, full of vitamins C and E and beta carotene, which turns into vitamin A.


Prince Charles Forms Architecture School
Prince Charles, who once compared modern buildings to "Frankenstein monsters," has announced the formation of a new institute of architecture, which will bear his title and convey his antimodernist principles to students from around the world.
In October, the Prince of Wales's Institute of Architecture, housed in two classical stucco buildings designed by John Nash on the edge of Regent's Park in London, will offer its first one-year course to 30 students.
By autumn 1993, a postgraduate course will also be offered.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
REMOVING or relocating a wall is not the only way to enlarge a kitchen or to incorporate it more intimately with a dining area.
Often, cutting a window-size opening, or "pass-through," in an existing wall is sufficient.
This solution can sacrifice less cabinet space than removing a wall completely, and the job can usually be done fast and relatively inexpensively.
Eye level is a convenient height for the top of a pass-through.
If there are wall cabinets, a pass-through can be cut beneath them.
But the pass-through should be at least 15 inches high.


George's 22 Keep the Nets From Sliding
Eight is enough.
That's how many games in a row the Nets had lost.
That's how many in a row they had lost in the Spectrum, too.
But tonight, with Tate George providing a career-high 22 points, the Nets snipped both streaks with a 102-87 victory over the 76ers.
The victory evened the season series between the Nets (20-29) and Philadelphia (24-25) at two games apiece.
They meet again Friday night at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Dow Jumps To Record At 3,276.83
Spurred in part by expectations of a further interest-rate cut by the Federal Reserve, stocks rallied strongly yesterday, with many indexes bounding past recently set records.
A solid showing in the secondary market spilled over into blue-chip issues, as the Dow Jones industrial average rose 25.26 points, to 3,276.83.
That barely eclipsed its previous high, 3,272.81, set on Feb. 4.


The Latest in Canine Sportswear


Formica Spruces Up The Hearth
FORMICA, normally seen in counters and cabinets, has been given a new function by Leslie Armstrong, a Manhattan architect (right, with her daughter Helen).
She designed a fireplace of the material in her country home in Southfield, Mass.
Her husband, William Priester, who comes from Iowa, wanted a real New England farmhouse: white, discreet and simple.
"But I wanted color," Ms.
Armstrong said.
She framed the fireplace with what she calls a "draped proscenium, or a portal" of Formica.
It is in three colors: boysenberry blue on top and Nile green on the bottom, with a thin band of Chinese red running in between.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
VIVIAN MILROY thought the 6-year-old girls had been so well-behaved during the holiday outing that, as a special treat, she bought them each a small bag of jelly beans for the car trip home.
She was impressed with how nicely her daughter and the other child got along and how well they played together.
"All of a sudden, all hell broke loose in the back seat as they fought over a chocolate jelly bean," said Ms.
Milroy, a marketing research director at General Mills in Minneapolis.
She asked the girls to settle down, but the squabbling only grew worse.
Finally, she pulled the car to the side of the road and took all the jelly beans away.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with Mark Eichhorn, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Felix Fermin, shortstop, on a one-year contract.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Agreed to terms with Alejandro Pena, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Agreed to terms with Kal Daniels, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK METS -- Agreed to terms with Mackey Sasser, catcher, and Bill Pecota, infielder, on one-year contracts.
Named David Howard general counsel.
Basketball  United States Basketball League  PHILADELPHIA SPIRIT -- Named Mike Soroka scouting director and Scott Loft director of player personel.
Football  National Football League  LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Named Rick Smith director of public relations.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Named John Guy special teams coach.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Named Carl Jackson running back coach.
Hockey  East Coast Hockey League  LOUISVILLE ICE HAWKS -- Traded Brian Bellefeville, right wing, to Knoxville for future considerations.
Soccer  American Professional Soccer League  FORT LAUDERDALE STRIKERS -- Named Thomas Rongen coach.
College
NORTH CAROLINA STATE -- Agreed to terms with Les Robinson, men's basketball coach, on a two-year contract.


Madrid Journal; 500 Years Later, Latin America Can Forgive Spain
In the long windup to the Columbus quincentenary this year, Spain's recurrent fear was that Latin America might spoil the party by retelling all sorts of unpleasant stories about the pillaging and cruelty that followed Spain's conquest of the New World.
Already in the late 1980's, some Indian groups and leftist politicians were arguing that since there was nothing to celebrate, Latin America should boycott the occasion.
Even now, some governments suspect that Spain is more intent on strengthening its new ties to Europe than its old ties to America.


Students Call For Justice In Teaneck
About 150 high school students, some of them carrying neon placards saying "Justice!" and "No Justice, No Peace!" marched and rallied in Hackensack and Teaneck this afternoon to protest the acquittal Tuesday night of a white Teaneck police officer, Gary Spath, in the April 1990 shooting death of a black teen-ager, Phillip Pannell.
At the first of two rallies, students from Hackensack High School streamed onto the grounds of the Bergen County Courthouse in Hackensack chanting, "We want Spath!" as a group of community leaders and members of the clergy was holding a news conference there.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Victory for Courier  Jim Courier, the top-ranked player in the world, breezed past France's Fabrice Santoro, 6-2, 6-1, in an opening-round match yesterday at the $800,000 Donnay indoor championship in Brussels.
Courier, who replaced Stefan Edberg as the world's top-ranked player last Saturday, needed only 63 minutes to beat the Frenchman, who is ranked 50th.
Zina Garrison, seeded fourth, was tested by the world's 56th ranked player, Linda Harvey-Wild, but squeezed out a 6-4, 7-6 victory. (AP) SLED-DOG RACING  Swingley Wins Again  Greg Swingley, the 36-year-old musher from Simms, Mont., won the Montana Race to the Sky yesterday for the second time.
Swingley set a record for the 500-mile event, finishing the race in 87 hours 1 minute.
Terry Adkins of Sand Coulee, Mont., was second, finishing seven hours after Swingley.
The race began last Saturday in the mountains near Helena, Mont.


The Games Are Brought to You By . . .
Any high-flown palaver about the selfless idealism underlying the original Olympics concept rings increasingly hollow while watching the current CBS Sports coverage of the "XVI Winter Olympic Games." This is a gigantic business undertaking on every level, from network executive suites to advertiser campaigns to possible future payoffs for the athletes.
On this scale, the word hype is hopelessly puny and inadequate.
The good news: The pictures from Albertville, France, are superb whether capturing the athletes in close-up or giving viewers a you-are-there ride down a ski slope.
The marvels of television camera work tend, quite unfairly, to be taken for granted.
The images can be riveting.
It's the broadcaster additions that keep getting in the way.


Bronze Doors Make an Entrance
LAST year, the co-op board at 38 East 85th Street in Manhattan decided that the building's entrance, which had plain dark wood doors, and the lobby, whose plaster walls were treated to look like stone, were beginning to appear a bit shabby.
Three weeks ago, the entrance was transformed.
The doors (below) are now of bronze, and the lobby walls are covered in white raw silk on top and mahogany panels below.


Wide Use of Force on Disturbed Children Is Found
Poorly trained workers in institutions for emotionally disturbed children in New York State all too often handle disruptive behavior by putting youths in locked rooms, straitjackets or padded wrist cuffs, or controlling them through other kinds of physical force, a state report released yesterday concluded.
The New York State Commission on Quality of Care for the Mentally Disabled found that workers with little more than a high school education were left with disturbing frequency to monitor children at night and on weekends when professional staff members went home.


NORIEGA'S FORCES HAD DRUG ACCORD
A 1984 meeting between subordinates of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega and the head of the Drug Enforcement Administration office in Panama resulted in a secret agreement between the two countries to fight the Medellin cartel jointly, the drug agency official testified today.
Reading from a report sent to his superiors in Washington, Thomas M. Telles, whose two years as the drug agency's senior representative in Panama began in June 1984, said that General Noriega's forces had promised to help the United States in identifying cartel members' "bank accounts, monitoring movements of their money" and seizing the chemicals needed to make cocaine.
The objective, he said, was the "immobilization of the organization."


Big Profits From Risky Customers
Mail-order shopping is largely a pursuit of the affluent, with companies like J. Peterman offering a $33 leather-brimmed baseball hat described as a "treasure."
But the Fingerhut Companies is making large profits pursuing customers that most cataloguers would not waste postage on.
In fact, Fingerhut has grown into the nation's fourth-largest mail-order company by serving customers who on average have a household income of $24,000, about $5,000 less than the national average.


Quotation of the Day
"Japan can exist because the United States exists, but it is not the other way around. We owe our prosperity to the United States. Many Japanese forget this fact." -- SHIN KANEMARU, a leader of Japan's governing party.  [ A1:2. ]


Market Place; Americus Trust Becoming Extinct
AMERICUS TRUST units, in some ways the original long-term stock options, are starting to vanish.
Two of the existing 24 Americus trust units will go off the boards tomorrow, as the trust units on A.T.&amp; T. and Bristol-Myers Squibb expire.
The other 22 will disappear during the next several months, with the trust units on American Express the final ones.
All the units now trade on the American Stock Exchange, where they are listed in the A's and have often dominated the Amex lists of daily gainers and losers.


S.E.C. Proposal on Executive Pay Expected
Under growing pressure from lawmakers and shareholders to make companies more accountable for executive pay, the Securities and Exchange Commission on Thursday will propose rules requiring publicly traded companies to disclose more fully how much their executives are paid and to give stockholders the right to vote on compensation.
The proposals, described today by senior officials at the agency who insisted on not being identified, are intended to head off more restrictive legislation on executive pay that is pending in Congress.
As layoffs and hard times continue, public outrage has grown over the increasing number of multimillion-dollar compensation packages offered to executives, many of which include lucrative stock options as well as big salaries and bonuses.


Borg Sets Comeback
BJORN BORG, who recently announced that he would resume competitive tennis by joining the new seniors tour, said that he would play in the American Capital Invitational at the River Oaks Tennis Center in Houston next month.
The 35-year-old Borg, who plans to play an exhibition against JOHN LLOYD in Los Angeles on Feb. 25, said he had selected the clay-court Houston event, which runs from March 30 to April 5, as one of three planned American appearances simply because it fit his schedule.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
House Democrats sent all of Bush's tax proposals to the floor, where they expect the package to die.
In doing so, they insisted that all they wanted to do was cooperate with the President.  [ Page A1. ]
The S.E.C. will propose rules requiring publicly traded companies to disclose more fully how much executives are paid.  [ D1. ]


Tucson Electric Reoffering Bonds
The Tucson Electric Power Company, which was pushed to the brink of bankruptcy last year by a large overcapacity of power and a failed diversificaiton strategy, said yesterday that it would reoffer about $753 million in floating-rate, tax-exempt debt before the end of June.
The bonds were originally offered in 11 series from 1981 to 1985.
The lead underwriter will be Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, which was also lead underwriter on the utility's successful reoffering of $117.5 million of tax-exempt revenue bonds last year.


Looking Beyond Lafayette Gym
In his English class at Lafayette High School Tuesday afternoon, a discussion of "Macbeth" was taking place, and Phil Washington -- known to his friends as Phil Good -- was trying to concentrate, but his mind kept shifting forward to the basketball game in about two hours in the school gym.
Washington would be starting at guard in a big game against the arch-rival, Lincoln, located, as they say in the school, about five minutes down the Belt Parkway.
"Hard not to daydream," he recalled after class.
"You walk down the hallways and people are saying,, 'Y'all playing Lincoln today, Phil?' And you tell 'em, 'Yeah,' 'Big game, good luck.' 'And you start to think. I picture myself on the court, doing this" -- one hand threw an imaginary pass over one shoulder -- "and doing that" -- another hand threw another invisible pass over his other shoulder.
"Doing Magic stuff," he said, considering in his mind's eye how those passes ended up as baskets for Lafayette.


Tyson's Ring Weapons Proved His Undoing
Some people found it a bit puzzling at first.
Here was what was supposed to be the big moment in Mike Tyson's rape trial: the former heavyweight champion with a record of 41 victories and 1 defeat being cross-examined by J. Gregory Garrison, the special prosecutor who had not lost a jury trial since 1973.
But instead of talking about the charges against the fighter, Mr.
Garrison was asking him about boxing styles and strategy and what Mr.
Tyson's first trainer, Cus D'Amato, taught him.


Essay; Clinton vs. Cuomo, II
The issue in New Hampshire next week is not whether Bill Clinton avoided the draft but whether Mario Cuomo can induce one.
I called Cuomo headquarters in New Hampshire to find out how the write-in campaign was going, and wound up speaking to a clerk in Cuomo Appliances in Manchester who complained that his phone was ringing off the hook.


I.B.M. Plan For Faster Machines
I.B.M. plans to announce today that it is opening a laboratory devoted to designing computers that platoon hundreds or thousands of chips to gain dramatic increases in speed -- a technique known as massively parallel computing.
The computers are expected to be brought to market by early next year.
Such supercomputers were once considered radical experiments on the fringe of computer research.
I.B.M.'s announcement signals that it believes the time has come to bring massively parallel computing into the mainstream market.


Free Chen Ziming and Wang Juntao
President Bush, having encouraged China's hard-liners last month by meeting with Prime Minister Li Peng in New York, could now redress the balance: Appeal for the immediate release of Chen Ziming and Wang Juntao.
Li Peng himself is said to have called these two imprisoned democrats the "old tigers of four dynasties." They have participated in all four of the pro-democracy movements in China since the close of the Maoist era.


Hy Zausner, Tennis Figure, Dies; Founder of L.I. Academy Was 84
Hy Zausner, the visionary who founded the Port Washington Tennis Academy, which has nurtured John McEnroe, Vitas Gerulaitis and some 10,000 lesser young players since it was established on Long Island in 1965, died yesterday at St.
Francis Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 84 years old.
Mr.
Zausner had suffered a stroke, according to his son, Richard, who said he did not know the cause of death.


Berry Joins Broncos As Quarterbacks Coach
RAYMOND BERRY the former Patriots head coach who has been coaching quarterbacks for the Detroit Lions, was named quarterbacks coach of the Denver Broncos yesterday and the Broncos receivers coach, GEORGE HENSHAW, was named offensive coordinator.
The moves by head coach DAN REEVES fill vacancies created last month when he dismissed offensive coordinator MIKE SHANAHAN, who had doubled as quarterbacks coach.


Prosecution in Gotti Trial To Stress Secret Tapes
John Gotti's own words and the testimony of the man who was once his "most trusted aide" will provide the heart of the racketeering-murder case against him, United States Attorney Andrew J. Maloney told jurors in his opening statement yesterday.
"This is a case about a Mafia boss being brought down by his own words, his own right arm and in the course of it, perhaps bringing down his whole family," Mr.
Maloney said, as Mr.
Gotti listened at the defense table without displaying emotion.


Tyson's Ring Weapons Proved His Undoing
Some people found it a bit puzzling at first.
Here was what was supposed to be the big moment in Mike Tyson's rape trial: the former heavyweight champion with a record of 41 victories and 1 defeat being cross-examined by J. Gregory Garrison, the special prosecutor who had not lost a jury trial since 1973.
But instead of talking about the charges against the fighter, Mr.
Garrison was asking him about boxing styles and strategy and what Mr.
Tyson's first trainer, Cus D'Amato, taught him.


A Swarm of Gypsy Cabs
Just seven years ago, Richie's Car Service had 50 cars that shuttled hundreds of New Yorkers each day between the 179th Street subway station at the end of the F line in Jamaica and their homes in the semi-suburban sprawl of eastern and southeastern Queens.
Today, Richie's -- run from a white trailer that sits on cement blocks next to Hillside Avenue -- has shrunk to 25 cars, a victim not of the recession, its owners say, but of a proliferation of unlicensed, or gypsy, taxicabs.


INSIDE
Teaneck Remains Tense
Students rallied to protest the acquittal of a white officer in the death of a black youth.
Around town, there were calls for new charges and questions about the all-white jury.
Page B1.
Pakistan Fires on Kashmiris
Alarmed over the possibility of conflict with India, Pakistan violently halted a march by Kashmiri separatists, killing 12.
Page A3.


Brooklyn Man Arrested in 2 Rapes on East Side
A 21-year-old Brooklyn man arrested early yesterday morning was charged with committing two rapes on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and is a suspect in a third, the police said.
The man, David Daniel, was arrested at his mother's house, at 1003 Willmohr Street in East Flatbush, Brooklyn, at 2:45 A.M., said Inspector Joseph Saccavino, commander of the Manhattan Detectives.


How to Squeeze Saddam Hussein
A year after the Persian Gulf war, Saddam Hussein still struts.
Millions of Iraqi Kurds, Shiites and Sunnis grow restless in the grip of hunger and high prices.
The beaten Iraqi Army ponders its loyalties and its own best interests.
Can't something
decisive
be done?
President Bush, like many Americans, longs impatiently for such a resolution.
Late last year he authorized the C.I.A. to foment internal military action against Saddam Hussein and asked the Pentagon to plan military moves in support of any revolt.


3d Anniversary of Edict Against Rushdie
On Friday, writers around the world will observe the third anniversary of the death sentence against Salman Rushdie with events championing the right to freedom of expression.
On Feb. 14, 1989, the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini of Iran issued his edict, or fatwa, sentencing Mr.
Rushdie to death for having written "The Satanic Verses." The Ayatollah said the novel blasphemed Islam.
Since then, Mr.
Rushdie has been in hiding in Britain, resurfacing only for the occasional book signing, interview or speech.


Iraq Trying to Make Plutonium Too, U.N. Aide Says
United Nations nuclear inspectors now in Iraq are hunting for a secret nuclear reactor capable of producing enough plutonium to make two or more bombs a year, United Nations officials and European diplomats say.
For the first time, the United Nations inspectors searching for President Saddam Hussein's weapons of mass destruction have described intelligence suggesting that Iraq has a previously unknown reactor capable of turning out plutonium.


Did Women, or Politics, Put A Chinese Democrat in Jail?
Of all the criminal cases in China involving advocates of democracy, perhaps the most mysterious -- certainly the most titillating -- concerns a leading official here who was sentenced to four years in prison for engaging in an overly dynamic sex life.
Pan Weiming, the 42-year-old former chief of propaganda in Shanghai, China's largest city, was sentenced on Jan. 24 for "hoodlum offenses."


Bush Orders End to Manufacture Of Ozone-Harming Agents by '96
In response to new evidence that the earth's atmospheric ozone shield may be weakening over parts of the United States, President Bush today ordered American manufacturers to end by Dec. 31, 1995, virtually all production of chemicals that destroy ozone.
The policy, authorized under a provision of the 1990 Clean Air Act, takes effect immediately.
Last Friday the Bush Administration reversed its opposition to such a plan and backed a Senate proposal to phase out the production of the chemicals as soon as possible, rather than by 2000.


The Unmade American Bedroom; What Secrets a Bed Table Can Hold
MY bedside table is small, too small.
The lamp, tall, looks uneasy.
The books that bank it are as uncertainly balanced as standees on a bus.
Among them are A. S. Byatt's "Possession" and Gabriel Garcia Marquez's "Love in the Time of Cholera." They are there for the day I have a cold bad enough to stay home but not so bad my eyes are streaming.
Since that day will probably never arrive, only the detective novels are sure to be read (if I wake at 3).
In the soul's dark night, it is wise to find a soul darker than one's own.
If I spent more time in bed, I would outfit that table, or a table twice its size, as grandly as an oceangoing raft.
But I was raised in a family to whom "lying around in bed" was tantamount to sin.
It atrophied the moral muscles; it paralyzed the moral spine.
If I lingered on a mattress longer than my health justified, I'd arise a prodigal.


Investors in Venezuela Are Confident
Investor confidence and contracts are returning after the failed coup of Feb. 4.
President Carlos Andres Perez has vowed to maintain orthodox, free-market economic policies, which last year helped to lower inflation and to aid growth.


VANCE URGES U.N. TO PROTECT TRUCE IN YUGOSLAVIA SOON
The United Nations special envoy for Yugoslavia today recommended the rapid deployment of a larger-than-expected peacekeeping force in that country, Western diplomats and United Nations officials said.
After delaying for weeks, the envoy, Cyrus R. Vance, made his recommendation to the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Ghali, amid growing fears that the fragile cease-fire will break down unless the force is dispatched quickly.
The force is now to be expanded from 10,000 soldiers to 11,500 soldiers with 500 additional police officers.


Miscellany
*
The Television Bureau of Advertising, New York, will introduce its first trade advertising campaign next week, to promote spot television as an ad medium.
The campaign, carrying the theme "Put your money where your sales are," was a collaboration between the bureau and William Snyder Design Inc., New York.


Scandal-Plagued Realty Concern's Chief Financial Officer Kills Himself
The chief financial officer of the Colonial Realty Company, an investment company whose bankruptcy has shaken banks, businesses and thousands of investors in Connecticut, committed suicide on Tuesday at his home in West Hartford, Conn., the authorities said
The executive, Frank M. Shuch, 40 years old, was to go on trial in May in Federal District Court in New Haven on charges that he embezzled $6 million from Colonial, which is based in West Hartford.
He faced maximum penalties of $24 million in fines and 485 years in prison.


17 Firefighters Hurt In Blaze in Harlem
A fire swept through the top floors of a five-story apartment building in Harlem last night, forcing its 32 residents to flee and slightly injuring 17 firefighters, officials said.
The blaze, which officials said may have been deliberately set by a squatter, began shortly after 8 P.M. on the fifth floor and quickly spread to the roof of the building, at 283 West 150th Street, near Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard.


Tyson's Ring Weapons Proved His Undoing
Some people found it a bit puzzling at first.
Here was what was supposed to be the big moment in Mike Tyson's rape trial: the former heavyweight champion with a record of 41 victories and 1 defeat being cross-examined by J. Gregory Garrison, the special prosecutor who had not lost a jury trial since 1973.
But instead of talking about the charges against the fighter, Mr.
Garrison was asking him about boxing styles and strategy and what Mr.
Tyson's first trainer, Cus D'Amato, taught him.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Joe Morris Knitting Factory
The guitarist Joe Morris and his trio whipped through a tight little set at the Knitting Factory on Sunday night.
Mr.
Morris, who lives in Boston, rarely comes to New York, but when he does he comes prepared; his show was precisely arranged and organized and a bit hyperactive, with riffs and solos falling all over themselves to be heard.
But in an odd way, Mr.
Morris has taken care to keep his rhythm section clean and orderly, having it spew out long, complicated riffs that often use off-balance time signatures.
Mr.
Morris, playing with a dirty, buzzing tone, clanged away at nicely angular melodies, but where the rhythm section was taut, Mr.
Morris, who borrows some of his ideas from the guitarist James (Blood) Ulmer, caught Mr.
Ulmer's openness and slackness.
This bordered on false advertising, implying a certain improvisatory coarseness that wasn't really there.


Difficult Days as Eldredge Gets Ready
Once, twice, three times and again, Todd Eldredge skated across the ice and aligned himself for a triple-axel jump.
Once, twice, three times and again, he failed.
Either another skater had crossed his path during the practice session, interrupting his approach, or he could not generate enough power to rotate three and a half times in the air.
Finally, after several more attempts, he made it.
The tension eased a bit from his face, and his coach, Richard Callaghan, flashed him a smile of approval.
It was the skater's first successful triple axel since he arrived in Europe last week.


Heavy California Rains Cause Flooding but Fail to Ease Drought


Westmark Is Planning To Split Operations
Westmark International Inc., the company that makes diagnostic ultrasound equipment and other patient-monitoring products, said today that it planned to split its operations into two public companies.
The operations to be affected are Advanced Technology Laboratories, its diagnostic ultrasound business, and Spacelabs Inc., its patient-monitoring company.
The split, in which shareholders would get one share of each company for every Westmark share, is subject to shareholder approval at the annual meeting in May.
Westmark is based in Seattle.


Conspicuous Consumers
To The Home Section:
From Suzanne Slesin's "Decorating Confessions: The Secret Shame of Ostentation" (Jan. 30), I infer that de-acquisition specialists may emerge among interior designers as consultants to self-conscious conspicuous consumers.
SALLY HUNTER Alexandria, Va.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; A Stone's Throw From Fray, Cuomo Upstages Candidates
With all the trappings of a campaign, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo traveled to the New Hampshire media market today to deliver a speech that won as much attention for its timing as for its substance.
Six days before the Presidential primary in New Hampshire, where Cuomo supporters are waging an unauthorized write-in campaign for the New York Governor, Mr.
Cuomo went to Harvard to denounce what he described as a practice of scapegoating the poor for the country's economic problems.


At Library, No Inquiry Is Too Odd
Every day, 3,500 people climb the main steps of the New York Public Library, past the two stone lions, Patience and Fortitude, to pursue a fact or a fancy.
More than half wind up in Room 315, the Public Catalogue Room.
There, a platoon of librarians stands arrayed beneath the high Beaux-Arts ceiling, fielding requests ranging from bizarre and obscure to indecipherable.
The answers are just about always in the three million volumes on 88 miles of shelves.


Co-President Promoted At Marsh &amp; McLennan
For four years, John T. Sinnott and David D. Holbrook have worked under a system of give and take as co-presidents of Marsh &amp; McLennan Inc., the giant insurance brokerage.
Now that carefully balanced relationship will be put to a more complex test: Marsh &amp; McLennan announced yesterday that the two men had been promoted to co-chief executives.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a "Washington Journal" article on Monday about the everyday problems of former top Federal officials referred incorrectly to the law firm of William H. Webster, the former Director of Central Intelligence.
The firm is Milbank Tweed Hadley &amp; McCloy.


On Tape, a President Itrigued by a Scanner
Disturbed by news coverage suggesting that President Bush was amazed to see an ordinary grocery price scanner, the White House for the last week has maintained that he was impressed by a new generation of high-technology devices and not the type most people see every time they go to the supermarket.
Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said on Monday that Mr.
Bush had seen scanners "many times." And Mrs.
Bush complained to reporters over the weekend that coverage of the scanner incident was "unfair."


Corrections
An article yesterday about Ukrainian nationalism misidentified Prof.
Roman Szporluk.
He is a professor of Ukrainian history at Harvard, but not head of the program.


10-Year Notes Get Mixed Response
An offering of $11 billion worth of 10-year Treasury notes, the second part of the Government's quarterly refunding auctions, was fairly well received by dealers in the credit markets yesterday.
Demand for the securities among large institutional accounts, however, was very weak, dealers said, and prices of outstanding Treasury issues moved lower as the session wore on and traders sought to discover price levels that would arouse some interest from customers.


Sweden's Sonar Is Quiet After Soviet Collapse
After nearly a decade of stalking unseen underwater intruders along their coast, Swedish naval patrols report that the unexplained sonar contacts have stopped in the weeks following the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Military and Government leaders say the coincidence supports their suspicion that Soviet submarines were responsible for the mysterious activity during much of the 1980's.
But Gen.
Bengt Gustafsson, the top Swedish military commander, said that high-ranking Russian naval officers continue to insist that they were not the culprits.


Tokyo Seeks To Prop Up Its Economy
In a sign of the growing alarm over the depression in the Japanese stock market and the slowing economy, the ruling Liberal Democratic Party has floated a number of proposals in recent days to persuade voters that their leaders are not watching idly as the dark clouds of recession gather.
The comments also seemed aimed at diverting public attention from a growing scandal over reported payoffs by businessmen to politicians.
The scandal has already resulted in the indictment of a former Cabinet minister with close ties to Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.


Unmade American Bedroom: A Place to Live; The New Direction In Mattresses: Thicker
PRESIDENT BUSH returned from Japan with a clear message from the competition: the Cadillac mentality must go.
To this, the mattress manufacturers of the United States answer with one voice: get stuffed.


Panel Proposes Steps to Control the Spread of TB Among Inmates
A task force headed by New York City's Health Commissioner plans to recommend sweeping measures to help control the spread of tuberculosis in jails and holding cells throughout the criminal justice system.
The measures include taking chest X-rays of every new inmate and beginning a screening program for the quarter-million people arrested and held for arraignment in the city every year.
They also call for the testing of court and jail employees.


Writers Short List Of Prize Films
Is "Fried Green Tomatoes" the sleeper film of the year?
The offbeat, low-budget movie about friendship among Southern women is showing surprising strength not only at the box office but among the Hollywood Establishment as well.
Today, the Writers Guild of America, which has 10,000 members, nominated the film, together with such heavyweights as "The Prince of Tides" and "J. F. K.," for one of its awards, "best screenplay based on material from another medium." There was speculation that the movie, a late starter, may be nominated next week for some Academy Awards.


Selecting Judges: Machine Politics Under Siege
Meade H. Esposito, the former Brooklyn Democratic leader, often groused that whenever he dispensed a judgeship, he made five jealous enemies and one ingrate.
His jocular complaining never concealed the fact that making judges is a last vestige of machine politics.
Nor did it stop Mr.
Esposito and his successors.
But the situation addressed this week by a task force might.
Its recommendations on judicial selection are subject to review, though, by some of the very same political leaders whose power the task force would diminish by reducing the size of districts from which judges are elected and by removing legal roadblocks to getting on the ballot.


Abroad at Home; The Two Nations
When President Bush expressed amazement last week at a supermarket's electronic checkout scanner, he was ribbed for being so out of touch with American life.
Commentators went on to remark that high government officials as a group, with their chauffeured lives, are cushioned from reality.
Fair enough.
But the episode of the President and the unfamiliar supermarket suggests a broader point, a much more serious one.


REPUBLICS PROMISE TO PROTECT RIGHTS
The leaders of Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan pledged to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today that they would adhere to democratic principles and human rights, and Mr.
Baker indicated that the declarations met his conditions for diplomatic relations with the former Soviet republics.
Mr.
Baker, on the second day of a whirlwind tour through the Caucasus and Central Asia, began his morning by sampling grapes in a fruit market in Armenia, then flew down the Caspian Sea to Baku, Azerbaijan, for lunch with the President, then hopped over to Turkmenistan where he dined in a traditional hut with senior leaders.


Review/Music; The Philadelphia in a 'Pagliacci' Whose Virtuosos Are in the Pit
During his stay in the United States, Riccardo Muti has been at the head of one of the world's great orchestras, but he has never tired of extolling the virtues of his own Italian culture.
As he gradually retreats as music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra, one wonders whether he will experience withdrawal symptoms.
Indeed, for all the virtues of Italian singers -- the naturalness of response to the nuances of Rossini or Verdi -- and for all the largess the Italian Government bestows on some of its major opera houses, Mr.
Muti is not likely to find at home the kind of ensemble he commanded on Tuesday night at Carnegie Hall.


Canada Is Discouraging Shopping in the U.S.
The Canadian Government took its first significant action today to try to curb the billions of dollars that Canadians spend shopping for cheaper goods in the United States.
The steps include a new $5 handling fee on packages mailed to Canada, the dropping of the duty-free limit on packages to $20, from $40, and an unusual unilateral reduction in tariffs covering $1 billion of annual consumer imports.


New California Storm Brings Worst Floods in Decades
For most of the last decade, Southern Californians have struggled through drought.
This week they are coping with the opposite problem: the worst flooding in decades.
The rain storms have closed freeways, sent millions of gallons of raw sewage into the Pacific, washed out canyon roads, flooded trailer parks and contributed to the death of at least seven people.


Review/Dance; Bart Cook's Choreographic Numbers Game
The New York City Ballet played a charming numbers game on Sunday afternoon when it danced Bart Cook's "Seven by Five Plus Two" at the New York State Theater.
The work, to Saint-Saens's Septet (Op. 65), is a revision of "Seven by Five," which Mr.
Cook created for the company in 1984.
He has had clever second thoughts about it.


Robert W. Russell, 79, Stage and Film Writer
Robert W. Russell, a writer for films and the Broadway theater, died on Tuesday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in New York City.
He died of heart failure after suffering a stroke, his wife, Rinaldina, said.


German Speed Skaters Don't Disappoint
Germany's superiority in speed skating at the Albertville Olympics continued today in the women's 1,500-meter event but for one of the most unlikely reasons imaginable.
The gold medalist was Jacqueline Borner, a 26-year-old skater from the eastern German town of Wismar, whose athletic career nearly ended 18 months ago when she was struck -- intentionally, she said -- by a car during a training session on her bicycle.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire; Clinton Thanked Colonel in '69 For 'Saving Me From the Draft'
Trying to prevent further damage to his Presidential campaign, Bill Clinton made public today a 1969 letter in which he thanked an Army officer overseeing the Reserve Officers Training Corps program at the University of Arkansas for "saving me from the draft" and also apologized for misleading the officer about the strength of his anti-war feelings.
At a news conference here, the Arkansas Governor said he was issuing the letter, dated Dec. 3, 1969, because he knew it was to be disclosed later today by ABC News.


No Bikini Team In New Stroh Ads
The Swedish Bikini Team, five blond actresses whose appearances in advertising for Old Milwaukee beer have provoked charges of sexism, will be missing from television commercials due in the spring, the Stroh Brewery Company said yesterday, though they will continue in other marketing roles.
"We're not dumping the Swedish Bikini Team," said Lacey Logan, a spokeswoman for Stroh in Detroit, adding that "it was always our intention to evolve the campaign to insure consumer interest."


NASA CHIEF QUITS IN POLICY CONFLICT
The head of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Richard H. Truly, announced his resignation yesterday after a long and often losing battle with the White House over the direction of the nation's space program.
Adminstration officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Mr.
Truly had been forced to step down.
Mr.
Truly, a space pioneer and former astronaut, was chosen to head NASA after the Challenger disaster in January 1986 to try to get the space agency back on its feet.
His resignation comes as the agency again faces an uncertain future.


People
*
Ron Gianettino, president and chief executive of Gianettino &amp; Meredith Advertising, Short Hills, N.J., has been named chairman, a new position.
Succeeding him as president is George Meredith, formerly an executive vice president, who remains creative director.
Named executive vice presidents were Norma Friend, Karen McAuvic and Barbara Perchaluk. *
Monita Buchwald, senior vice president and director of Manning, Selvage &amp; Lee's health-care division, New York, has been promoted to worldwide account director, a new position. *
Philip C. Shyposh has been named senior vice president-member services at the Association of National Advertisers, New York.
He succeeds Peter Eder, who resigned.
Also, Peter J. Thomas was promoted to vice president-member relations, from director-member relations. *
Helane Naiman has joined the management staff of Media Buying Services International Inc. in New York.
She had been an executive vice president at Mediaforce in New York.


Patient Is Abducted On L.I., Police Say
A 27-year-old Long Island woman was kidnapped at gunpoint at the Nassau County Medical Center by four men who forced her into their car and beat and sodomized her before releasing her more than 18 hours later, the police said last night.
The woman, who had gone to the hospital in East Meadow for medical care, told the police that she was entering the elevator on the main floor at 6:30 P.M. on Tuesday when four men followed her, then abducted her at gunpoint, said Officer Andy DeSimone, a spokesman for the Nassau County police.


'Helium Heads' Aim to Make History
They call themselves helium-heads and air-heads because helium and hot air make balloons fly, and for them lighter-than-air flight is something akin to love.
In their wallets, pictures of balloons replace photographs of wives and husbands.
Drawn inexorably to balloons and dirigibles, they have flocked to the Earthwinds round-the-world balloon project to donate expertise, muscle, equipment, food, haircuts and a hundred other things.


New Woes for Howe
Yankees relief pitcher STEVE HOWE, scheduled to stand trail on March 30 in Federal court in Missoula, Mont., on cocaine possession charges, has been fined $125 in Whitefish City Court for striking a light pole with his car and leaving the scene without identifying himself.
Police Chief BILL LABRIE said yesterday that the accident report showed Howe hit a patch of ice about 1:30 A.M. on Dec. 7 and slid into a light pole at a city intersection.
Howe apparently did not realize there was any damage and left, LaBrie said.


U.S. Scientists to Seek Patent on 2,375 More Genes
Government scientists said today that they had identified an additional 2,375 human genes and would try to patent them, continuing an approach that critics charge could discourage work on an international project to map all human genes.
Scientists at the National Institutes of Health said an automated technique they developed had enabled them to identify and determine the basic makeup of 2,375 human brain genes, adding to 347 similar genes they found and reported last year.


Atom Agency Finds No Threat at Iran's Sites
At the end of a weeklong mission, officials from the International Atomic Energy Agency said today that based on their findings, Iran's nuclear activity and abilities were entirely for peaceful purposes.
Dr.
John Jennekens, the group's Canadian spokesman and deputy to the Secretary General of the International Atomic Energy Agency, who characterized his mission as a "multi-purpose visit" after an invitation from the Iranians, did not rule out the possibility of an inspection as a follow-up visit.
He spoke at a news conference here.


CHRONICLE
Overheard in the crowd of more than 300 gathered to honor GAY TALESE on Tuesday evening at the St.
Regis Hotel in Manhattan: "The book party is the new village. Instead of gathering at christenings, instead of quilting bees, in New York we go to book parties."
The occasion was Mr.
Talese's new book, a family saga called "Unto the Sons." The inhabitants of the village included Walter Cronkite, Norman Mailer, Judy Collins, Nora Ephron, Dan Rather, Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Dominick Dunne and George Plimpton.


CBS Reports Modest Profit For Quarter
CBS Inc. yesterday reported a modest profit for the fourth quarter of 1991, although it posted a loss for the full year.
Laurence A. Tisch, CBS's chairman, attributed the poor performance to problems at the CBS Television network, including a large loss from sports programming during the year and additional losses from other programming.


A Law That Abuses Children
The death of 8-year-old Yaakov Riegler at his mother's hand dramatizes the need to revise state laws that limit access to information about child abuse cases.
Such laws prohibit public agencies from releasing data about investigations of abuse reported by citizens to a hot line.
The intent of these laws is to protect the privacy of children and troubled families.
They also safeguard informants who report abuse cases.


After Day 1 of Women's Combined, Austrian Rises and Avoids the Tumble
Petra Kronberger, still saddened by her Austrian teammate's training accident over this same slope, began her downhill run at a possible five gold medals in skiing today.
She captured the first day of the women's combined on a course that also continued to send Americans crashing into the life-saving nets and did little to answer questions about the spate of accidents on the slopes in these Games.


Carnegie Plans Jazz Series and Four Workshops
Carnegie Hall's plans for its 1992-93 season include the introduction of a new jazz series, the expansion of the professional training workshops that the hall started in 1990, and about 100 orchestral concerts, chamber performances and recitals.
In announcing the season yesterday, Carnegie Hall's executive director, Judith Arron, said the hall would be presenting about the same number of concerts as this season, though slightly fewer than it presented in 1990-91, when it was celebrating its centennial.


OPEC Meets With Accord On Cutback
The oil ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries began a meeting today with unanimous agreement that they must rein in runaway production to bolster prices.
But Saudi Arabia, as expected, held out for a modest cut in the group's total production of 24.2 million barrels a day.
Saudi Arabia produces about 35 percent of OPEC's oil and says that it thinks the group's production should be cut by only about one million barrels a day.
Iran and others are seeking cuts of 1.5 million barrels to 2 million barrels a day.


What About Rushdie?
When the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini first issued his decree against Salman Rushdie three years ago tomorrow, I swear I thought it was a joke -- a very bad joke, a bit like "Papa Doc" Duvalier putting a voodoo curse on Graham Greene for writing "The Comedians," but a joke nevertheless, in the sense of being an example of furious but harmless flatulence -- just wind.
I thought the death sentence would be laughed off -- condemned as despicable, and then mocked.
Of course, I did not foresee much merriment about "The Satanic Verses" in any Islamic state, where building blueprints have to be submitted to a board of Islamic scholars, the ulema, so that the authorities can make sure that no toilet faces Mecca.


Mets' Elster Is Loser in Arbitration
In the three and a half weeks between the time they exchanged salary figures and their hearing before an arbitrator, the Mets never tried to negotiate a contract with Kevin Elster.
They didn't have to.
General Manager Al Harazin knew a winner when he saw one.
Robert Creo, a first-timer in baseball's salary arbitration procedure, heard the case in New York Tuesday and yesterday gave Elster the $760,000 salary the Mets proposed over the $1.35 million the shortstop sought.
The decision was the eighth victory for baseball clubs in 10 hearings.


Getting 'em to the Primary on Time
Every four years, when the national spotlight shines on New Hampshire's Presidential primary, Stephen Singer implements his long-held business philosophy: take advantage of the environment around you.
Since 1972, Mr.
Singer, executive vice president of Merchants Rent A Car, has been actively campaigning to get Presidential candidates and their workers to rent cars from his family's business.
Merchants Rent A Car has rented to politicians on both sides of the aisle, from Ronald Reagan and George Bush to Morris Udall, the former Arizona Congressman who ran for President in the 1970's and won Mr.
Singer's lifelong admiration for handing over his personal credit card to insure that Mr.
Singer got paid for his cars.


Leaks Nobody Needs to Find
The Senate today plunges blindly into a showdown with journalists over leaks from its Judiciary and Ethics committees.
Reporters have been subpoenaed for testimony they will not give to senators who don't need it.
It's almost too late to pull back from this senseless and dangerous incursion on First Amendment rights.
Timothy Phelps of Newsday has been summoned to appear today and Nina Totenberg of National Public Radio to appear next week before the Senate Rules Committee.
They're wanted for questioning about their reports last fall that Anita Hill had complained of sexual harassment by Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court nominee.
Their reports forced an embarrassed Judiciary Committee to reopen confirmation hearings.


Moguls: It's Time To Twist And Shout
It is truly the sport for the M.T.Ski generation.
It has rock music, howling fans and gyrating artists whose telegenic performances are subjectively judged.
"It's awesome," said 29-year-old Tracy Rapoza-Pickard, whose childhood friend from West Milford, N.J., Donna Weinbrecht, was about to descend the 2,222-meter high, 250-meter long, 28-degree angled mogul freestyle ski hill, beginning a two-day quest for an Olympic gold medal.
"It gets you pumped."


New York City Needs Vacancy Decontrol Again
To the Editor:
In 1971, when New York City's Vacancy Decontrol Law was passed, it was the first ray of hope for apartment buildings since rent control began in 1943.
Sadly, this law was repealed in 1974, though it didn't wreak the havoc that opponents had projected, and it contributed toward preserving our housing inventory.
The time is at hand, more than 20 years later, for the state to take another step and follow the actions taken in San Francisco and even in Moscow to lighten the severity of rent control by having the state adopt a luxury vacancy decontrol bill.


Rangers Find Canucks Worse Than Bad Ice
If this one was a preview of the Stanley Cup finals, it might be a good idea to keep the playoffs hidden on pay-cable television, sold like contraband to only the well-connected.
The Rangers and the Vancouver Canucks, the top two teams in the National Hockey League, met in an interconference showdown last night at Madison Square Garden and the Rangers skated to a one-sided, 5-2, victory before 16,002 fans and plenty of empty seats.


Books of The Times; New Fun From Whoopee Cushions
Pieces of Soap Essays By Stanley Elkin 334 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.
In this collection's funniest piece, "A la Recherche du Whoopee Cushion," Stanley Elkin interviews Paul Smith, the owner of "that mail-order company we remember, the Johnson Smith Company, candy-butcher of joy buzzers and whoopee cushions to the world." It seems that Mr.
Smith, who inherited the company from his founding father, can't wait to retire.


Acquitted Officer Expresses Only Relief, Not Joy
Officer Gary Spath said today that he had been persecuted by state authorities, was uncertain about resuming police work and was praying for the family of Phillip Pannell, whose shooting led to the Teaneck police officer's trial for manslaughter.
During a news conference with his lawyer, Robert L. Galantucci, Officer Spath seemed somber but relaxed.
Gone was his tense expression of the trial's waning days, but there seemed little sense of jubilation at his acquittal.


Yesteryear's Whatnots Set Auction Records
COLLECTORS of the rarest baseball cards, film posters, comic books, Georgian silver and Art Deco clocks had good reason to cheer last year every time such items soared to record levels at auction, defying a downward trend in prices for fine art and antiques.
"Nostalgia fuels these collectibles sales," said Joshua Arfer, director of Christie's New York sales of toys and entertainment items.
"A toy, animation 'cel' or a piece of movie memorabilia represents something from a person's past."


A New Science Museum Begins to Rise in Jersey City


New Jersey Welfare Law Strengthens Families
To the Editor:
"The $64 Question," Anna Quindlen's Jan. 22 column, describes the plight of welfare recipients, frustrated and disillusioned by their inability to go from poverty to self-sufficiency; but her portrayal of New Jersey's new welfare reform misses the mark.
Indeed, she ignores the primary focus of New Jersey's new program: reuniting and strengthening the family.
Ms.
Quindlen begins by questioning whether or not those who formed the law sought input from those who would be affected by it.


EXECUTIVES
*
HEI Hotels, Westport, Conn., a unit of Hospitality Equity Investors Inc., named Murray L. Dow 2d senior vice president for operations. *
Mannington Mills Inc., Salem, N.J., a maker of ceramic tile and flooring, named Scott Smith chairman.


For Press Conferences
To the Editor:
Whatever happened to the Presidential press conference?
It has quietly disappeared.
Instead we have brief Presidential appearances with rehearsed statements on limited subjects, and quick, often unsatisfactory responses to shouted questions as the President dashes for his plane or comes back from jogging.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Records; Role as Lobbyist Poses Questions for Tsongas
When he left the Senate in 1984 with a diagnosis of incurable cancer, Paul E. Tsongas did not anticipate returning to politics.
With a need to make money quickly, he chose a career path that has proved troublesome to others seeking elective office: He became a lawyer-lobbyist.
With public opinion polls now showing the former Massachusetts Senator running strongly in next week's Democratic primary in New Hampshire, rival campaigns have suggested that his record as a highly paid lobbyist could prove damaging.


Unmade American Bedroom: A Place to Live; The Touches That Make It Just Right
SO what does the good-looking bedroom feel like this year?
Certainly not the formal, imposing canopy swathed in yards and yards of tea-dyed chintz, with the neatly-draped night table covered with antique silver frames and the crisp, fitted bedspread and matching dust ruffle.


McCann Forced Out of Office
Jersey City's Mayor was forced to give up his office when the State Supreme Court refused to let him stay on while appealing his conviction on Federal fraud and tax evasion charges.
Some residents said they hoped the action would end the limbo that has paralyzed city government since the Dec. 17th verdict.
Article, page B6.


Libya Offers Some Cooperation in Plane Bombings
In an attempt to avert an international air-traffic blockade, Libya said today that it was ready to cooperate with French investigations of charges that its secret agents blew up a French airliner over sub-Saharan Africa in 1989, killing 171 people.
Libya said the investigations conformed with international law and did not violate its sovereignty.
But the Libyan message, contained in a report to the United Nations Security Council by Secretary General Boutros Ghali, suggested that the Government of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi is still resisting British and American demands for the extradition of two Libyan agents they have accused of blowing up Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988 with the loss of 270 people.


Ad Hoc Ukraine Money Drives Out Ruble
Ahead of schedule and unannounced, the Ukrainian Government has in effect given birth to a new national currency that makes the growing separation of the Ukrainian and Russian economies seem impossible to reverse.
The new bills, which are the size of Monopoly money and are called coupons, were originally issued as ration tickets that entitled Ukrainians, and not outsiders, to buy the republic's limited supplies of food and other essentials.
Actual payment was in Russian rubles.
But with Russia's reported failure in January to supply Ukraine with enough ruble notes, officials here hastily transformed the coupons into cash.


Tax-Exempt Yields Decline in a Reversal
The yields on tax-exempt funds reversed and moved down a little for the week ended Monday, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
Taxable funds continued their decline for the period ended Tuesday.
Walter Frank, economist for Donoghue's, said: "There was some movement by investors in the latest week into tax-exempt funds as indicated by a sharp increase in their asset value to a record level. But as these yields decline, we will probably see demand for the tax frees slacken unless the Federal Reserve eases."


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Senator Tom Harkin's arrival in New Hampshire from Iowa misidentified the woman with him.
She was State Representative Mary Chambers of New Hampshire, not Mr.
Harkin's wife.
The reference to Mrs.
Harkin was also incorrect; her name is Ruth, not Judy.


A Post Office Wants Elbow Room, but Some Like Its Closeness
WITH its rows of mailboxes and its white-painted walls, the post office is a major dot on the map for this rural village in the northernmost corner of Fairfield County.
It is a friendly place, where people go to pick up and send off their letters and Valentines, and postal clerks greet them by name.
Here one can look over the F.B.I.'s "wanted" posters, clipped together near the front door, or consult the National ZIP Code Directory that lies on a shelf by the windows.
It often happens that someone comes in for a book of stamps, and leaves with a dinner invitation from a friend as well.


Japanese Leaders Taken to Task By Political Boss for Bashing U.S.
The man described as the godfather of Japanese politics chided some of his country's leaders today, saying that their recent criticisms of American work habits have helped to cause relations with the United States to worsen dangerously.
"Some Japanese politicians have caused misunderstanding as a result of their remarks," Shin Kanemaru, vice president of the governing Liberal Democratic Party, said in an interview.
"I told my colleagues that you have to be extremely cautious when you make remarks, that you have an impact on people overseas."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Nitzer Ebb Limelight
Leaping around the stage of the Limelight, arms out and head shaking, bare-chested in black-and-white bicycle shorts, Douglas McCarthy of Nitzer Ebb looked like a cheerleader for nihilism.
He was chanting and shouting phrases like "What am I doing here?" and "Let them wonder if I lie" and "I don't want to go!"


To Republicans' Ire, Bush's Tax Package Advances in House
Insisting that all they wanted to do was cooperate with President Bush, House Democrats today sent a package of all his tax proposals to the floor, where they expect it to die.
Then they ended a snarling open meeting with Republicans, who were angry at the sight of the Democratic majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt, introducing what he said was Mr.
Bush's program.
After that the Democrats went behind closed doors to check with their leaders and start working out their own alternative, which will focus on a tax cut for the middle class.


CHRONICLE
Yearning for a valentine from HARRY BELAFONTE, BILL COSBY, AUDREY HEPBURN, ELIZABETH TAYLOR or MARGARET THATCHER?
A sweet sentinment perhaps from ERICA JONG, QUEEN LATIFAH or the Minnesota Twins?
They may not come in the mail, but valentines made or donated by these and other celebrities will be sold at auction this evening at a party to benefit Impact, an organization that provides recreational and educational programs for homeless children in shelters.
The cocktail party and auction will be at the Puck Building in Manhattan.


India Plans Purchases Of Wheat
For the first time since 1988, the Government of India will be buying wheat abroad to bolster its stockpiles of food, Indian and American officials say.
The head of India's Food Deaprtment told the United States Agriculture Department this week that New Delhi needs about one million tons of grain to stabilize food prices, which have risen as a result of changes in economic policies.


TVWeekend; In Child-Custody Struggle, Who's on Children's Side?
NBC's "In the Best Interest of the Children," on Sunday at 9 P.M., is the kind of compelling television movie that leaves you wondering what it was really trying to say.
Tackling the highly sensitive and complicated issue of child custody, the film is powerfully acted, but its script, by Peter Nelson and Judd Kinberg, seems less interested in being coherent than in not offending anybody, specifically birth parents or their close relatives or foster parents.
Once again, viewers are assured that what they are about to see is based on a true story, in this instance a legal battle in Iowa during the late 1980's.
But then there is an opening credit saying that the film is based on a story by Mr.
Nelson.
Is Mr.
Nelson's "story" true?
How far removed from the original story is the script?
Muddying matters further, all names have been fictionalized.
Welcome to prime-time docu-drama.


Market Place; Westmark Sees Value in Split-Up
CALL it reverse synergy.
Many investors today seem to believe that fewer businesses per company are better, and that the sum of the parts is greater than the whole.
The newest example of that thinking is Westmark International Inc., which announced on Wednesday that it would divide itself in two.
In the last two days, the company's stock has soared 21 percent, gaining $10.625, to $62.125.


Brooklyn Woman Is Shot in Car
A 50-year-old school custodian's secretary was shot four times by a masked gunman as she sat in her car in her quiet Brooklyn neighborhood yesterday morning, the police said.
The woman, Carmella Fricione, climbed from her car and staggered up six steps to the door of her neighbor in Mill Basin, Joe Burke.
"She knocked on my door. She fell into my arms. She said, 'Joe, I've been shot,' " said Mr.
Burke.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices fell in Tokyo today.
At the midday recess, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 236.09 points, or 1.1 percent, to 21,154.93.


Corrections
An obituary on Jan. 23 about Ruby Levitt, a set designer, omitted a survivor.
She is Gertrude Levitt, a sister.


Canseco Rams Into Wife's Car
Jose Canseco, the Oakland Athletics slugger who has had marital and off-season problems before, was charged with aggravated battery early this morning after the police said he twice deliberately rammed his car into his wife's car, running her off the road.
Canseco posted bond of $5,000 after being booked by a Metro-Dade detective, Mickey Valenzuela, and he left the Dade County Jail without comment.
He will be arraigned in four to six weeks, at which time he will enter a plea and a court date will be set, according to Patrick Brickman, a Metro-Dade Police spokesman.
The charges could bring a maximum penalty of 15 years in prison and $10,000 in fines.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire; Democrats Move to Capitalize on Clinton's Troubles
The Democratic candidates for President slashed, hustled and frantically repositioned themselves today, convinced that the tempest over Gov.
Bill Clinton's draft record had created vast new openings in next Tuesday's primary here.
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa asserted that Mr.
Clinton was no longer a serious contender in New Hampshire, and fired a withering new attack on the man who seems to be gaining the most from the Arkansas Governor's troubles, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts.


Gooden's Arm Earns Rave Reviews
Eight days earlier than his fellow Mets pitchers, Dwight Gooden began spring training yesterday.
Gooden, continuing to rehabilitate his valuable right shoulder from surgery, threw from a mound for the first time since the operation last Sept. 7.
Catching his six minutes worth of pitches was a former major league catcher who caught three no-hitters: Jeff Torborg.
He also happens to be Gooden's new manager.


Nahman Avigad, an Archeologist And Biblical Scholar, Dies at 86
Dr.
Nahman Avigad, an eminent Israeli archeologist who led excavation of the vestiges of the workaday Jerusalem that the Romans razed in A.D. 70 together with the Second Temple, died on Jan. 28 in Jerusalem.
He was 86 years old.
His death was reported in New York by American Friends of the Hebrew University.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about Christianity's loss of followers in the land of its birth misstated Israel's population.
The Israeli authorities say it is about five million, not "nearly four million."


Macy Is Granted Financing Pact
A bankruptcy judge approved $600 million in interim financing for R. H. Macy &amp; Company to use for its daily operations during its reorganization.
Judge Burton R. Lifland approved the financing after a 90-minute hearing during which objections by Macy creditors were resolved.
The financing agreement is between Macy and banks led by Chemical and Bankers Trust.


Loud Israeli 'No!' To a Halt in Housing
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's chief of staff said today that there was no chance Israel would accept a freeze on new settlement housing in the occupied territories as a condition for receiving United States loan guarantees to help absorb new immigrants.
Nonetheless, the official, Yossi Ben-Aharon, expressed optimism that a formula could be found that would enable Israel to get the assistance it wanted.
The Bush Administration has demanded that Israel halt new construction in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


HOUSE DEMOCRATS WORK ON TAX PLAN WITH $400 CREDIT
House Democrats began working today on an alternative to President Bush's tax legislation, centered on temporary tax credits of up to $400 for 80 percent of all taxpayers, a permanent one-percentage-point reduction in the corporate tax rate and a modest cut in taxes on capital gains.
The costs of the Democrats' five-year $90.9 billion measure would be made up mainly by increasing the top individual income tax rate from 31 to 35 percent and imposing a 10 percent surtax on taxable income over $1 million.


Vietnam Again Haunts Politics
In 1975, as the helicopters were preparing to lift off the American Embassy's roof in Saigon, President Gerald R. Ford declared an end to the debate on Vietnam.
"America can regain the sense of pride that existed before Vietnam," he said.
"But it cannot be achieved by refighting a war that is finished as far as America is concerned." There would be no official post-mortems on the worst defeat in our history, no attempt to find out what went wrong and who was responsible.


When Child Kills Parent, It's Sometimes to Survive
Until she took the stand, 17-year-old Donna Marie Wisener seemed girlishly calm, twirling a ballpoint pen and playing with her hair even as her distraught mother testified in her defense last week.
But the girl's composure quickly collapsed as she recounted how, nine months earlier, she picked up a .357-caliber Smith &amp; Wesson revolver and blasted bullet holes in her father's head, hip, hand, back and side.
Thus ended the life of Glenn Wisener, the 49-year-old truck driver of whom the jury in Tyler, Tex., had been given a posthumous portrait the prior few days.
Mr.
Wisener's wife, Mamie, testified that her husband was the type to throw oak logs at her or Donna Marie when either displeased him, or smash a plate containing his fried eggs if they were not sufficiently runny.
He beat his stepson with branches, belts, ropes, hoes and fists -- in a worse way, one witness recalled, than he would ever have "whupped" his own livestock.
Life With Father
Miss Wisener offered her own grotesque version of life with father: He had once broken two switches on her buttocks.
Other times, he handcuffed her to a chair for his amusement or, when her report card was unsatisfactory, beat her unconscious.
In more affectionate moments, he gave her "rub downs" and sent her sexually suggestive Valentines.


Ally &amp; Gargano Win 3 and Lose 1
There was good and bad news yesterday for Ally &amp; Gargano in New York.
As the agency lost one of its largest accounts -- the Andrew Jergens Company, billing $15 million to $20 million annually -- it was awarded three other accounts -- the World Gold Council, Business Express/the Delta Connection and Southern New England Telephone -- with billings totaling $15 million.
As had been expected, Jergens moved its account to Bloom FCA in New York, which had been working on new projects for the Cincinnati-based marketer of personal-care products.
Brands involved include Jergens lotions and soaps and Actibath bath tablets.


Bear Stearns Gets S.&amp; P. Upgrading
The outlook on the Bear Stearns Companies, the parent of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, a leading Wall Street underwriter, was upgraded from stable to positive yesterday by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
At the same time, S.&amp; P. affirmed Bear Stearns's ratings of A- on senior debt, BBB on preferred stock and A-1 on commercial paper.
The rating service said that about $700 million in senior debt and $150 million in preferred were affected.


Effort for a Paperback 'Satanic Verses' Faltering
An effort to organize American publishers into a consortium to bring out the paperback edition of Salman Rushdie's "The Satanic Verses" is struggling to find support among the country's leading publishing houses.
The Authors Guild and Andrew Wylie, Mr.
Rushdie's agent, had hoped to mark today, the third anniversary of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's death sentence against the author, by announcing a list of publishers who had agreed to work toward that goal, but settled instead for a statement expressing "strong moral support for the paperback publication" of the book.


Genes Don't Doom Anyone to a Life of Crime; A Long, Sad History
To the Editor:
It is not surprising, as you report Jan. 31, that criminal behavior runs in families.
Such transmission is expected whether criminality is caused by genes, environment or a combination of both.
What is surprising is the willingness of academics like Richard Herrnstein and Deborah Denno to declare that the genetic component is substantial.
There is not a scintilla of evidence for "criminal genes," and there can be none without rigorous adoption or twin studies, which can separate environmental from genetic influences.
Because there are no such studies, it is as silly to claim that there are criminal genes as to claim there are genes for being Republican or living in mansions, traits that also run strongly in families.


CHRONICLE
Seven and a half years after Richard Burton's death, the man who came to be known as his adoptive father and mentor, PHILIP BURTON, is publishing his memoirs.
In them, he tells how he helped to transform the orphaned Richard Jenkins into a great actor and how their relationship endured turbulent years.
Although he wrote the book in 1986, "I couldn't get it published," Mr.
Burton, who is now 87 years old, said from his home in Key West, Fla., the other day.
"I lost my agent, and I was out of New York in Key West, so it went nowhere."


Art in Review
Deborah Turbeville  Staley-Wise Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through March 7
This show, writes the well-known fashion photographer Deborah Turbeville, "is not about my beautiful anorexic women clinging to collapsing walls in outrageous couture but yet another 'endangered species' . . . the noble women of the Mayan and Aztec races." Ms.
Turbeville presents these women in photographs taken near her house in San Miguel Allende, Mexico, as well as in Guatemala.


Review/Art; A Pivotal Jasper Johns Is a Show's Centerpiece
The show at the Gagosian Gallery emulates a current vogue in the museum world for building small, carefully organized exhibitions around single works of art.
The piece showcased is a pivotal Jasper Johns painting from the 1960's, and it is set in the context of related work by the artist -- the slightly earlier painting titled "Watchman" and a handful of later prints, collages and drawings -- which are variations on its major themes.
The centerpiece here, "According to What," dates from 1964 and has not been shown publicly for several years.
It is usually described as a watershed work, marking Mr.
Johns's decisive shift away from his maps and targets of the 50's to work on a grander scale.
Spread horizontally over six panels, it is a compendium of many of his effects and motifs up to that time.
His signature stencil letters are here, made of aluminum and cantilevered out from the surface.
The negative wax cast of a leg positioned upside-down on a bisected chair recalls similar objects used earlier, specifically in "Watchman." Also recurring are enigmatic devices like a smaller attached stretched canvas, its back turned to the viewer, and bits and pieces of the everyday world, like the coat hanger that first appeared in the previous decade.


Diner's Journal
3 in the Mid-Range
Here is a brief, and not altogether felicitous, report on recent visits to three moderately priced restaurants in Manhattan, two new, one old.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The 60's; Clinton and Draft Issue: Vietnam Era Revisited
In the flush of victory in the Persian Gulf war, President Bush exultantly proclaimed, "By God, we've kicked the Vietnam syndrome once and for all."
But does the fresh controversy over Bill Clinton's efforts to avoid the draft in 1969, epitomized by his agonized letter written that fall from Oxford University, demonstrate the contrary?
Are all the painful ambiguities of that era, the conflicts between duty and conscience, the lack of a clear-cut denouement, now to be revisited?
Though Vietnam veterans, once scorned, are now celebrated, and though the sting of defeat is easing, no national consensus has ever developed as to whether the Vietnam War was just or unjust, whether draft dodging was justified, or whether the United States could have won with a more determined effort.
A Kind of Curse
Some see a kind of curse hanging over the generation that was fractured in the long dark night of war, with some of its members shedding blood in Southeast Asia while others fled to Sweden or Canada, a few went to jail and still others found one means or another to finagle a deferment.


Dorothy Uris, 85, Dies; Actress and Instructor
Dorothy Uris, a Broadway and Hollywood actress and voice teacher known professionally as Dorothy Tree, died yesterday at the Actor's Fund Home in Englewood, N.J.
She was 85 years old.
She died of heart failure, said her son, Joseph Uris of Manhattan.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 587 money market mutual funds increased by $4.63 billion, to $513.68 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 217 institutional funds increased by $4.20 billion, to $183.27 billion.
The 279 general-purpose funds were up $548.6 million, to $180.31 billion.
But the 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $126.0 million, to $150.1 billion.


Syracuse's Admission on Violations Is a First Step
Regardless of the findings of an expected National Collegiate Athletic Association investigation into the basketball program at Syracuse, the university's admission of at least 13 apparent rules violations is a milestone in the 13-year history of the Big East conference.
Although the university's report of its internal investigation, released Wednesday, concluded that the institution had not lost control of the program, no conference member has made an admission of such extensive violations.


Delta Is Accused Of Discrimination In Job Interviews
The New York City Human Rights Commission yesterday charged Delta Air Lines with violating the rights of former employees of Pan American World Airways by asking illegal questions about sexual orientation, H.I.V. infection and other private matters in job interviews.
The commission said that the employment firm hired by Delta engaged in a broad pattern of discrimination in the interviews and background checks that followed Pan Am's collapse.


Review/Film; They Take the Plunge (No, Not the Fatal One)
The title characters in "Romeo and Julia," the self-described "comedy of errors" opening today at the Quad Cinema, meet on the Brooklyn Bridge where each has come to commit suicide.
The rest of the film is even worse.
Romeo (Bob Koherr), who is usually the life of any party and a great practical joker, has been told that he has AIDS.
It is one of the niceties of this flat-footed film that the disease, though described, is never named.
Romeo doesn't know that the diagnosis was a gag arranged by his office pals who hired an actor to pose as a doctor.


E.P.A., in a Reversal, Lifts A Ban on Farm Chemicals
The Environmental Protection Agency reversed itself today and said it was lifting most of the restrictions it had placed nearly three years ago on a family of farm chemicals that prevented damage to fruit, vegetable and grain crops but were shown to cause cancer in laboratory animals.
William K. Reilly, the E.P.A.
Administrator, said the action to ease restrictions on the agricultural chemicals, known as EBDC's, came after new scientific information was developed by the National Toxicology Program, a Federal research agency in North Carolina, and the four manufacturers of the compounds.


Review/Art; Genteel Decorative Styles in 'American Rococo'
The first gallery of "American Rococo, 1750-1775," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art is dominated by the monumental and elaborately carved fireplace from James Beekman's Manhattan estate.
The last gallery is filled by the lavishly conceived parlor furniture from John Cadwalader's Philadelphia home that represents the apex of 18th-century Colonial craftsmanship.
From start to finish, this large and elegantly presented exhibition puts on display the most refined examples of the genteel decorative style typically referred to as Chippendale.
It presents not only familiar landmarks but also unusual ones in materials like cast iron.
What it does not do, and what makes the show unsatisfying despite the quality of the objects on view, is to go beyond esthetics and give some indication of the larger historical context in which American Rococo thrived.
The style, ascendant during the years leading up to the Revolution when the colonies were undergoing dramatic changes, is a subject that seems especially ripe for a contextual approach.


On Reining In a Runaway Supreme Court
To the Editor:
"The Runaway Supreme Court" (editorial, Feb. 2) is on target.
However, since these are clearly people with a mission and a will, it is doubtful that criticism will have much impact on their future decisions.
On the other hand, if a Democrat were elected to the Presidency in November, the option of enlarging the Court might be revisited.
While President Franklin D. Roosevelt was stymied in his attempt to increase the Court's membership to 15 by charges that he was trying to pack the Court for political reasons, circumstances today, the economy apart, are very different from what they were then.


Holiday on Monday
Washington's Birthday will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and city closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Option to close.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION: No street cleaning, pickup or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Saturday schedule, Long Island Rail Road on holiday schedule, Metro-North on weekend schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal and state closed, local option to close.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit rail service on Saturday schedule, N.J.
Transit bus schedules vary, with most on Saturday schedule.
CONNECTICUT GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and municipal closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: New Haven line on weekend schedule.


A Commuter Tax Rebate?
A group of Republican state senators from New York City hopes to salvage the Dinkins administration's proposed commuter income-tax rise by providing coupons to allow commuters from suburban New York counties to pay the tax, then claim rebates on their local property taxes.
The group, led by Senators Roy M. Goodman of Manhattan and Guy J. Velella of the Bronx, met with Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday to discuss the idea -- an unusual gesture of conciliation -- and mayoral aides said it was one of the possibilities that might improve chances that the tax would pass.
But a spokesman for the Senate Republican majority leader, Ralph J. Marino of Oyster Bay, L.I., said he was still cool to the notion of any commuter tax rise.


Sports of The Times; Mogul Gold In Them Thar Bumps
TO most people, a mogul is what Jack Kent Cooke is and what Donald Trump was.
But in the Winter Olympics, a mogul is a bump in the snow.
Freestyle mogul skiing is a wild ride over dozens of snowy bumps that demands the delicate balance of a surfer, the reckless daring of a ski jumper, the thumping rhythm of a disco dancer, and the shock absorbers of an amusement-park bumper car.


Canada Wins U.S. Extradition Deal
When United States marshals accompany Lee O'Bomsawin from a Montreal prison next week to stand trial for a double murder in Jacksonville, Fla., Mr.
O'Bomsawin will have an unprecedented guarantee for a fugitive returning to the United States from Canada: at the Canadian Government's insistence, Florida has promised not to seek the death penalty.
According to Florida prosecutors, Mr.
O'Bomsawin killed his estranged wife, Denise Vinet, and her lover, Vaughan Williams, at a motel parking lot in Jacksonville on the night of March 4, 1987.
The prosecutors charge that Mr.
O'Bomsawin stalked the couple fron a grocery store where they worked, then shot Mr.
Williams in the head with a .357 Magnum handgun.
When Ms.
Vinet fled into an adjacent highway, the state charges, Mr.
O'Bomsawin chased her and dragged her to the roadside.
There, he shot her twice, the second time in the head.


Retail Sales Up 0.6% in Month In Hopeful Sign
In one of the first important reports to signal a possible economic rebound, the Commerce Department said today that retail sales rose by six-tenths of 1 percent in January.
The increase was the largest in eight months in a sector that represents about one-third of the nation's economic activity and is crucial to any economic rebound.


Robert W. Russell, 79, Stage and Film Writer
Robert W. Russell, a writer for films and the Broadway theater, died on Tuesday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in New York City.
He died of heart failure after a stroke, said his wife, Rinaldina.


Love on the Wing
"Birds do it, bees do it. . . ."
Nineteen hardy New Yorkers trekked through Central Park last Sunday to see if Cole Porter had it right.
Their chilly adventure was conceived by the park system's Urban Rangers to celebrate St.
Valentine in nature, and it produced heartwarming evidence that even in urban jungles they do "do it" -- one way or another.
The park's wildlife is mostly birds, whose wings loft them over the barriers of city streets and skyscrapers that deter most pedestrian mammals.
In the course of a year, more than 250 species of birds come and go, or stay.


Winking at Aggression in Baku
So much for principle.
Last fall Secretary of State Baker articulated sound standards for establishing diplomatic ties to the former Soviet republics, based on their adherence to the rule of law and respect for human rights.
Azerbaijan has flagrantly violated these standards by its brutal aggression against Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh.
Yet Mr.
Baker looked the other way in Baku Wednesday; he suggested that mere lip service to these principles by the Communist-run republic warrants early recognition.
Mr.
Baker seems excessively anxious to keep Azerbaijan and other Muslim republics in Central Asia out of Iran's orbit.
He's right to establish diplomatic relations with Azerbaijan, but why rush before appropriate conditions are met?


An Investment Banker Buys a Unit She Began
Patricia de Blank Klink has bought herself the kind of freedom most business people only dream about.
The Discount Corporation of New York announced yesterday that it had sold its fixed-income asset management subsidiary, Discount Corporation of New York Advisers, to Mrs.
Klink, who set up the subsidiary for the corporation in 1978.
"I've been one of the team running the company, so that aspect is nothing new," said Mrs.
Klink, 46 years old.
"But this gives me and the people who work here a new sense of freedom. If we want, we can try things that we might not have considered."


Nelson Carmichael


Trenton Senate's G.O.P. Files Bill to Cut Sales Tax
Exactly a month after the defeat of a Democratic drive to roll the sales tax back to 6 from 7 percent, Senate Republicans began their own tax-cut campaign today.
"Unlike Gov. Jim Florio's 'business as usual' $15.7 billion spending plan, our legislation takes a half-billion-dollar chunk out of state spending by removing its revenue source," said the Senate President, Donald T. DiFrancesco of Scotch Plains, as he announced the introduction of the Republican rollback legislation.
"That's half a billion dollars that will go back into taxpayers' pockets," Mr.
DiFrancesco said.
"That's half a billion dollars that will be pumped back into the economy."


Colgate Agrees to Acquire Mennen in $670 Million Deal
The Colgate-Palmolive Company said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Mennen Company for $670 million in stock and cash.
Calling it a "strategic acquisition," Reuben Mark, chairman and chief executive of Colgate, said the move "significantly enhances Colgate's presence in the very large U.S. and Canadian market" for personal-care products.
Mennen, based in Morristown, N.J., markets Speed Stick deodorant, Skin Bracer after shave and Baby Magic lotion.


Terreri A Stopper, Not a Scorer
Returning home after two victories on the road, the Devils were concerned about a letdown as they faced the Vancouver Canucks tonight.
Instead, they never let up in scoring a 5-3 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
With the Devils holding a two-goal lead and Vancouver's goal empty in favor of an extra skater in the waning moments of the game, many in the crowd of 12,702 encouraged Chris Terreri, the New Jersey goaltender, to shoot the puck goalward and attempt to score the first goal of his career.


Kashmir Militants Call Off March to Cease-Fire Line


San Francisco Judge Voids V.D.T. Safety Law
A judge today struck down a San Francisco worker-safety ordinance that was the nation's only law aimed at regulating the purchase and use of video display terminals in private businesses.
The judge, Lucy Kelly McCabe of San Francisco Superior Court, said California law allowed only the state, not individual cities, to regulate safety in the workplace.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  U.N. READY FOR YUGOSLAVIA
The leader of the United Nations won backing from permanent members of the Security Council for a peacekeeping force in Yugoslavia, the first such operation on the European mainland.
A 13,000-member force would be sent to bolster the fragile Yugoslav cease-fire.
A1  ANGER OVER AN M.I.A.
CASE
Senator John McCain of Arizona has asked the Attorney General to investigate an apparently fraudulent photograph that purports to show a missing serviceman still alive in captivity in Indochina.
The Senator fears that criminals are preying on the families of the missing.
A3  WEAPON AGAINST DEATH PENALTY
Canada plans to extradite an American to Florida next week to stand trial in a double murder.
But at Canada's insistence, prosecutors will not seek the death penalty.
A3  YELTSIN PLANS 'CORRECTIONS'
President Yeltsin of Russia promised to make "urgent" corrections in his economic plan so he could speed change at collective farms and help shield the poor from inflation.
A6  Tajikistan agrees to restrict its sales of weapons components.
A7  ISRAELIS FIRM ON SETTLEMENTS
The Prime Minister's chief of staff said there was no chance that Israel would accept a freeze on new settlement housing in the occupied territories as a condition for receiving American loan guarantees.
A10  Israel clears interrogators in the death of a Palestinian.
A9  RAID JOLTS TOKYO POLITICIANS
Another scandal hit Japan's governing party, with the police raiding the offices of a trucking company that is reported to have funneled hundreds of millions of dollars to top politicians and organized crime.
A5  Tokyo Journal: A news blackout on a prince's hunt for a bride.
A4  LIMITED SUPPORT FOR RUSHDIE
An effort to organize a consortium of American publishers to bring out the paperback edition of Salman Rushdie's "The Satanic Verses" is struggling to find support.
A11  WEIGHING ACTION IN HAITI
United States and Latin American officials are informally discussing the possibility of setting up an international peacekeeping force to restore order in Haiti and allow a civilian government to be restored.
A12  A reprieve for six Haitians loaded onto a ship of returnees.
A12  National A14-20  DEMOCRATS' TAX PLAN EMERGING
The Democratic majority on the House Ways and Means Committee began working on a package centered on temporary credits of up to $400 for most taxpayers, a permanent one-point reduction in the corporate tax rate and a modest cut in the rate on capital gains.
A1  RISE IN RETAIL SALES
In one of the first important reports to signal a possible economic rebound, the Commerce Department said sales at the retail level were up 0.6 percent in January.
A1  YOUNG MR.
CLINTON AND THE DRAFT
A review of public records suggestss that Bill Clinton's making himself eligible for conscription in 1969 posed no immediate likelihood that he would actually be drafted.
A1  The Clinton controversy has reopened old wounds.
A16  In the South, the Clinton campaign faces a new challenge.
A17  A retired recruiter says why he kept a letter from Mr.
Clinton.A17  The other Democratic candidates scurried to capitalize.
A16  Senator Kerrey has seized on "electability" as his own issue.
A18  THE TALK OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
If interviews with dozens of Manchester residents are any guide, then all the Presidential candidates have a problem.
In conversations over two days, not one of those people expressed enthusiasm for anyone in the field.
Many said they were undecided; others said they were decidely uninterested.
A1  Rumors on Capitol Hill: Could someone else join the race?
A17  White House Memo: Reaching for the mantle of Reagan.
A18  THE COSTS OF PEACE
Fearing economic dislocation from cuts to the Pentagon budget, Congress is considering proposals to cushion the effect on communities, employees at arms plants and displaced military personnel.
A1  MOVE TO DELAY TEXAS VOTE
The State of Texas asked the United States Supreme Court to order a postponement of the March 10 primary for the State Senate.
A19  REVERSAL ON FARM CHEMICALS
Citing new evidence, the E.P.A. said it was lifting most of the restrictions that it placed nearly three years ago on a family of farm chemicals that prevented damage to fruit, vegetable and grain crops but were shown then to cause cancer in laboratory animals.
A14  San Francisco's safety law on video terminals was voided.
A14  Law Page D20  ABUSE AND AN ACQUITTAL
A new Texas law permits a defendant charged with killing a family member to introduce evidence of prior abuse, as well as expert testimony on the peculiar psychology of victims of battering.
The law played a central role in the acquittal yesterday of a girl who had shot her father to death.
A1  Metropolitan Digest, B1 DOES KALIKOW WANT DAILY NEWS?
Peter S. Kalikow, owner of The New York Post, said that he intended to make an offer to acquire the bankrupt Daily News, a move that apparently has the financial backing of Bankers Trust Company, one of his creditors.
A1  Business Digest,D1  Weekend C1-29  Where romance blooms.
C1  A Euro-fling at the Mark hotel.
C1  Movie studio proposes half-price days.
C6  For Children C12  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "The Most Happy Fella." C1  Film: At the Movies C6  Music: Tito Puente, El Rey.
C3  Dance: Erick Hawkins troupe.
C3  Word and Image: "Billy Dyer and Other Stories." C27  Obituaries B11  Dr.
Nahman Avigad, an Israeli archeologist.
Dr. Alfred L. Copley, an abstract artist and a medical researcher.
Stella Roman, a Met soprano.
Sports B12-20  Baseball: Gooden throws off mound.
B17  Basketball: Bulls beat Knicks, 106-85 B13  Column: Anderson on mogul skiing.
B13  Olympics: U.S. hockey team tops Finland.
B13  Weinbrecht captures gold in moguls.
B13  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials A28  The Vietnam test.
Winking at aggression.
Love on the wing.
Mitchel Levitas: Golan.
Letters A28  A. M. Rosenthal: Victory for Buchanan.
A29  Leslie H. Gelb: Iowa's secrets.
A29  A. S. Byatt: Love's rhyme knows reason.
A29  Elizabeth Becker: Vietnam again haunts politics.
A29


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In the Wings; Capitol Hill Starts Rounding Up the Usual Suspects
In Washington folklore, every member of Congress looks in the mirror and sees a President.
This week, according to the buzz on Capitol Hill, a few Democrats may be taking a second look.
A perception is rising among Congressional Democrats that Gov.
Bill Clinton's candidacy is badly damaged, and that a groundswell could easily emerge behind one of their own.
While some members appear to be warming to former Senator Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts, none of the Democratic contenders appear to be benefiting much from Mr.
Clinton's slippage, at least not on Capitol Hill.


Art in Review
Giuseppe Penone  Marian Goodman Gallery 24 West 57th Street Through Feb. 29
The intersection of the natural and the human worlds is the informing theme of Giuseppe Penone's quiet, meditative show.
The artist, who is associated with the Arte Povera movement, establishes his self-identity with natural forces in the verselike lines he has penciled on the gallery wall ("I have been a river in the landscape/I have been a leaf in the wind"), in his use of juice pressed from grass as pigment, and in his making of large photo transparencies in which the blown-up imprints of branches or wet earth resemble the furrowed patterns of the human brain.


Albertville
U.S. IN HOCKEY QUARTERFINALS
The American hockey team continued its impressive run, clinching a spot in the quarterfinals with a 4-1 victory over Finland.
ON THIN ICE
Kurt Browning, Christopher Bowman and Todd Eldredge struggled as the men's figure skating opened.
Paul Wylie, the 27-year-old Harvard graduate, was a surprising third.
ONE DOWN, FOUR TO GO
Petra Kronberger won the Alpine combined, what she hopes will be her first of five gold medals.
Her country, Austria, has 12 medals.
SportsFriday, page B13.


Duchesnays Try to Make Just as Striking an Exit
When they burst into worldwide consciousness at the Calgary Winter Olympics four years ago, the judges did not know quite what to make of them.
Amid all those other dance couples with their orthodox presentations to classical music, Isabelle and Paul Duchesnay of France wore simulated animal skins and used percussive rhythms to evoke images of Africa.
They finished eighth.
If there was a message from the judges, as there often is in figure skating, they ignored it.
Plunging ahead with new provocations over the next three years, the Duchesnays not only rose in international standing -- from third at the 1989 world championships to second in 1990 to first in 1991 -- they began influencing the way other skaters performed.
More and more, the traditionalists began breaking out, even those from Russia, the seat of ice-dance conservatism, which produced all the champion couples but one since dance was added to the Olympic program in 1976.


Colgate-Mennen Deal May Affect McCann
The announcement yesterday that the Colgate-Palmolive Company would acquire the Mennen Company could lead to the departure of Mennen's advertising account from McCann-Erickson in New York.
McCann, which handles Mennen brands including Speed Stick and Teen Spirit deodorants, is also an agency of Unilever, a global competitor of Colgate.
McCann handles margarine and spread products made by Unilever's Van den Bergh Foods Company, including Promise and I Can't Believe It's Not Butter.
Colgate has two worldwide agencies, Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications in Chicago and Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York, which are barred from working on Unilever accounts.
A spokeswoman for McCann said yesterday that it would be premature to comment on the future of the shop's Mennen account.
Advertising Age estimated that through the first nine months of last year, Mennen spent $22.3 million advertising its men's and babies' toiletries.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
All American Gourmet/Birds Eye, Orange, Calif., a unit of Kraft General Foods, named Lawrence S. Benjamin president, succeeding Ernest Townsend, who resigned. *
CCA Industries, East Rutherford, N.J., a health and beauty products distributor, named Ronald De Classis senior executive vice president for operations and Dunnan Edell executive vice president for marketing.  *
Fine Line Features, New York, a unit of New Line Cinema, named Liz Manne senior vice president for marketing. *
Prudential Insurance Company of America, Newark, named Ira J. Kleinman senior vice president.


American Is New Chief Of a Retailer in Britain
The Burton Group, the British retailer, announced this week that its chief executive, Laurence Cooklin, had resigned and would be replaced by John Hoerner, 51, chairman and chief executive of Debenhams P.L.C., a department store division of Burton.
Mr.
Cooklin, 47, was with the group for 20 years and had succeeded Sir Ralph Halpern as group chief executive in 1990.
No official reason was given for his departure, and retail analysts were reluctant to comment.
There had been rumors, however, of a power struggle between Mr.
Cooklin and Mr.
Hoerner for some weeks.


Genes Don't Doom Anyone to a Life of Crime
To the Editor:
"Studies Find a Family Link to Criminality" (front page, Jan. 31) and "Time to Rethink National Policies on Race" (letter, Jan. 31) are dangerously misleading and could promote a punitive attitude toward blacks and criminals.
Allen Beck, compiler of the Justice Department statistics your article discusses, asserts that there were no earlier studies linking crime and familial disorder.
He is wrong.
In "Unraveling Juvenile Delinquency" (Commonwealth Fund, 1950), Sheldon and Eleanor Glueck reported a detailed study of delinquents in Boston that established a relation between crime and family life.
In 1959 and subsequent years, I traced the longitudinal histories of criminals and noncriminals reared in the same impoverished neighborhood and noted a strong relationship between a child's eventual criminality and parental discipline, rejection, brutality and deviance.


U.N. Council Favors Peace Force for Yugoslavia
The United Nations Security Council moved ahead today with plans for its first peacekeeping operation on the European mainland, in which a 13,000-member international force will be sent to bolster the fragile cease-fire in Yugoslavia.
Secretary General Boutros Ghali won broad backing for his plan from the five permanent Council members.
Mr.
Ghali, acting on a proposal by his mediator in the area, Cyrus R. Vance, a former American Secretary of State, told Council members the force should be sent for at least a full year.


When Prime Time Ends, CBS's Late Fun Starts
Each segment of CBS's Winter Olympics telecast has a distinct personality.
Amusement and a sense of adventure infuse the morning show, with its hosts, Harry Smith and Greg Gumbel.
Sobriety and a lack of spontaneity hang over the prime-time effort, with Tim McCarver and Paula Zahn.
But the character of late night is downright odd, with its host, Pat O'Brien.


Judge Upheld on Flag Pin
A state appeals court ruled today that a town justice in Queensbury, N.Y., acted properly last year when he prohibited a district attorney from wearing an American flag lapel pin in court.
In overturning a lower court ruling, the four-judge panel from the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court said that the decision of Attorney General William E. Cunningham 3d to wear the American flag pin at the height of the patriotic fervor surrounding the Persian Gulf war might have influenced a jury hearing his case.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about "Grandchild of Kings," a play directed by Harold Prince at Theater for the New City, 155 First Avenue, near Ninth Street, misstated the opening date.
It is Sunday, not Monday.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about Romane LaFond, the man accused of having killed a Hasidic woman in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, referred incorrectly to an assistant district attorney who handled the arraignment.
He is Jon L. Besunder.


Review/Dance; Hawkins Troupe Paying Tribute
The international music world knows Lucia Dlugoszewski as an experimental American composer; her commissions have included "Abyss and Caress" from Pierre Boulez for the New York Philharmonic.
The dance world knows her even better through the original and always startling scores that she has written for Erick Hawkins's choreography for more than 30 years.


Worries Amid Growth For Cellular Telephones
Like the tropical clouds over this always boisterous city, the national recession has overshadowed much of the telecommunications business, stunting its growth.
An exception is the cellular telephone industry.
The cellular industry is growing faster than ever, with an estimated 7.5 million users last year, up about 40 percent from the previous year, according to the Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association.


5 Accused of Faking Designer Bags and Watches
More than 100,000 handbags awaiting a Chanel label -- but not, prosecutors said, from Chanel -- have been confiscated in what the Manhattan District Attorney called one of the largest seizures of counterfeit merchandise in the state.
The District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said that the bags, sold by street vendors and in storefronts at hundreds of dollars less than the luxury items they were imitating, would have brought upwards of $50 million.
The bags were seized in raids on two warehouses in Manhattan and one in Carlstadt, N.J.


U.S. Stays Solid on Ice: LeBlanc Stops Finns
The players from Finland walked past reporters tonight and headed into their locker room.
They didn't know what, or who, had just zapped them with a 4-1 loss in the Olympic hockey tournament.
"LeBlanc?" Mikko Makela said, in answer to one question.
"Sometimes, you get goals from a guy like that you don't hear of."


Israeli Interrogators Cleared in Arab's Death
A police investigation into the death of a Palestinian prisoner in a West Bank jail has cleared interrogators from the Israeli security service Shin Bet of criminal wrongdoing, the authorities said today.
Police Minister Ronni Milo said the investigation showed that "Shin Bet acted as it should, and there were no grounds for the complaints and accusations against it."
The inquiry was ordered after the death last week of Mustafa Akawi, 35 years old, who had been arrested on Jan. 22 for reported activities on behalf of the hard-line Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
The group is suspected by the Israeli Army of being involved in recent shootings of settlers in the occupied territories.


Stocks Tumble, With Dow Falling by 30.18
Stocks fell sharply yesterday as investors' hopes of a further easing by the Federal Reserve began evaporating and bond prices collapsed on signals that the economy may be stabilizing.
After a record close the day before, the Dow Jones industrial average staged a 30.18-point retreat, to 3,246.65.
Robert C. Walberg, analyst at MMS International, an economic analysis and research firm, said the economic data released yesterday, including strong retail sales and lower jobless claims, exerted pressure on stocks.
Also a factor, he said, was the Treasury's 30-year bond auction, which did not live up to expectations and extended bond losses in the afternoon.


Daihatsu Planning to Halt Imports to U.S.
Daihatsu, the most recent Japanese entry in the American car market, will stop importing vehicles to the United States because of mounting financial losses.
Daihatsu America, based in Los Alamitos, Calif., began selling its Charade subcompact in 1987, and its Rocky compact sport-utility vehicle was introduced two years later.


Critic's Choice/Dance; Works With Goofy Slants
Tom Evert was one of the most interesting performers in the Paul Taylor Dance Company in the 1980's, a big man with an understated, gentle quality who played his cards a little close to his chest on stage.
And so it was a surprise to discover that as a choreographer he is often a goofily funny man.
Humor in dance often seems to misfire.
But the grimmest of dancegoers may find themselves roaring with laughter as the mad devil, skeleton, bats and pig lady of "Neewollah" (say it backward) cavort across the stage at manic speed to music performed on drums and carnival instruments by the creatures themselves.
That mad, wittily costumed gang will return tonight and tomorrow night at Marymount Manhattan Theater when the Cleveland-based Tom Evert Dance Company makes a rare New York appearance.
And Mr.
Evert's recent "Bodytalk," billed as a vivid exploration of body languages and set to a commissioned score by the Cleveland composer Laurence Minadeo, sounds promising.
But not all of the dances on the program will be lighthearted.


Cuts at Northrop
The Northrop Corporation said it would cut about 2,000 jobs in its aircraft division by the end of the year.
About half the jobs will be trimmed through layoffs and half through attrition, a spokesman said.
The division now employs 12,000.
The cuts are in addition to the 1,500 jobs Northrop said it would eliminate at its B-2 bomber division after President Bush proposed cutbacks in military spending last month.
The company has been one of the hardest hit among military contractors.
Northrop shares fell 37.5 cents today, to $25.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.


At the Bar; A Black Jurist, In an Open Letter, Says Justice Thomas Must Not Forget a Debt To the Past
In his Supreme Court confirmation hearings Clarence Thomas spoke frequently and movingly about his mentors.
Recently, another famous black jurist tried assuming that role, though whether Justice Thomas will listen to him as he once did to his grandfather and the nuns of Savannah, Ga., only time will tell.
Last November, shortly after the Senate narrowly confirmed Judge Thomas for the seat being vacated by Justice Thurgood Marshall, A. Leon Higginbotham Jr., chief judge emeritus of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in Philadelphia, wrote a long and impassioned letter addressed to Justice Thomas.
That letter appears in the current issue of the University of Pennsylvania Law Review.


Bill Clinton's Vietnam Test
The curse of Vietnam echoes anew through American politics.
The war tore the country apart a generation ago when the body bags were coming home.
Now it reverberates in the New Hampshire Presidential primary campaign with intimations that Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas dodged the draft in some devious way.
Voters have good reason to examine this issue.
Whether or not one accepts the propriety of delving into Governor Clinton's private life, there can be no doubt about the legitimacy of asking how a public official behaved during the Vietnam years; the question provides an illuminating test.


Companies Told to Let Holders Vote on Pay
The Securities and Exchange Commission proposed today, as expected, that companies more clearly disclose executive compensation and ordered them to give their stockholders the right to vote on how much the executives are paid.
Although the votes would not be binding, the potential embarrassment of quantifiable shareholder disapproval is nonetheless expected to be a powerful incentive for corporate boards to rethink how much they pay themselves and their senior officials.


A Euro-Fling on East 77th St.
THE bar in the Mark hotel is small, dimly lighted and as cozily intimate as a private club.
So intimate that the Frenchman in aviator glasses, black jeans, and a jacket with Mickey Mouse stitched under a "Euro Disney" logo felt free to slide his chair to a corner table occupied by two women.
"May I eat off your plate?" he murmured in a thick Parisian accent, smoke curling up from his Gauloise.
He helped himself to a thick slice of goat cheese quesadilla and munched ingratiatingly.
Even the nicest Upper East Side hotels are not safe from creeping Eurotrash.
My friend and I had checked into the Mark for a quiet, self-indulgent girls' weekend of room-service folly, a kind of Thelma-and-Eloise adventure.
Fortunately for the Frenchman, we had not packed firearms.


Off and Running at Convention Site
The opening gavel of the Democratic National Convention at Madison Square Garden is five months away, but already 17,500 hotel rooms have been booked -- enough to house the entire population of Kings Park, L.I., or Gallup, N.M.
News organizations are already squabbling about just how cramped the press headquarters will be.


Ronnie Paris; Writer and Teacher, 67
Ronnie Paris, a playwright, novelist and teacher, died on Feb. 4 at Kingston Hospital in Kingston, N.Y.
She was 67 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Bearsville, N.Y.
She died of an aneurysm, said her son Peter Stein of New Haven.


Editorial Notebook; The Road From Damascus
Mark Twain trekked across the Golan Heights on horseback 125 years ago, on his way from Damascus to the Holy Land.
The place hasn't changed much since: 500 square miles of volcanic landscape, strewn with basalt rocks, underground streams that feed the Jordan River, deep ravines, and flat, rich farmland in the south.
"Here," wrote Twain in "The Innocents Abroad," "you feel all the time just as if you were living about the year 1200 before Christ -- or back to the patriarchs -- or forward to the New Era."
Some 13,000 Israelis now live in 30 communities strategically scattered across the plateau.
More than 1,000 U.N. peacekeepers supervise the separation of Israeli and Syrian forces.
On a clear day you can see Mount Hermon in the far north, and an Israeli listening post.
Syrians laugh nervously at the thought that the antennas can eavesdrop on their bedrooms in Damascus.


Taking on Tammany, 100 Years Ago
On Valentine's Day in 1892 an obscure minister delivered a sermon that changed the fate of New York City.
The jeremiad by the Rev.
Dr.
Charles H. Parkhurst inspired a campaign that unmasked New York's first major police scandal, that contributed to the creation of a five-borough city and that placed Theodore Roosevelt on the road to the Presidency.
Today, the centenary of the almost-forgotten sermon will be observed at the same Manhattan site where it was delivered.
Dr.
Parkhurst's charges of governmental and police corruption were met with ridicule by politicians and prosecutors, according to the man who organized today's forum, Thomas A. Reppetto, president of the Citizens Crime Commission.
The airing of the same issues, which Mr.
Reppetto said "are still with us today," is not expected to create the same stir.


Five Weeks Later, Still in Love With Rangers
Because they have never broken my heart, I am sending the Rangers a Valentine today.
There are few other people in New York who can love the Rangers unconditionally; for too many years, the Broadway Blues have promised and teased, then vanished like melted ice.
Ranger fans have scar tissue on their souls.
They are too ready to wince, to shrug, to wait for another season.
They hold back at the last moment, their skates throw snow, they don't finish their checks.
Who can blame them?
By now, they may even be afraid of winning.


Inquiry Asked on 'Lost P.O.W.' Photo
Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican who was a prisoner of war in Vietnam, has asked the Attorney General to investigate the latest case of an apparently fraudulent photograph that purports to show a missing American serviceman still alive in captivity in Indochina.
The photograph, said to be of Capt.
Donald G. Carr, an Army officer whose plane crashed in Laos in 1971, was made public last August by a retired Air Force Lieut.
Col., Jack E. Bailey, who has devoted years to searching for missing Americans in Indochina.


Vehicle Sales Post Sharp Rise
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks rose a robust 23.8 percent in early February, auto makers reported today.
Although analysts had expected a gain over the sluggish period a year earlier, they said sales for the first 10 days of the month were the strongest sign of improvement in the auto industry since last summer.
"We're off the bottom, and there seems to be genuine improvement in retail demand," said Maryann N. Keller, an automotive analyst with Furman Selz in New York.


Pessimistic Kronberger Wins the Combined and Aims for 4 More Golds
In this morning's freezing rain, Petra Kronberger had skied the slalom a bit slowly, conservatively, knowing that if she made a horrible mistake she lost any chance to become the women's combined champion.
But then, in the afternoon snowstorm that howled through this valley, obscuring the peaks, she suddenly changed her strategy.


For 6 Haitians, Last-Minute Reprieve
As this cutter carrying more than 250 Haitian migrants pulled within sight of the Port-au-Prince harbor, some of them swayed gently to the rhythms of Bob Marley and the Wailers playing over the ship's loudspeakers.
"Everything's gonna be all right, everything's gonna be all right," went one refrain, and another: "Get up, stand up, stand up for your rights."
But for six of the refugees, the words were especially poignant.
Instead of being returned, they were told at the last minute that they would be allowed to pursue their claims for asylum in the United States.


New Jersey Legislation Escalates Commuter Tax War
A three-state tax war heated up this week with the introduction in the New Jersey Legislature of two bills to raise taxes on New Yorkers who work in New Jersey.
There were also warnings that Connecticut would retaliate if Mayor David N. Dinkins goes ahead with a plan to increase taxes on commuters from outside New York State.
Senator George Jepsen, who represents Stamford and Darien in the Connecticut Legislature, said Mayor Dinkins's insistence on pressing a commuter tax increase could poison efforts to find interstate solutions for transportation and pollution problems.


Review/Opera; Thomas Hampson as the Barber
The bicentennial of Rossini's birth is just two weeks away, but celebrations are only now beginning.
The occasion has been overshadowed by Mozart's anniversary, which is unfortunate: Mozart was much better known beforehand but Rossini will still be unknown afterward.
This is not only because many of his operas, like "Zelmira" and "Maometto II," have become obscure, but because even in his best-known work -- "Il Barbiere di Siviglia" -- the composer hides himself behind farce and satire, parody and burlesque.
There is hardly a real character in this most remarkable of operas; given the joyous cynicism and playful self-consciousness of the music, it sometimes even seems as if the composer is turning himself into an illusion before our very ears.
The problem is how to create that Rossinian mix of mockery, disguise and pleasure.
In the first performance this season of the Metropolitan Opera's production of "Barbiere" on Wednesday night, it looked at times as if all the elements were in place.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
House Democrats began working on an alternative to Bush's tax legislation, centered on temporary tax credits of up to $400 for 80 percent of all taxpayers, a permanent one percentage point reduction in the corporate tax rate and a modest cut in taxes on capital gains.  [ Page A1. ]
Retail sales rose 0.6 percent in January, the Commerce Dept. said, in one of the first important reports to signal a possible economic rebound.
The increase was the largest in eight months in a crucial sector of the economy.  [ A1. ]
Sales of U.S.-built cars and light trucks rose 23.8 percent in early February, auto makers reported, in what analysts called the strongest sign of improvement since summer.  [ D1. ]
The cellular telephone industry is growing faster than ever, with an estimated 7.5 million users last year.  [ D2. ]
The S.E.C. proposed that companies disclose executive compensation more clearly and ordered them to give stockholders the right to vote on executive pay.  [ D5. ]
The first commercial test of gene therapy, a potentially revolutionary technique that could cure hereditary diseases and might also help in fighting diseases like AIDS and cancer, has been cleared by a Federal review panel.  [ D1. ]
Most restrictions on farm chemicals shown to cause cancer in lab animals were lifted by the E.P.A.  [ A14. ]
A judge struck down a San Francisco ordinance that was the only U.S. law aimed at regulating the purchase and use of video display terminals in private businesses.  [ A14. ] Companies
Ford Motor lost $475.7 million in the quarter, it said, on revenues of $21.98 billion, capping a year with its largest deficit ever.  [ D1. ]
Colgate-Palmolive agreed to acquire Mennen for $670 million in stock and cash, a "strategic acquisition" to increase its presence in personal-care products.  [ D1. ]
The New York Post's owner wants to buy The Daily News.
The expected bid is said to have the backing of Bankers Trust.  [ A1. ]
Revco agreed to pay Jack Eckerd $7.5 million to drop its takeover bid.  [ D4. ] International
Daihatsu will stop importing vehicles to the U.S. because of mounting financial losses.  [ D4. ] Markets
There was a big selloff in the credit markets, helped by data carrying the scent of economic recovery.
Also contributing to the decline in prices was the weight of unsold inventories of securities amassed by dealers during the Treasury refunding.  [ D1. ]
Stocks fell sharply as hopes of a further Fed easing began evaporating.
The Dow fell 30.18, to 3,246.65.  [ D6. ]
Crude oil prices moved sharply higher as traders speculated that OPEC ministers would soon agree to cut production.  [ D13. ]
The dollar climbed and gold prices fell after the Government reported unexpectedly strong economic figures.  [ D13. ] Today's Columns
The bad old 80's were a lot like the good old 60's, except for one vital dimension: poverty did not ease as the economy grew.
While poverty shrank by a quarter in those golden Kennedy-Johnson years, it was actually higher at the end of the Reagan boom than in 1979.
Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Westmark International is the latest reflection of the theory that the sum of the parts is greater than the whole.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D6. ]
Pepsi is planning a marketing blitz for Diet Pepsi, eager to translate the success of its Ray Charles campaign into sales.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D19. ]





Go Figure: Favorites Browning, Bowman and Eldredge Stumble Badly
The opening night of men's figure skating at the Albertville Olympics produced one improbable performance after another as several of the world's best skaters, including two from the United States, found themselves in altogether unexpected positions.
By the time the last of 31 athletes had skated his original program, about the only thing that seemed reasonable was Viktor Petrenko of the Unified Team holding first place.


Review/Film; A Dim Duo In a Revel Of Stupidity
At least the world of Wayne Campbell (Mike Myers) and Garth Algar (Dana Carvey) is a cozy place.
It's crammed with all the pop-cultural junk mail that helped make Wayne and Garth whatever they are today.
The familiar sitcoms and advertisements and heavy-metal hits that shaped their consciousness have become, for Wayne and Garth, just so many friendly signposts on the path from one loud party to the next.
As a matter of fact, these are the
only
signposts.
Simply being able to identify them -- anything from Led Zeppelin to "Laverne and Shirley," anyone from Claudia Schiffer to Dick Van Patten -- is a large part of appreciating Wayne and Garth's marginal humor.


Accounts
*
The House of Seagram, New York, to Adland, San Francisco, for advertising its Martell, Chivas Regal, Crown Royal and Royal Salute brands to Asian Americans.
Billings were not disclosed. *
The Florida Lottery has finally and officially named Earle Palmer Brown, Tampa, to handle its $27 million account previously at Bozell Inc., Tampa.
The shop had won the account twice in the last nine months, but the decision had been protested by losing agencies.


Probation Sentence In St. John's Assault
A former student at St.
John's University was sentenced yesterday to three years of probation for his guilty plea to sexually abusing a woman in the St.
John's sexual-assault case.
Adam Gerber, 24 years old, of Pleasantville, N.Y., one of three men to plead guilty to reduced charges in the case, was sentenced by Justice Kenneth N. Browne in State Supreme Court in Queens.


2 Men Are Indicted On Racket Charges, Including 9 Murders
Two men identified as the top leaders of the Lucchese crime family were indicted in Brooklyn yesterday on Federal racketeering charges that included nine murders.
The indictment charged that Vittorio Amuso, cited as the boss of the crime family, ordered or arranged the nine murders between 1988 and 1991.
The second defendant, Anthony Casso, was named as the underboss and charged with involvement in seven of the murders.


Portland Journal; The Comedian Politician Heads Back to His Roots
In the office of Bud Clark, Mayor of Portland, are envelopes stuffed with dollar bills.
Usually the money is attached to hand-scrawled letters, postmarked from anywhere in the country.
A typical note, plucked from the floor of the Mayor's carpet, begins:
"Dear Budster:
"We think you're a great guy and lots of fun. We just disagree with your liberal politics. Here's a buck for Bud."


Quotation of the Day
"Somebody's got to be President. But we don't have to like it." JODIE BANKS of Manchester, N.H.  [ A1:1. ]


Texas Asks High Court to Delay State Senate Vote
In an emergency request, the State of Texas today asked the United States Supreme Court to order a postponement of the March 10 primary for the State Senate.
It cited allegations of illegal collusion between a Federal judge and a Republican legislator in drafting a court-ordered redistricting plan for the Senate that is highly favorable to Republicans.
"A dark cloud hovers over the district court's purportedly self-crafted Senate redistricting plan," said the motion filed by Dan Morales, the Texas Attorney General.


Gotti Violates Grammar, Not Law, His Lawyer Says
The way John Gotti's lawyer put it, the only offense committed by his client was against the English language.
And even that, the lawyer quickly suggested, was hardly Mr.
Gotti's fault.
"He received his education on the streets, from the people he grew up with," the lawyer, Albert J. Krieger, said.
"He learned to speak what they speak." Mr.
Krieger then suggested that his client was "embarrassed" by his lack of breeding.


Bulls Make a House Call, But Knicks Don't Answer Bell
For the Chicago Bulls, it was simply another night at the office.
The Knicks might have been better off they had called in sick.
Ignoring the playoff-like atmosphere and a capacity crowd (19,763) that was ready to erupt, the Bulls casually strolled into Madison Square Garden and dismantled the Knicks, 106-85.
The Bulls never trailed, and New York never threatened.
At times, it appeared the Bulls were almost bored.


Dinkins Gains Tentative Pact On Sanitation
The Dinkins administration has reached a tentative agreement with New York City's 6,800 sanitation workers that grants a one-year raise of 3.5 percent but leaves a central productivity issue unresolved.
The city's recycling program has reduced the load for many sanitation workers, some of whom complete their eight-hour shifts in four hours.
The union agreed to return to productivity levels spelled out in its 1980 contract.
But what that means in terms of extended collection routes and what further efficiencies the city can gain have been set aside for further negotiation.
Those issues will go to a mediation board if no agreement is reached within a year.


INSIDE
New York Sanitation Pact Mayor Dinkins reached an agreement with sanitation workers that grants a 3.5 percent raise but leaves productivity unresolved.
Page B1.
Ban Lifted on Pesticides
The Environmental Protection Agency eased restrictions on pesticides it banned three years ago because they caused cancer in animals.
Page A14.
Orchids in Your Mailbox
Calyx and Corolla, a three-year-old company that sends flowers by mail, is seen as one of the brightest spots in the mail-order business.
Page D1.


On My Mind; Victory for Buchanan
Patrick Buchanan already has achieved a remarkable victory in the New Hampshire primary.
It will stand no matter what the vote spread.
He could not have done it alone.
He had the help of American journalists and politicians.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House Memo; Trick for Bush Is to Run Against the Bush of 1980
In a new commercial that his campaign began showing on television today, President Bush gazes into a camera in the White House.
He reminds New Hampshire Republicans that they "will once again lead the nation" in choosing a President and asks them to "stand united to defeat the liberal Democrats in the fall."
Campaigning in New Hampshire last month, Vice President Dan Quayle repeatedly told voters: "The Republican revolution began here 12 years ago in the snows of New Hampshire. They've been trying to tell you made a mistake. You did not make a mistake."


Stella Roman, 87, Soprano in Works Staged by the Met
Stella Roman, a soprano who sang with the Metropolitan Opera Company, died on Wednesday at Mt.
Sinai Hospital.
She was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of respiratory failure, said her son, Flaviu Romanul of Boston.
Miss Roman was known for her interpretations of the great Italian spinto roles, including Aida, which she sang at her Metropolitan Opera debut in 1941, Tosca, Mimi in "La Boheme," Amelia in "Un Ballo in Maschera" and Desdemona in "Otello." She also appeared in German operas and was chosen by Richard Strauss to sing the role of the Empress at the Italian premiere of his "Frau Ohne Schatten" at La Scala in 1940.


Books of The Times; A Small Town Full of Drama, Crisis and Grief
Billie Dyer and Other Stories  By William Maxwell  117 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $18.
Though William Maxwell's latest book, "Billie Dyer and Other Stories," reads like fiction, it is actually a series of interlinked autobiographical musings, enlivened by the author's use of imaginative sympathy and projection.
It is a technique already used to powerful effect by Mr.
Maxwell in such books as "So Long, See You Tomorrow" (1980) and "Ancestors: A Family History" (1971).


For Sikh Independence
To the Editor:
I take exception to the sentiment of the Indian historian Khushwant Singh, quoted in "Violence, Like Punjab's Wheat, Finds Fertile Soil" (news article, Feb. 1), that an independent Sikh homeland, Khalistan, "is not viable."
The Punjab, known as the wheat-basket of India, produces 73 percent of India's wheat reserve and 48 percent of its rice reserve.
Sikhs make up 2 percent of India's population but account for 26 percent of its gross national product.


Appeals Court Rebukes Cuomo on Late Submission of Budget Bills
A midlevel appeals court ruled today that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has violated the state Constitution in each of the last eight years by failing to submit budget bills to the Legislature on time.
The ruling, while having no practical effect this year, is the latest judicial rebuke of Mr.
Cuomo for his fiscal practices, which have been the subject of numerous court challenges in recent years.
Last month, the state's highest court, the Court of Appeals, ruled that Mr.
Cuomo and the Legislature acted unconstitutionally two years ago when they required court employees to defer part of their wages.


Dr. Alfred Copley, Abstract Artist And Physiological Researcher, 81
Dr.
Alfred L. Copley, who had dual careers as an abstract artist and as a medical researcher, died on Jan. 28 at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old and was a resident of Manhattan.
He died of cancer, his family said.


For Children
The nearness of the Children's Museum of Manhattan to the American Museum of Natural History sometimes leads to heavy stroller traffic on the Upper West Side on the weekends.
Here is a look at some of these museums' newer exhibitions and films, which might explain this neighborhood's popularity with families.
Barosaurus Exhibition  American Museum of Natural History Central Park West at 79th Street (212) 769-5000 Recommended for all ages
The museum's Barosaurus is a skeletal still life of facts: it is 50 feet high, with one fossilized neck bone (in a separate display case) weighing 150 to 175 pounds.
The dinosaur was dug up in Utah in the 1920's.
But this free-standing Barosaurus, craning its long bony neck toward the rosette ceiling in the museum's main entrance hall, seems deceptively real.
Shown rearing on its hind legs, protecting its baby from a merciless Allosaurus (who seems about half its height), the Barosaurus is both domestic and warlike.
Indeed, the dinosaur, which is on permanent display and was installed in December, seems poised for battle.
But as 2 3-year-old visitors pointed out, the dinosaur's head is incredibly small for such a lengthy, cumbersome body, leading the children to conclude that the Barosaurus doesn't have a ferocious bite. (It is, indeed, a plant eater).
The museum is open daily from 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M. (until 8:45 P.M. on Fridays and Saturdays); admission is $5 for adults and $2.50 for children.
A fast-food restaurant in the lower level is a good place for families to rest and eat before heading to other destinations.
Strollers are permitted throughout the museum.
A coat check is in the main lobby.  'Amazing Worlds of Weather'  Hayden Planetarium American Museum of Natural History 81st Street, near Central Park West (212) 769-5920 Recommended ages: 7 and up Through November
This 45-minute film, narrated by Al Roker, the Channel 4 weatherman, begins by explaining that humans live under an ocean of atmosphere, which doesn't sound too ominous.
Viewers can sit back and hear about this ocean as well as the sun's path, air currents, prevailing westerlies and jet streams in the United States, while special effects bounce lightning storms, tornadoes and wind storms around the dome.
Visitors are also treated to climatic facts, among them that the highest temperature in the world has been recorded in the Libyan desert (136 degrees) and the lowest in Antarctica (128.6 degrees below zero); the wettest place is the summit of Mount Haialeale, Hawaii, and New York receives more precipitation than Seattle on average.
Ozone, that atmospheric element that keeps threatening to depart, is discussed with computer graphics.
The program concludes by looking at other planets' weather systems, information courtesy of NASA's Voyager.
Saturn, for example, is decidedly inhospitable to Earthlings: it is rife with ammonia blizzards.
The film is shown weekdays at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M.; Saturdays at 11 A.M. and at 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 P.M., and Sundays at 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 P.M.
Admission is $5 for adults and $2.50 for children ages 2 to 12.
Younger children may be uncomfortable with the special effects and darkness. 'Great Stuff'  Children's Museum of Manhattan Recommended ages: 6 and up Through June 1993
Somewhere along the way, children collect things, be it erasers, snow domes or G.I.
Joes.
The Children's Museum of Manhattan understands this, and its newest exhibition, "Great Stuff," is dedicated to this psychological need.
The show, which is on the first floor and mezzanine and opened earlier this week, is stuffed with, among other things, private collections (and things gathered by the museum) of: bus transfers, socks without partners, pine cones, chopstick rests and found objects with holes in them (hoarded by a 4-year-old, no less).
In addition, there are Pez containers, toy service stations and taxi cabs, soil samples, a working train set, and Ken and Barbie dolls (and friends, like Midge) dating from the 1960's to the present.
The show is generous with interactive devices (using a flashlight, for instance, children can look under a bunk bed for treasures, or they can snoop through chest drawers for an imaginary person's trove).
It is also enhanced with bright, painterly murals, which hide more kitschy collectibles.
A video of interviews with young New York City collectors reveals their earnestness.
Darryl Foy, 11 years old, collects comic books, but more important, he says he intends to pass them down "for generations."
Visitors can also create their own collections through games; make funky art (using paper cups, for example); listen to songs played by Shlomo Pestcoe, a museum staff member whose collection of instruments is in the show; design a stamp using magnets, and play a baseball manager. (The mezzanine is devoted to stamp and baseball card collections.)
Younger children are welcome to the show; an unsupervised coat check is available for strollers. 'The Great Kapok Tree'  Children's Museum of Manhattan 212 West 83d Street (212) 721-1223 Recommended ages: 2 to 10 Through June
"The Great Kapok Tree" is a book written by Lynne Cherry, an author and illustrator; it is also the name of an exhibition at the Children's Museum of Manhattan that is based on Ms.
Cherry's book.
The show is contained within a long, wide hallway gallery space that keeps children focused on the matter at hand: the destruction of the Amazon rain forest.
The first display, a large green "tree trunk," is a good lure; if children peek inside, they can see something hiding.
The show appeals to younger and older children, with interactive stations that are meant to dramatize how the living entities in the forest need one another.
Some of the stations are successful; others, like the "Balance of Life," are awkward because the objects fall off too easily.
One display entices children to push a button to listen to such calming rain-forest sounds as rushing water, or to smell cinnamon, which is derived from the region.
Other displays require viewers to place animal-puzzle pieces within the canopy and the undergrowth of the forest, or to place colored glass pieces of the earth's rain forests in their proper spot, a puzzle with good intentions but slippery to do.
The game "What Doesn't Belong in the Rain Forest?" lets children choose answers (like "a large saw").
Another conscience-pricking display asks viewers to "stamp your hand with an environmental pledge," like switching off lights when leaving a room.
Ms.
Cherry, who spent time in the Amazon researching her brilliantly colored and evocative book, also has some of her original drawings on display.
The gallery is painted in tropical greens and browns and sings with the chattering sounds of the forest so even if younger children aren't sure what a rain forest is, they know it's green and noisy and breathing with life.
As one little girl yelled: "Oh, I hear sounds! How do we get out of this forest?"
The exhibition is also enhanced with readings of Ms.
Cherry's book by the museum staff and by regular workshop offerings.
The museum is open Mondays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 1 to 5 P.M. and Saturdays and Sundays from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission is $4.  'Ring of Fire'  American Museum of Natural History (212) 769-5650 Recommended ages: 3 and up Through June
The newest natural phenomena in close-up depiction on the museum's wonderfully gigantic screen (and in its comfortable and clean Naturemax theater) are volcanoes and seismic activities.
The Naturemax film takes viewers searingly close to the mouths of the regurgitating or quiescent volcanoes that ring the Pacific Ocean.
The title "Ring of Fire" itself refers to the 30,000-mile circle of about 400 volcanoes from the tip of South America, up the West Coast of North America and eventually over to Indonesia and New Zealand.
The film travels from volcano to volcano, while taking a look not only at the beastly eruptions, but also at the people who live in the vicinity of volcanoes.
The movie was worked on by a team of geologists, anthropologists, computer animators and film makers for more than seven years.
They captured over-the-rim aerial views of swimming molten lava.
On the island of Hawaii, for example, coal-black lava is laced with an orange undertow in Mauna Loa.
Smoke rolling from Navidad in Chile is also dramatic to witness on the screen.
But the most riveting spectacles are actual scenes from the 1989 San Francisco earthquake, where swaying apartments, cracking freeways and buckling bridges are vividly captured.
The 40-minute film doesn't overburden younger viewers with techno-speak, though the terms geologic plates and techtonic forces are bandied about by volcanologists.
The film is accompanied on Fridays and Saturdays by "We Are Born of Stars," a 10-minute 3-D film of computer-generated graphics about evolution.
"Ring of Fire" is being shown daily at 10:30 and 11:30 A.M. and 12:30, 1:30, 2:30, 3:30 and 4:30 P.M.
The double feature is shown on Fridays and Saturdays at 6 and 7:30 P.M.
Admission is $5 for adults and $2.50 for children for "Ring of Fire" and $7 for adults and $3.50 for children for the double bill.
Keep in Mind
"KEYS-TO-THE-CITY KIDS WEEK," sponsored by New York City public school system and the United Way of New York City, in cooperation with Mayor David N. Dinkins and other civic groups, starting on Monday and lasting through next Friday.
Hundreds of activities will be offered to children, including screenings at the Anthology Film Archives, 32 Second Avenue, at Second Street, in Manhattan, which will present two hours of free animated films from 1 to 3 P.M. on Wednesday to next Friday, to free academic tutoring (enrollment limited) at the Ralph-Lincoln Service Center, a community-based organization open 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. weekdays at 578 Ralph Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
Kids Week is meant to give public school children, who will be on vacation from school, something fun and constructive to do.
Recorded information on the activities can be heard by calling (718) 935-5300 (English) or (718) 935-5303 (Spanish) or by tuning into WNYE-TV's Channel 25 or WNYE-FM (91.5).
"YOU WON'T BELIEVE THIS, BUT," the new Paper Bag Players show, features skits about a runaway leak, a cardboard-box family lost in a mall, alligators and mummies.
With live music.
Saturdays and Sundays, through March 8, at 2 P.M.
Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $12.
Information: (212) 864-5400.
ERICK HAWKINS DANCE COMPANY, a children's matinee featuring the company's "Killer of Enemies: The Divine Hero," with American Indian costumes, and "Lords of Persia," with dancers in an imaginary game of polo.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M. at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $22 for adults, $10 for children ages 6 to 14.
Information: (212) 242-0800.


U.S. Bobsled Fortunes Receive Unexpected Push
The gold medal that Donna Weinbrecht won today in women's moguls skiing was expected.
No medal of any color had seemed likely for America's bobsledders, but their chances in the two-man competition have taken a giant leap in the past 24 hours.
The American duo of Brian Shimer and Herschel Walker had the fastest combined time in Wednesday night's two training runs, finishing first in one run and second in the other.
Walker is the Minnesota Vikings running back and Shimer is from Naples, Fla.


Incinerators Become an Outmoded Technology
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 18 interview with Steven M. Polan as he left the post of New York City Sanitation Commissioner quoted him as stating, "Every elected official in this city and state that I have spoken to in the last two years has told me privately that we need to build incinerators here."
But I, for one, never expressed such a sentiment to Mr.
Polan.
In fact, a detailed report recently released by my office recommends not only that the city scrap plans for new incinerators, but that it also shut down the three we have, which operate without permits.
The report established such points as the following:


At the Movies
Lessons From Hollywood
As a writer, producer and director, Jon Avnet is something of a triple-threat man in the film-making business, and now, he said, "I'm what's referred to in Hollywood as the flavor of the month."


Tito Puente Celebrates 100 Albums
When "The Mambo Kings" opens in theaters on Feb. 28, the band leader and percussionist Tito Puente, who plays himself in the movie about struggling Latin musicians, will be performing at 1 of the 300 or so shows he appears in yearly.
But for a moment Mr.
Puente, known as El Rey (The King) of Latin music, is within reach of New Yorkers, playing tomorrow at Madison Square Garden.
It's a special occasion: Mr.
Puente will be celebrating the release of his 100th album, with a huge cast paying tribute, including the great singer Celia Cruz and the band leaders Oscar D'Leon, Tito Nieves, Ismael Miranda and Jose (El Canario) Alberto.
It's a chance to catch one of the great figures in American music.
At 68 years old, Mr.
Puente is an extraordinarily vital performer and improviser.
When he plays, he's a mess.
He'll whap away at his timbales, elbows flying up around his head, his hair waving around, eyes wide.
He mugs: dancing around, fooling with guests onstage.
He's the jovial host, inviting the audience to enjoy itself.
It's no accident that Bill Cosby shows up at most of his New York concerts, ready to climb onstage to clown around with him.


People
*
Jordie Krimstein has been named vice chairman and director of retail resources, a new position at Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Chicago.
He had been executive vice president and executive creative director. *
Paul Silverman has been named chief creative officer and creative director at Mullen Inc., Wenham, Mass.
He had been executive vice president.
He will be succeeded by Edward Boches, who assumes the additional post of co-creative director.
Mr.
Boches had been a senior vice president and associate creative director. *
Carol Decker has been named publisher at Lear's in New York, a vacant position at the magazine.
She had been a publishing consultant. *
Dick Hanley has been named to the new positions of executive vice president and corporate creative director at Greenstone Roberts Advertising, Melville, L.I.
He had owned Dick Hanley &amp; Associates, an agency in New York.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon: Closing This Weekend
"TURANDOT," by Puccini, Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance of the season.
Tonight at 8.
Tickets: $20 to $110.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


Sounds Around Town
PeeWee Russell Tribute
Twenty-Third Annual PeeWee Russell Memorial Stomp, Hyatt Regency Hotel, New Brunswick, N.J., (908) 546-3603.
The death of the jazz clarinetist PeeWee Russell on Feb. 15, 1969, inspired the PeeWee Russell Memorial Stomp as a tribute to both Russell and the kind of traditional jazz that he played.
Originally the music at the Stomp was played by groups of his contemporaries, but as they died over the past two decades, younger traditionalists have replaced them.
On Sunday, starting at 1 P.M., the 23d Annual Stomp will feature the Bearcats Jazz Band; the clarinetist Joe Muranyi, who was in Louis Armstrong's group at the time of Russell's death and now leads his Gut Bucket Six; the trombonist Herb Gardner's New Royal Garden Six, and Frank Vignola's guitar and violin Hot Jazz Ensemble.
Charles Bourgeois, one of the founding producers of the Newport Jazz Festival, and the bassist Jack Lesberg will be honored for their contributions to jazz.
Tickets are $15; $12 for members of the New Jersey Jazz Society, which sponsors the Stomp, and $2 for students.


Revco to Pay Eckerd To End Takeover Bid
Revco D. S. Inc., the bankrupt drugstore chain, said yesterday that it had agreed to pay the Jack Eckerd Corporation $7.5 million to drop its takeover bid.
The payment, which must be approved by Judge Harold White of the United States Bankruptcy Court in Akron, Ohio, clears the way for Revco to emerge from the Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings it entered in July 1988.


Weinbrecht Captures Gold Medal in Moguls
What was supposed to have been a sure thing, as good as gold around her neck, had suddenly become more like the weight of a large, gold medal-starved country on her back.
"In people's minds, second place was not going to be good enough for Donna Weinbrecht," said Howard Peterson, the executive leader for the United States Ski Team.
"She was supposed to win the gold, nothing less."


Art in Review
Armand Agresti  Janet Borden Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through March 21
The Queens recorded in Armand Agresti's black-and-white photographs from the 1950's is a mythic place full of hot jalopies, seriously cool cats and girls with beehives that just won't quit.
Mr.
Agresti, himself a teen-ager at the time, must have been a bit of a pest to his friends, always hanging around taking pictures.
His photographs here evoke a prelapsarian world of sunny, tree-lined streets and slow dancing, a world where thoughts of fallout shelters and segregation were far away.
Part of the charm of these photographs is how unpretentious and direct they are, and how self-conscious their subjects are as well.
Three teen-age girls pose themselves in the driveway of a white frame house, two with hands on hips in would-be model poses, the third beaming beneath a towering hairdo.


Review/Theater: The Most Happy Fella; Basic Feelings, Soaring Songs
NOSTALGIA alone does not explain why Americans still adore Broadway musicals of the 1940's and 50's.
The appeal of these shows is much plainer than that.
Men and women step forward and express their most primal desires in simple poetry and unforgettable melodies: I want this.
I must go there.
I love you.
These feelings, which are no less profound for being universal, will never go out of fashion, and neither will the musicals containing them if they are as powerfully acted, sung and staged as the revival of Frank Loesser's 1956 musical, "The Most Happy Fella," which opened at the Booth Theater last night.
As directed by Gerald Gutierrez and performed by a cast led by Spiro Malas and Sophie Hayden, this work can hold its own with "Carousel" and "The Music Man" on the hit parade of Broadway romantic classics of the golden Rodgers and Hammerstein era.
It is so stirring that even as your head tells you that you cannot possibly be moved by its preposterously simple love story of a middle-aged immigrant Napa Valley grape farmer of the 1920's and his young mail-order bride, the rest of you is tugged right in.


Art in Review
Faith Ringgold  Bernice Steinbaum Gallery 132 Greene Street SoHo Through Tuesday
Faith Ringgold, a veteran of 25 years on the New York art scene, began making her story quilts, as she calls them, in 1983.
At first she interspersed handpainted images with handwritten texts on handsewn surfaces of quilted canvas, a combination that was usually bordered with a patchwork of patterned fabrics.


Art in Review
Moira Dryer  Mary Boone Gallery 417 Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Feb. 29
Moira Dryer's big new paintings on wood are of two types, premeditated or spontaneous, and neither seems quite self-sufficient.
In works like "Revenge" and "Captain Courageous," Ms.
Dryer's diaphanous veils and blots of color seem overly programmed.
Furthermore, their surfaces are punctuated with arbitrary physical details -- a pair of violin sound holes in the first case, four rubber grommets in the second -- that announce with Magrittean overtones "this is not a painting."


Review/Film; Dennis Potter Directs His Own 'Secret Friends'
Dennis Potter is one of the most skillful and innovative of contemporary English dramatists.
With the nerviness of a stand-up comedian at a funeral, he shakes things up.
He has freely reordered conventions to set new free-wheeling standards for narrative television.
He has also written movies of enormous originality and feeling, most notably the screenplay for Gavin Millar's "Dreamchild" (1985).
Yet "Secret Friends," the new theatrical film he directed as well as wrote, plays as if it were a 97-minute imitation of his six-hour television classic "The Singing Detective" (1986).
It has the manner of something pared down in all the wrong ways.
It's an idiosyncratic work from which everything that might have been exceptional has been removed.


Economic Scene; Puzzling Poverty Of the 80's Boom
DESPITE what you may be hearing from some of the candidates in New Hampshire, the bad old 80's were actually a lot like the good old 60's.
The expansion lasted for almost as long as the 60's boom, eight years.
The economy grew by nearly as much.
And unemployment fell by an even bigger increment.
But in at least one vital dimension, the 80's were totally unlike the 60's.
The official poverty rate, which counts the number of people whose income falls short of some minimum level, did not come down as the economy rose.
While poverty shrank by a quarter in those golden Kennedy-Johnson years, it was actually higher at the end of the Reagan boom than in 1979.


Newsday Refuses to Reveal Source of Thomas Report
A Senate special counsel investigating how Anita F. Hill's sexual harassment accusations against Judge Clarence Thomas were disclosed to the press sought today, unsuccessfully, to make a Newsday reporter tell how be obtained the information for the first published account of the allegations.
The account by the reporter, Timothy M. Phelps, along with a report by a National Public Radio reporter, Nina Totenberg, prompted the extraordinary reopening of Senate hearings last fall on Judge Thomas's fitness to serve on the Supreme Court.
The full Senate ultimately confirmed him on a vote of 52 to 48.


New Jersey Woman Wins Gold Medal


Plan for Global Peacekeepers To Soothe Haiti Is Weighed
United States and Latin American officials are informally discussing the possibility of setting up an international peacekeeping force to restore order in Haiti and allow a civilian government to be restored.
Such a force, under the control of the Organization of American States, would almost certainly not include American troops, Administration officials and Latin American diplomats say.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; It's Indecision vs. Indifference In New Hampshire's Primary
Pauline Dowd swears it isn't The Draft or The Woman or even The Letter that makes her grimace when she sees Bill Clinton.
It's not the The Health Question or The Massachusetts Greek Issue that irks her about Paul Tsongas, either.
"These guys just aren't the ones," said the 55-year-old social worker with certainty and a little sadness.
"You know it when you've seen a guy who can be President. And you know it when you haven't."


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.87
6.37
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.76
3.73
5.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.89
3.81
5.84
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.98
6.83
7.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.91
7.80
7.98
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.95
8.90
9.20
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.77
6.75
7.20
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Angels Sign Alvin Davis
Three months after becoming a free agent, ALVIN DAVIS finally got a job yesterday.
The California Angels, trying to bolster their offense, signed the designated hitter-first baseman to a one-year contract with an option for a second year.


U.N.L.V. Under Federal Inquiry, Paper Says
The seemingly endless problems surrounding the University of Nevada-Las Vegas men's basketball team may be getting deeper.
The Las Vegas Review-Journal reported yesterday that Federal authorities are investigating whether points were shaved in U.N.L.V. games during the 1990-91 season, including the Final Four game in which Nevada-Las Vegas lost to Duke, 79-77.
The paper, quoting an unidentified Federal law enforcement source, said the point-shaving investigation is part of an inquiry focusing on Richard Perry, a convicted sports fixer, and his relationship with some of the U.N.L.V. players.


Tokyo Journal; Is the Prince Courting? Not a Peep From the Press
In an extraordinary act of deference by a supposedly independent press, Japan's news establishment voluntarily brought down the curtain today on one of the best stories of the decade: the fruitless search for a bride by Japan's most eligible bachelor, Crown Prince Naruhito.
Bowing to the Imperial Household Agency, which runs the affairs of Emperor Akihito and his family, the Japan Newspaper Association agreed to stop writing about the search for a bride for at least three months, apparently accepting the notion that the coverage was sabotaging the search itself.


The Art Market
Again: South Garden
This week, four months after the Battery Park City Authority formally put a stop to a much-criticized proposal for South Garden that would have blocked its spectacular Hudson River views, the authority announced new plans for the diamond-shaped, 3.5-acre plot at the tip of Battery Park City.


Waiving Fees and Doing the Right Thing for Love
IT happened right about this time of year in the dental offices of Dr.
Duane Schmidt.
A bent old lady named Geneva wandered in.
She had tried fixing her dentures with glue so she could chew her breakfast oatmeal.
As Dr.
Schmidt fit a new set, Geneva kept asking about the cost.
"This isn't right," Dr.
Schmidt thought.
He said there would be no charge.
That was Valentine's Day, 1984, on First Avenue in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.


CHRONICLE
A chair has been endowed and a scholarship fund established at Brown University in memory of Harrison S. Kravis, a son of HENRY R. KRAVIS and HEDI RUGER.
Mr.
Kravis was killed at the age of 19 last July in an automobile accident in Buford, Colo., shortly after completing his freshman year at Brown.


In Recession, Illegal Aliens Find a Cold Reception on L.I.
Shortly after her grueling overland journey here from El Salvador, Rosa R. lay terrified in an ambulance, about to give birth.
She feared not the labor or delivery, but that her first encounter with American authorities would end in her deportation.
Now, at four months old, her son, William, has a fever, but Rosa is afraid to apply for aid: the last time she did, a social worker accused her of lying and threatened her with jail.
This time, she fears deportation, and will likely send William to El Salvador.


Eager but Ill Equipped, Kurds Train Recruits
In the winter cold dozens of young men, stripped to the waist, parade out of their unheated barracks for an hour of morning calisthenics.
As they go through the drills, watched by a gaggle of officers in a motley collection of olive-green uniforms, the recruits chant slogans of Kurdish independence no less familiar to their fathers and grandfathers.


Seattle Signs Gelbaugh
The Seattle Seahawks yesterday signed a Plan B free-agent quarterback, STAN GELBAUGH.
Gelbaugh played in nine games and started three for the Phoenix Cardinals last season.
He completed 61 of 118 passes for 674 yards with 3 touchdowns and 10 interceptions. (AP)


In the Mailbox, Roses and Profits
Until three years ago, about the only innovation in the retail floral business was to put some carnations in a stand close to the carrots in supermarkets.
Then in 1989, Ruth M. Owades committed floral heresy: She began selling fresh anthuriums, tulips, roses, orchids and other exotic blooms by mail.


On Stage, and Off
The Substance of 'Substance'
Everyone is suddenly paying so much attention to Broadway -- and why not, with 18 shows opening in the next three months? -- that no one is noticing the phenomenon of "The Substance of Fire." The play, by Jon Robin Baitz, about a family-owned publishing business, was a hit last season at Playwrights Horizons; the star, Ron Rifkin, won an Obie and a Drama Desk Award.
It closed in June when Mr.
Rifkin had to return to the television series "The Trials of Rosie O'Neill." That show was recently canceled, so he and his fellow cast members, Sarah Jessica Parker, Maria Tucci, Jon Tenney and Patrick Breen, are all back.
Previews began at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater on Jan. 27, a few weeks after Andre Bishop, the former artistic director of Playwrights Horizons, moved to the same post at Lincoln Center Theater.


Hospital Exonerated In Infant's Death
The death of a 5-month-old infant at New York Hospital last month was not precipitated by the treatment there, the Medical Examiner's Office said yesterday.
The baby, Jeffrey Harden, who had suffered severe abuse and had burns on the lower half of its body, died Jan. 17 at the hospital.
While the medical examiner's office ruled the death a homicide from abuse, it also reported that a contributing factor was a cardiac arrest precipitated by a misplaced feeding tube that perforated his heart.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Aluminum Co. of America, Pittsburgh, agreed to buy a controlling stake in a subsidiary of Hungarian Aluminum Industrial Corp., Hungary's state-owned aluminum company. *
Dynatech Corp., Burlington, Mass., a data communications concern, acquired Industrial Computer Source Inc., a supplier of personal computers and accessories, for undisclosed terms. *
Marsam PharmaceuticalInc., Cherry Hill, N.J., agreed in principle with Healthmark Ltd. to form Marsam Canada, a joint venture in generic drugs in Canada.
Terms were not disclosed.


Places of the Heart: Where Cupid Turns a Spark Into a Glow


Sounds Around Town
Delta Blues
Winter Blues Festival, the Triplex, 199 Chambers Street, Manhattan, (212) 618-1980.
Electric Chicago blues dominates blues clubs and recordings around the world.
But back in the Mississippi Delta, where the blues germinated, performers who don't travel much still play wayward, idiosyncratic, stubbornly homegrown blues.
The World Music Institute has put together a two-night festival of performers who rarely reach New York City and who play blues that haven't been homogenized.
Tonight's triple bill includes the New York debut of Jack Owens, an 86-year-old guitarist and singer whose high, reflective voice and fingerpicked guitar come out of the regional style of Skip James; he performs with Bud Spires on harmonica.
Eddie (Guitar) Burns, transplanted from Mississippi to Detroit, leads an electrified blues band, playing solos with a twangy tone and loping phrases that hark back to Mississippi; Lonnie Pitchford re-creates the songs of Robert Johnson and also plays the one-stringed diddley-bo.
Tomorrow night should be more raucous.
Othar Turner, who is 83 years old, leads the Rising Star Fife and Drum Band, whose pentatonic melodies and syncopated drumming hark back to Africa.
R.
L.
Burnside plays raw-boned country blues on an electrified guitar, spiky and hypnotic.
And the Jelly Roll Kings -- Jack Johnson on electric guitar, Frank Frost on piano and Sam Carr on drums -- play band blues in a way that seems to turn the music sideways and inside out; any instrument can turn into the rhythm and any instrument, including drums, can play the lead, while the singing is gutsy and indomitable.
Both concerts begin at 8 P.M.; tickets are $13 and $16.
Information: (212) 545-7536.


Critic's Choice/Film; A Goodbye to Grandma
Is death anything like a long walk through the Holland Tunnel, crammed with pedestrians wearing everything from hospital gowns to black leather, all trudging to the other side?
If you got in an old-fashioned rocket ship, could you fly to heaven to see your dead Grandma?
These colorful fancies are played out near the end of "Thank You and Good Night," Jan Oxenberg's quirky, affectionate, part-documentary about the terminal illness and death of her grandmother and her family's reaction to those events.
The film is home-grown in the best sense: informed by the texture of family life, it is loaded with comic relief, common sense and unanswerable philosophical questions.
Ms.
Oxenberg wrote, produced and directed this work over 12 years, filming her mother, brother and other family members as well as herself.
But her white-haired, increasingly frail grandmother is the centerpiece.


Sounds Around Town
Mardi Gras Tradition
Bo Dollis and the Wild Magnolias, Town Hall, 113 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-2824; and Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Bacchanal whoops and hollers, ecstatic primitive rhythms and multi-colored regalia aren't idle ornamentations on Bo Dollis's style, they're the foundation of his entire esthetic.
From the tips of his royal blue feathers to the bottom of his growly voiced soul, Chief Dollis is an expressionist, and as the leader of the Wild Magnolias Indian tribe in New Orleans, he's one of the primary keepers of the Mardi Gras musical tradition.
"I'm Back . . . at Carnival Time!" (Rounder), the Magnolias' 1990 album, stomps all over Cajun, rhythm-and-blues and Dixieland brass; the ensemble's Afro-Indian chants, spicy percussion and unquenchable lust for fun make for a great version of the classic "Iko, Iko." At Town Hall tonight at 8 with Women of the Calabash and Kanza; tickets are $15.
At Maxwell's tomorrow with the Voodoo Rhythm Kings, at 9 and 11:30 P.M.; tickets are $10.


Rates on Treasury Securities Rise Sharply
Data carrying the scent of economic recovery helped to generate a big selloff in the credit markets yesterday, pushing interest rates sharply higher.
Also contributing to the decline in prices was the weight of unsold inventories of securities amassed by dealers during the Treasury refunding auctions this week.


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, the Poetry Project, St.
Mark's Church, Second Avenue and 10th Street, Manhattan.
Readings by contributors to Cover Magazine, including Michael Andre, Ira Cohen, Lita Hornick, Vincent Katz and Jeff Wright.
Today at 10:30 P.M.
Suggested admission: $5.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
READING, Judith's Room, 681 Washington Street, Manhattan.
Paula Gunn Allen, an American Indian writer, will read from her work.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 727-7330.
SLIDE SHOW AND TALK, American Numismatic Society, Broadway at 155th Street, Manhattan.
"The Coins and Medals of the World's Columbian Exhibition, 1892-1893," a talk about the items in the collection of the society given by Barbara A. Baxter, a curator for the society; a display of items from the collection will be on view through April 11.
Tomorrow at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 234-3130
LECTURE AND SLIDE SHOW, Washington's Headquarters State Historic Site, 84 Liberty Street, Newburgh, N.Y.
"George Washington's Weapons," a discussion of the firearms owned and used by Washington, given by Dr.
Allan Boudreau, an author and historian.
Tomorrow at 3 P.M.
Free.
Reservations and Information: (914) 562-1195.


Fly So Free Is Back on Track
Fly So Free, the champion colt whose 4-year-old debut was delayed by an elusive ailment, went back into training today with some jogging at Gulfstream Park.
The nature of the ailment was still not known.
But the colt, who is owned by Tommy Valando, seemed sound and lively again as he went to the track for the first time in two weeks.
His trainer, Scotty Schulhofer, said he was aiming at the $500,000 Oaklawn Park Handicap in Arkansas on April 11.


Comic Books Offer More Than Escapism
To the Editor:
Further on "The Comic Books Break New Ground, Again" (editorial, Jan. 24), about Northstar, a Marvel Comics hero who has come out as gay: On April 6, 1941, Tarpe Mills, who had been working in the comic-book industry since 1938, created her most popular character, Miss Fury.
The character, originally called Black Fury, wore a black leopard-skin costume and battled gangsters, Nazi spies and crooked investigators.
Although she possessed no special powers, her skill as a fighter made her a formidable opponent.
With Miss Fury, Tarpe Mills reached beyond sexism to create an image of strength and integrity.


Yankee Stripes In Southern Circles
Home is where you go when you need your car fixed, as Robert Frost might have said.
So it was that the new manager of the Yankees -- William Nathaniel Showalter 3d -- brought his ancient Volvo to Joe Reid the other day.
An old quarterback can always trust his former left guard.
Joe Reid is a good old boy who fixes cars under the pine trees with a Christian radio station playing from the garage.
On a fine February afternoon, a week before Showalter would open his first spring training camp, Reid scuttled under the front bumper, taking his time, prolonging the visit.
He doesn't see his old pal that often.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  POST'S OWNER EYES THE NEWS
Peter S. Kalikow, owner of The New York Post, said he intended to make an offer to acquire the bankrupt Daily News, a move that has the apparent financial backing of Bankers Trust Company.
The announcement raises the curtain on the formal effort to find a buyer for The News, a process that could become a complex bidding war in which the paper's owners, unions and creditors weigh competing offers and try to agree on a deal that will probably require sacrifices by all the parties.
A1.
GOTTI: BEST FOOT FORWARD
In an impassioned opening argument, John Gotti's defense attorney sought to do more than proclaim his client's innocence and set the groundwork for destroying the credibility of the government's star witness.
By painting his famous client in warm, albeit earthy pastels, the lawyer sought to pre-empt a less appealing side that would be audible on the government's electronic surveillance tapes.
B3.
BAD NEWS.
GOOD NEWS
The good news is at least one New York City agency is operating more efficiently than it used to, despite steep budget cuts.
The bad news is it is the agency that collects your taxes.
B3. 100 YEARS AGO TODAY
On Valentine's Day in 1892 an obscure minister delivered a sermon that changed the fate of New York City.
The jeremiad by the Rev.
Dr.
Charles H. Parkhurst inspired a campaign that unmasked New York's first major police scandal, contributed to the creation of a five-borough city and placed Theodore Roosevelt on the road to the presidency.
Today, the centenary of the almost-forgotten sermon will be observed.
B3.
THE 'BRUISE BROTHERS'
A pair of burly thugs known as the "bruise brothers" enforced the Gambino brothers' illegal hold over truck deliveries in New York City's garment industry by threatening recalcitrant garment makers, a former Gambino salesman told a Manhattan jury.
B2. 2 indicted on racketeering charges, including 9 murders.
B2.
Discrimination charges against Delta.
B4.
Counterfeit Chanel bags seized in raid.
B6.
REGION  A REBUKE FOR CUOMO
A midlevel appeals court ruled that Governor Cuomo has violated the state Constitution in each of the last eight years by failing to submit budget bills to the Legislature on time.
The ruling was the latest judicial rebuke of Mr.
Cuomo for his fiscal practices.
B9.
TAX-CUT CAMPAIGN REDUX
Exactly a month after the defeat of a Democratic drive to roll the New Jersey sales tax back from 7 to 6 percent, Senate Republicans began their own tax-cut campaign.
B7.
THE WAR AMONG THE STATES
A three-state tax war has heated up with the introduction in the New Jersey Legislature of two bills to raise taxes on New Yorkers who work in New Jersey.
There were also warnings that Connecticut would retaliate if Mayor Dinkins goes ahead with a plan to increase taxes on commuters from outside New York State.
B7.
Civil-rights charges sought in Teaneck case.
B7.
Our Towns B7


Hardheaded Skills Equal Financial Headway
The good news is at least one New York City agency is operating more efficiently than it used to, despite steep budget cuts.
The bad news is it is the agency that collects your taxes.
Over the last two years, since Carol O'Cleireacain took over as commissioner at the Department of Finance, changes have been coming fast and furious.
And since the department is the one that administers the 23 taxes that pay for city services, manages the city's daily cash balances of $250 million and handles six million pieces of correspondence a year, any improvement in service could be considered a boon to many residents.


The Way to Approach a Sumo Wrestler
To the Editor:
You report cancellation of a movie called "Hell Camp," which was to be made in Japan (Arts pages, Feb. 5), because the Sumo Association refused its cooperation.
I spent 1980 to 1985 in Japan.
For the first three years, I produced television commercials, several starring a famous sumo wrestler.
I spent my final two years as a photographer and writer on sumo.
Before making commercials with the wrestler, I had no impression of sumo, other than of fat, clashing bodies.
When our plan for starring the wrestler came up, I knew that lack of knowledge about the sumo world would constitute disrespect and make it impossible to work successfully with him.
I underwent a regimen of reading sumo magazines and watching it on television.


Congress Studying Ways to Ease Pain of Huge Pentagon Cutbacks
Fearing economic dislocation from $50 billion in cuts to the Pentagon budget, Congress is considering a variety of proposals to cushion the effect on communities, employees at arms plants and displaced military personnel.
Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, has proposed allowing military personnel a year's leave to attend college or undertake vocational training to prepare for civilian life, then providing increased retirement pay to those who go into teaching, law enforcement and other jobs designated by the Government as particularly useful to society.
Congressional budget analysts have not yet determined the cost of the proposal.


Tyson's Accuser Is Identified
The 18-year-old woman who accused MIKE TYSON of rape has apparently agreed to go public.
People magazine said yesterday that the woman, DESIREE WASHINGTON, woild appear on the cover of its Feb. 24 issue in a smiling photograph with a headline, "The Woman Who Stopped Tyson."


Federal Prosecutor Urged To Take Up Teaneck Case
Civil rights officials and community leaders met with the United States Attorney for New Jersey here today to urge him to bring criminal civil rights charges against Officer Gary Spath of Teaneck, who was acquitted of manslaughter Tuesday in the killing of a 16-year-old youth he was chasing, Phillip Pannell.
The nine-member delegation met for almost two hours with the Federal prosecutor, Michael Chertoff, and several of his assistants, and emerged at 4:30 P.M. to give only a brief outline of the conference.


Ray Danton, 60, Actor and Director Of Stage and Screen
Ray Danton, an actor and director whose career embraced film, theater and television, died on Tuesday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 60 years old.
He died of complications from a kidney ailment, said Jill Danton, a daughter-in-law.


NORIEGA IS LINKED TO A SABOTAGING
Acting on orders of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, Panamanian narcotics police sabotaged a 1984 investigation of the Medellin, Colombia, cartel by releasing the principal suspect, a United States Drug Enforcement Administration agent testified today.
In his third day on the witness stand, Thomas M. Telles, the drug agency's senior representative in Panama from June 1984 through June 1986, told a government prosecutor that many of the successes in combatting drugs that General Noriega trumpeted as his own were actually developed by the American authorities.


DeBartolo Is Accused
The police in Menlo Park, Calif., said yesterday they were investigating a complaint from a woman who said she had been sexually assaulted early Tuesday morning by EDWARD J. DEBARTOLO JR., the owner of the San Francisco 49ers.
In discussing the investigation, Detective DOMINICK PELOSO declined to disclose the nature of the claimed assault, noting that under California law the term covers a series of offenses, including rape.
He said the woman, an acquaintance of DeBartolo's whose name was not disclosed, had not suffered any injuries requiring medical treatment.


Texas Bank Plan Approved
The troubled First City Bancorporation of Texas said today that the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency had approved a plan filed in December to raise $300 million in capital, or to merge with another banking company or to be acquired by one.
First City also said it lost $35.8 million in the fourth quarter.
The Houston-based banking organization has purposefully shed loans and other assets, to a total of $9.9 billion at the end of 1991, from $13.3 billion a year earlier, to lower its legally mandated capital cushion.
Yet the banking company is expected to turn to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation for much of the $300 million in new capital.


If Love Can Last, Why Not Flowers?
Lovers everywhere will be putting romantic bouquets in vases today.
But in a few days many of the flowers will wither, and the last reminder of Valentine's Day will be tossed in the trash.
If scientists succeed, though, sweethearts may never again have to suffer such sudden sorrows.
By next year, genetically engineered flowers may keep the blooms and romance of Valentine's Day lasting up to three times longer.


Foreign Affairs; Iowa's Secrets
Iowans did not get their media fix this election year.
Few came to report on a one-horse race.
So, if you had a tape recorder and so much as smiled at residents of this city in the last week, you heard their whole life histories and innermost political secrets.
The biggest secret was who Iowa Democrats longed to see on top of their national ticket if their own favorite son, Senator Tom Harkin, faltered: none other than Mario Cuomo.


Surgery for Elway
JOHN ELWAY, the Denver Broncos quarterback, underwent arthroscopic surgery to remove a bone spur from his throwing shoulder, and afterward his doctors said he should be fully recovered in about six weeks.
The bone spur had aggravated tendinitis in Elway's arm during the last half of the 1991 season, causing him to miss practice time but no games. (AP)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton's Woes Are Kerrey's Frustration
After spending 20 weeks campaigning, and cycling through nine television commercials with three different slogans, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska seems to have finally alighted on a definitive theme: "electability."
For the last few days, Mr.
Kerrey has been exploiting this theme with all the subtlety of a supermarket tabloid.
The Senator's latest television advertisement, which will go off the air on Friday to make room for yet another generation of commercials, declares, "With America in crisis, the Democrats have to nominate someone who can win the Presidency in November."


Ford Loses $475.7 Million In Quarter
The Ford Motor Company, capping a year with its largest deficit ever, posted a fourth-quarter loss of $475.7 million today on revenues of $21.98 billion.
The latest results actually improved on last year's fourth quarter, when Ford lost $518.5 million on revenues of $24.19 billion.
The narrower loss from a reduced sales volume "indicates that our efforts to reduce costs without compromising our product plans are working," said Harold A. Poling, the chairman and chief executive.
"Not Out of the Woods"


Nets' George Hopes His Best Is Yet to Come
When Tate George of the Nets was asked if his performance against Philadelphia on Wednesday night was the best of his career, the 6-foot-5-inch second-year guard out of the University of Connecticut paused for a moment before answering.
"I hope not," he said.
George had a career-high 22 points, 9 assists, 6 rebounds, 3 steals and 40 minutes of play in the 102-87 victory at the Spectrum that ended an eight-game losing streak for the Nets.


TAJIKISTAN AGREES TO CURBS ON ARMS
The mineral-producing former Soviet republic of Tajikistan agreed today to adopt an American-designed program for restricting the sale of weapons components and promised never to sell any of its uranium to countries that could use it to build atomic bombs.
President Rakhman N. Nabiyev made those and other promises to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, who flew into the snow-blanketed capital of Tajikistan today from Turkmenistan.
Mr.
Baker is touring seven former Soviet republics, including five with which Washington has not yet established diplomatic relations.


Corrections
A brief article by Bloomberg Business News in the Company News columns yesterday about the Medicis Pharmaceutical Corporation referred incorrectly to the company's expectations on seeking approval from the Food and Drug Administration to market a hair loss treatment.
The company plans to submit an application for F.D.A. marketing approval within three years.
Because of an editing error, the article also misidentified the company's headquarters city.
It is New York.


Yeltsin Promises to Modify His Economic Program
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia promised today that "urgent" corrections would be made in his six-week-old economic liberalization plan to force faster change upon collective farms and to better protect the poor from the steep new price rises.
"Life does not stand still and, therefore, these corrections are perfectly natural and even unavoidable," Mr.
Yeltsin told the Parliament in announcing that he would deliver a television address to the nation next Wednesday spelling out the changes and reassuring the worried Russian public.


Corrections
Because of a production error, the continuation page for an article about gypsy cabs was omitted from some copies yesterday, and a duplicate of another page appeared in its place.
Readers wishing copies of the omitted page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Studio Proposes Weekly Bargain for Moviegoers
Universal Pictures has proposed that movie theaters sell tickets at half price one day a week to stimulate weekday moviegoing, but theater owners gave the plan a mixed response today.
Some theater operators welcomed the proposal, but others said that discounting was already in place in many theaters and that the measure appeared to be a publicity ploy by Universal.
But even critics of the idea said it underscored the restlessness and concern among studios and exhibitors about the uneasy financial state of the movie industry.


Commercial Test of Gene Therapy
A Federal review panel has cleared the way for the first commercial test of gene therapy, a potentially revolutionary technique that could cure hereditary diseases and might also help in fighting diseases like AIDS and cancer.
The Recombinant Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health, which oversees gene therapy experiments, on Tuesday gave permission to researchers associated with the Targeted Genetics Corporation of Seattle to implant genetically modified cells into patients with AIDS in hopes of helping them fight the disease.
The test had already been approved by the Food and Drug Administration.
Marking a Milestone


A New Scandal in Japan Links Politics and Crime
After months of rumors and speculation, another scandal involving the governing Liberal Democratic Party broke today with police raids of the offices of a large trucking company that is reported to have funneled hundreds of millions of dollars to top politicians and organized crime.
A series of scandals have tainted politicans both in and out of government since disclosures of improper payoffs to members of Parliament toppled Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita in 1989.
But the amounts reportedly involved in the current scandal are far larger than those in the past.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Draft; Clinton Could Have Known Draft Was Unlikely for Him
When Bill Clinton gave up his deferment and exposed himself to the draft in the fall of 1969, information was readily available from local and Federal authorities that he was protected from induction at least until the following June, and that almost no one would be drafted from his town for the rest of that year.
President Richard M. Nixon announced on Oct. 1, 1969, that draft-eligible graduate students like Mr.
Clinton could finish the school year before induction.
And a review of public records shows that only two men were sent draft notices by Mr.
Clinton's draft board, No. 26 in Hot Springs, Ark., in the last three months of 1969.
No Immediate Risk
Mr.
Clinton, today the Governor of Arkansas and a Democratic Presidential contender, has said on the campaign trail that he made himself eligible for the draft because he felt a moral obligation to do so after learning that some of his high school classmates had been killed in Vietnam.


CHRONICLE
VICTORIA OWENS and LESTER BUTLER are both admirers of RUTH LAREDO'S piano artistry, so it was not remarkable that they found themselves in adjoining seats for a subscription series of Ms.
Laredo's concerts in 1988.
As Ms.
Owens recalled yesterday, "I noticed a gentleman interested in music sitting next to me, but I was more interested in music than in gentlemen."
Still, when he offered to walk her to her car, she was impressed.
At the next "Concert With Commentary" by Ms.
Laredo, they exchanged cards.
By the time the third concert rolled around, "we were good friends," Ms.
Owens said.
And on June 12, 1990, they were married.
Ms.
Owens, a photographer, had been divorced; Mr.
Butler, a lawyer, had been widowed.


Restaurants
Claire, a little taste of the subtropics on Seventh Avenue in Manhattan, was modeled after a restaurant by the same name, now defunct, in Key West, Fla.
It has all the appurtenances of a Florida fish house, including a palm tree and a menu that includes conch chowder and red snapper sandwiches.
Yet repeated visits suggest that all is not margaritas and Bain de Soleil.
The two dining rooms, separated by wood latticework, have teal walls and a Key-West-sky-before-dawn ceiling, ceiling fans, and closely arranged tables draped with paper.
The hardwood floor and bare walls amplify conversation to a numbing din at peak hours.
The greeting was hardly effusive -- on one recent visit the host seemed preoccupied with his buddies at the bar -- and there was no mention of a self-service coat check in the front room.
Presumably, one is supposed to know these things.


Pepsi-Cola Plans Big Effort To Exploit 'Uh-huh' Theme
AS soon as Pepsi-Cola introduced Ray Charles as the spokes-singer for its Diet Pepsi brand, growling, "You got the right one baby, uh-huh!" it seemed the decision had indeed been the right one.
Consumers immediately took to the infectiously cheerful advertising created by BBDO Worldwide, ranking the campaign among the most likable and memorable of 1991.
The phrase entered the vernacular, appearing on a line of licensed clothing and on cans and bottles of the soft drink.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The South; Clinton's Support Is Buffeted by Disclosures on Draft
Gov.
Bill Clinton's supporters in the South stood by their man today in the wake of a letter about his draft history.
But they also acknowledged that in a region where military traditions run strong and deep, his campaign faces a formidable challenge.
Among those Democrats who are not yet backing a candidate in the Southern primaries, the sentiment was that the 1969 letter would cause problems for the Arkansas Governor's campaign in the South, considered his firmest base of support.


POST OWNER SAYS HE MAY MAKE OFFER TO BUY DAILY NEWS
Peter S. Kalikow, owner of The New York Post, said yesterday that he intended to make an offer to acquire the bankrupt Daily News, a move that is said to have the financial backing of the Bankers Trust Company.
The announcement raises the curtain on the formal effort to find a buyer for The News, a process that could become a complex bidding war in which representatives of the paper's owners, unions and creditors weigh competing offers and try to agree on a deal that will probably require sacrifices by all the parties.


Marking Lovers' Day All Weekend
Here is a sampling of Valentine's Day activities this weekend in New York City: Today
"BIG APPLE LOVE AFFAIRS," a walking tour of buildings and places associated with the love lives of famous New Yorkers; sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring.
Today at 6:30 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.


Force Used In Trucking, Witness Says
A pair of burly thugs known as the "bruise brothers" enforced the Gambino brothers' illegal hold over truck deliveries in New York City's garment industry by threatening recalcitrant garment makers, a former Gambino salesman told a Manhattan jury yesterday.
The prosecution witness, who arrived at State Supreme Court with an escort of six armed detectives, laid out the workings of the cartel arrangement by which, the prosecution contends, organized crime maintains an unbreakable stranglehold on garment deliveries.


U.N. Executive Reorganized; Swede and American Named
Secretary General Boutros Ghali completed his overhaul of the top ranks of the Secretariat today by appointing Sweden's representative at the United Nations, Ian Eliasson, to the new post of coordinator of emergency relief operations with the rank of Under Secretary General.
The post was created last year at the urging of the 12 European Community nations, which argued that United Nations relief agencies had reacted slowly and inefficiently to droughts and famines in the Horn of Africa and to an exodus of Kurdish refugees from Iraq.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Jabbar's Record Broken  Don MacLean broke Kareem Abdul-Jabbar's U.C.L.A. career scoring record and the No. 3 Bruins (18-1, 9-1) pulled away last night for a 72-62 Pacific-10 victory over Oregon State.
Scott Haskin scored 24 points to lead the Beavers (11-12, 3-7). (AP) U.S.C. 69, Oregon 68: Rodney Chatman's two free-throws with 17 seconds left lifted the No. 13 Trojans to a Pac-10 victory over the host Ducks.
The Trojans (17-3, 9-1) got 32 points from Harold Miner.
Oregon (6-13, 2-8) was led by Antoine Stoudamire's 32 points.(AP) Arizona 94, Washington St. 72: Chris Mills scored 25 points as the No. 7 Wildcats crushed the Cougars.
Arizona (18-3, 8-2 in the Pac-10) won its 14th in a row against Washington State (16-7, 4-6). (AP) N.H.L.
Oilers Top Whalers  Bill Ranford made 35 saves as Edmonton overcame the Whalers' strong offensive attack for a 3-1 victory last night in Hartford.
Courier beat Henri Leconte, 6-4, 7-5, and Edberg defeated Jan Siemerink, 7-5, 6-2.
Fifth-ranked Boris Becker downed Patrick McEnroe, 7-6 (8-6), 6-1. (AP) GOLF  Strange Takes the Lead  Curtis Strange had a 10-foot birdie putt to take sole control of the first-round lead when he walked away in darkness in the Northern Telecom Open in Tucson, Ariz.


Review/Jazz; A 'First Lady' From Brazil, Leny Andrade, Is So Casual
There are many moments when Leny Andrade, the 60-something singer who has been nicknamed "the first lady of Brazilian jazz," bears a striking vocal resemblance to Sarah Vaughan.
Miss Andrade, who ends a four-night engagement at the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street) tonight, has a rangy contralto that, like Miss Vaughan's voice in her later years, dramatically increases in power the more deeply she dips into a lower register that seems almost bottomless.
If her timbre lacks the voluptuous, almost super-ripe richness of Miss Vaughan's, her informal stage demeanor is similar.
She is almost offhanded about the way she displays her skills, which include a formidable rhythmic drive as a clicking, clucking scat improviser.


Sports of The Times; Jansen's Four-Year Comeback
Every four years.
In the Olympics, that time frame has been both the beauty and the beast.
Win a gold medal and you reign for four years.
Lose when you might have won, and you suffer for four years.
But few have suffered for four years as Dan Jansen has.
He not only didn't win a speed-skating gold medal in Calgary, he fell twice, sprawling in a white smear across the gray ice on the first turn of the 500 and on a straightaway in the 1,000.
"I trained so many years," he said then, "and I couldn't finish a race."


7 Industrialized Countries Prepare Fund to Aid Ruble
The United States and other Group of Seven nations have begun laying the groundwork for a multibillion-dollar fund to stabilize the enfeebled Russian ruble, and some officials say such a fund might be set up in three to four months.
When President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia visited Washington two weeks ago, he and his economic aides strenuously urged the United States to help set up a fund that would, in effect, back the ruble with foreign money and so reduce economic and political instability during Russia's long and difficult winter.


The Dow Is Virtually Flat, at 3,245.97
Stocks ended a volatile week on a steady note yesterday, with blue chips practically unchanged and the broader market showing a bit of weakness.
The Dow Jones industrial average adjourned for the long weekend at 3,245.97, off just 0.68 point for the day but up 20.57 for the week -- a week that saw another record high.
Trading was choppy, with the market under pressure from the outset, as some investors sold to reduce exposure ahead of the three-day weekend, while others simply rotated out of growth issues into cyclical stocks.


Sports of The Times; Beyond Innocence and Guilt Lies Sexism
For the last two weeks we've all weighed in with our respective takes on Mike Tyson.
There has been anger directed at Tyson, compassion for his victim; apologies for Tyson, piercing questions directed at the victim.
Now the case has escalated to another level.


Production Down 0.9% Last Month
Industrial production fell sharply in January, and factory utilization slid as businesses struggled to bring inventories -- particularly of cars and trucks -- back in line with sales.
The Government said yesterday that output fell by nine-tenths of a percent, its third decline in a row and the largest in 11 months.


A Better Barkley Can't Touch Coleman
The real Charles Barkley returned tonight in the second game of the Philadelphia-New Jersey home-and-home series, but the rejuvenated Nets won again anyway, 107-99, to claim the season series from the 76ers, 3 games to 2.
Barkley, who took only 7 shots and scored a mere 6 points on Wednesday night against New Jersey in the Spectrum, fired 15 shots from the floor tonight.
He made six, including a 3-pointer, and finished with 23 points, a game-high 12 rebounds, 4 assists and 3 steals.


CHRONICLE
Motley Crue, the heavy metal band, whose last release is a retrospective entitled "Decade of Decadence," has parted company with its lead singer, VINCE NEIL, and is looking for a new vocalist.
"After 11 years together, we've parted ways," the band's bassist, NIKKI SIXX, said yesterday, adding that he hoped it would be "as friendly and peaceful as possible." Mr.
Sixx and the group's drummer, TOMMY LEE, and its guitarist, MICK MARS, are continuing to work on their new album.


Study Says Recession Wiped Out 80's Boom in Cities
While the entire region has suffered from employment losses during the recession, the sharpest drops have struck the cities, with some declines so steep that they wiped out in a year or two all of the gains of the boom years in the mid-1980's, according to a university report released this week.
A study focusing on New Jersey by a team of Rutgers University researchers shows that Newark, Jersey City, Paterson, Elizabeth, Trenton and Camden, the state's largest cities, were rescued from "an economic free fall" by the strong growth that began in 1982.
But after peaking in 1989, each of the cities fell back to a lower level of employment than they showed in 1982.
Boom's Heroes Are Villains
Suburban private employment similarly peaked in 1989, and then dropped by 2.3 percent in the following 12 months.
But for the cities, the job loss amounted to nearly five percent of their total.


INSIDE
A Sharp Drop in Production
Industrial output fell nine-tenths of 1 percent in January, but economists remain focused on the pickup in sales as a sign of growth in spring.
Page 37.
Democrats Finish Tax Plan
House Democrats agreed on a tax bill they said would raise taxes for only the top 1 percent of taxpayers and cut them for everyone else.
Page 37.
Cease-Fire in Somalia
United Nations negotiations produced a cease-fire accord in fighting between rival Somali factions that has killed at least 20,000 people.
Page 5.


LTV's Creditors Support Bankruptcy Exit
The LTV Corporation filed a reorganization plan today that for the first time since it entered bankruptcy in 1986 carried the tentative support of its five main creditor groups and the Federal pension guaranty fund.
But the court approval required to permit LTV to emerge from a long, contentious reorganization could be delayed for months if the United Steelworkers union decides to fight the company's demands for a new, lower-cost labor pact.


U.S. Cuts Off California Farmers' Water Supply
Six years of drought in the West culminated today in what farmers in California feared the most: The Federal Government announced that it no longer had enough water to supply farmers.
It was the first time in the 40 years since the Government opened the vast network of dams, reservoirs and aqueducts that made California the richest agricultural state in the nation that farmers have been cut off completely.


Ms. Goodman Is Wed on L.I.
Margaret Tonne Goodman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edmund N. Goodman of Sands Point, L.I., was married yesterday to Peter Bailey Gimbel, the son of Mary Lumet of New York and the late Peter R. Gimbel.
Irwin Brownstein, a retired New York State Supreme Court justice, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Gimbel, who is known as Tonne, is the vice president of advertising at Calvin Klein Inc. in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was an associate professor of clinical surgery at Columbia University.
Her mother, Marian P. Goodman, is a landscape watercolorist.


White House Presses a Ban on Haitians
The Bush Administration, arguing that legal challenges to the forced return of Haitians amounted to an "unprecedented assault" on the prerogatives of the Executive, asked the Supreme Court today to reject a plea by lawyers for Haitian refugees that repatriation be halted.
While the Court deliberated, moves in Congress to block the return of Haitians through legislation continued to gain momentum.


Oil and Auto Industries See No Gain From Alcohol Fuel
The domestic automobile and oil industries have issued a study that purports to show that cars fueled with a mixture of alcohol and gasoline emit more smog-causing chemicals and are more costly to run than those using on reformulated gasoline.
But the conclusion was immediately criticized by the chairman of the California Air Resources Board and representatives of the alcohol industry.
They said the data were meaningless because they were based on older cars with obsolete pollution control systems.


Paying Off a Loan Early Can Hurt
As people race to refinance loans to get better interest rates, some may end up paying hundreds or even thousands of dollars in hidden interest charges because of an accounting method used by some lenders.
The method, known as the "rule of 78's," inflates the amount of interest that the borrower must pay if the loan is paid off or refinanced early in its life.
The procedure is generally not used for first mortgages, but some lenders use it for second mortgages, home equity loans and loans for cars, boats and mobile homes.


Kennedy Would Have Stood by Vietnam in '65
To the Editor:
"How Kennedy Viewed the Vietnam Conflict" by Roger Hilsman (letter, Jan. 20) calls for elucidation.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Bridgeford Group, New York, a merger advisory unit of the Industrial Bank of Japan, named C. Barry Schaefer managing director. *
Dorna U.S.A., New York, a unit of Dorna Sports Promotion Inc., Madrid, named Thomas A. Conway executive vice president and chief financial and administrative officer.
Mr.
Conway had been executive vice president and chief financial officer of Madison Square Garden Corp., New York.


Classical Music in Review
The Eroica Trio Alice Tully Hall


Warring Somali Factions Reach a Truce
Representatives of the two factions fighting a bitter civil war in and around the Somali capital agreed to an immediate cease-fire today and pledged to negotiate a more detailed peace accord at the end of the month.
The breakthrough raised hopes of an end to three months of fierce fighting between rival Somali groups that has left more than 20,000 people dead or wounded in the area of Mogadishu, the capital.


Teen-Age Robot Makers' Initiation
The high school gymnasium is packed with screaming fans, but instead of a basketball game, the students are watching strange-looking robots with names like "Da Cat" and "the Devastater" maneuver through a big box filled with feed corn, trying to scoop up tennis balls.
At each robot's remote controls are high school students being coached by professional engineers and scientists from Motorola, Xerox, I.B.M. and 25 other companies and universities.
For the last two months, the students and engineers have worked together designing and making the robots.
Effort to Break Barriers
Companies like A.T.&amp; T., Boeing Delco Electronics, General Electric, Raytheon and Nynex and schools like M.I.T., Harvard and Dartmouth have provided teams of volunteer engineers and scientists to "adopt" a local high school class and design and build a remote-controlled mechanical vehicle to compete.


Beliefs
The Persian Gulf war left Saddam Hussein in power but freed Kuwait from his control, broke his military power and, in the opinion of some experts, paved the way to Middle East peace talks.
Yet the war and its aftermath have also taken as many as 200,000 lives.
The debate over this ambiguous outcome has been eclipsed, in the year since the war ended, by matters as diverse as the Palm Beach rape trial and the Presidential campaign.


Constance M. Adamec Sotheby's Vice President, 52
Constance M. Adamec, a vice president in Sotheby's finance department and a tenant advocate on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, died suddenly on Monday at her home.
She was 52 years old.
An announcement by Sotheby's said she died of an asthma attack.


James Carpenter, 77, Ex-Leader Of Colby College Art Department
James M. Carpenter, who developed the art department at Colby College and founded its art museum, drowned along with his daughter on Tuesday in an ocean swimming accident in Puerto Rico.
Dr.
Carpenter, 77 years old, was a resident of Waterville, Me.
His daughter, Jane Poliquin, an art conservator, was 36 and lived in Cumberland Foreside, Me.


Fox Hunting Survives Parliament Vote
The unspeakable in full pursuit of the uneatable, as Oscar Wilde described the class-ridden English sport of fox hunting, ran to ground a bill to ban the sport today.
At the end of the debate in the House of Commons, it was squirearchy 187, and foxes 175, amid stormy scenes, it was said, as conscience came up against compassion in the 650-member body.


Breaking the Ice


Despite the Forecasts of His Fall, Mobutu Has Zaire in His Grip
Six months ago Zaire seemed on the brink of political chaos as mutinous soldiers rioted and the 26-year autocratic rule of President Mobutu Sese Seko began to crumble.
But despite dire predictions from most Zairian political analysts and foreign diplomats, General Mobutu now seems more firmly in control than ever.
His political resurrection is in large part because of growing infighting among the anti-Government movement and also his deft handling of dissension within the country's army and police units.
The result, analysts here say, is that the prospects are fast fading for this impoverished central African country to join the democratic trend sweeping much of the continent.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
4.00
6.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.79
3.76
5.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.89
3.89
5.91
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.98
6.98
7.65
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.90
7.91
7.97
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.95
8.95
9.20
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.78
6.77
7.21
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Draft; Brief Deferment Likely Kept Clinton From Ever Serving
The two men who were called by Bill Clinton's draft board in the fall of 1969 were younger than he, and today a Selective Service official said that that means Mr.
Clinton would almost certainly have been called into the Army if he had not had a deferment.
"The order of call was oldest first by each draft board," said Lewis C. Brodsky, a spokesman for the Selective Service System.
"So if you have found an individual younger than the man with whom you are comparing him, the older man must have had a deferment."


The Kronos and Guests
The Kronos Quartet is to give a concert at 8 tonight at Alice Tully Hall.
The program includes works by Hamza El Din, Jin Hi Kim, John Oswald, Hermeto Pascoal, Dumisani Maraire and Philip Glass.
Some of the composers will take part, playing African instruments.
Tickets are $23.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Much More Than Medals at Stake in Men's Free Skate
In Olympic figure skating, it's not only about medals, it's about money.
Professional careers are made or broken by the final standings, and with the escalating contracts now available through ice shows and other commercial endorsements, the pressure has never been greater.
Usually, the women's gold medalist is the biggest winner.
Skaters like Peggy Fleming, Dorothy Hamill and Katarina Witt developed huge profiles during their Olympics years and moved on to a wide assortment of opportunities.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  60-Meter Records Fall


4 Police Officers Killed in Guerrilla Attack in Peru


Patents; Some Huge Shoes for Water Walking
Dr.
Alan W. Nayes, a physician and exercise enthusiast in Orange, Calif., has invented what he calls "aquashoes" that resemble cross-country skis and allow a person to walk on water.
"I got bored with jogging and cycling," Dr.
Nayes said.
"I was looking for a new way to get aerobic exercise."


Shimer and Walker 3d In Last 2-Man Practice
The top United States two-man bobsled team -- Brian Shimer and Minnesota Vikings running back Herschel Walker -- placed third in today's tune-up.
The two-day competition begins Saturday.
The United States' No. 2 team, Brian Richardson and Greg Harrell, was seventh in training runs up the mountain at La Plagne.


With Burke in Goal, Canada (4-0) Gets Hot
Ray LeBlanc of the United States is not the only man in the crease with a golden stick and wide stubborn pads.
There is that former New Jersey Devil, now a man possessed, in goal for another undefeated team in the Olympic hockey tournament.
"I didn't want to come into the Olympics thinking the only way to win it is if the goalie gets hot," Sean Burke said tonight, after he turned away 30 shots during Canada's convincing 5-1 victory over Czechoslovakia.
"But you're definitely not going to win if you don't get good goaltending."


Sports of The Times; Beyond Innocence and Guilt Lies Sexism
For the last two weeks we've all weighed in with our respective takes on Mike Tyson.
There has been anger directed at Tyson, compassion for his victim; apologies for Tyson, piercing questions directed at the victim.
Now the case has escalated to another level.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire; CLINTON STRESSING HIS ECONOMIC PLAN
Gov.
Bill Clinton took his extraordinary last-ditch effort to revive his flagging Presidential campaign to a live New Hampshire audience tonight for the second night in a row, appealing to voters to trust him to put the country back on the right track.
During the 30-minute live call-in show that was televised during prime time on a Manchester station, Mr.
Clinton fielded only one question about his draft status during the Vietnam War, an issue that has raised new questions about the Arkansas Governor's credibility in recent days.


A Device That's Likely To Please Everyone
An Arizona inventor has designed a toilet seat lifter that can be operated by a foot pedal.
The inventor, Bill Glickman, first thought of the device while he was in the hospital recovering from stomach surgery.
Bending over to lift the toilet seat had been an agonizing experience.
"I'm 6-foot-5 and that's a long trip down," he said.


Douglas Loses License
The police said the car was weaving, but not bobbing, and when they pulled it over for a little chat with the driver just before 3 A.M. yesterday outside Columbus, Ohio, they said the man at the wheel could not recite his ABC's.
So BUSTER DOUGLAS, the former heavyweight champion who was dethroned by EVANDER HOLYFIED, was charged with drunken driving and spent the rest of the night in jail.
He later pleaded not guilty and was released, but not before his license was revoked because he had a previous drunken-driving conviction and had refused to submit to a blood test. (AP)


Kennedy Would Have Stood by Vietnam in '65; Feared China's Role
To the Editor:
Further to the discussion raised by the Oliver Stone movie "J.F.K.":


Ms. Cockerill Has Wedding
Cynthia Cockerill, a daughter of Marcella Logan Cockerill of New Rochelle, N.Y., and John Woodman Cockerill of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Christopher Hagedorn, the son of Charles Hagedorn of New York and the late Jane Hagedorn.
David Howland, a justice of the peace, , officiated at the bridegroom's home in New Canaan, Conn.
Mrs.
Hagedorn, 35 years old, is the publisher of The Rockland Review in Nyack, N.Y., which is owned by Hagedorn Communications, a publisher specializing in weekly newspapers.
She graduated from the College of New Rochelle.
Her mother, who is retired, was an administrator at the New Rochelle Hospital Medical Center.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Harkin Tries to Show Toughness by Beating Up Primary Opponents
Senator Tom Harkin showed up at a toxic waste dump here today to attack Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas for "sweeping environmental problems under the rug."
Thursday he "did a number on" former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, as one Harkin aide put it, for supporting nuclear power.


J. F. Bernkopf, 65, Sought-After Editor Of Many Bestsellers
Jeanne F. Bernkopf, who edited "Scarlett" and many other best-selling books, died on Monday in Manhattan.
She was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Bonnie Blair's Gold Standard
Sprinting into Olympic history, Bonnie Blair won her second gold medal at Albertville, capturing the 1,000-meter speed-skating title by the eyelash margin of two-hundredths of a second.


At Salomon, New Focus, New Attitude
Six months after taking the reins of Salomon Inc., Warren E. Buffett and his lieutenants yesterday portrayed a firm that had lost a tremendous amount of business and, after a top-to-bottom renovation, was now primed to claw much of it back.
"More focused, more profitable, and more cohesive," said Deryck C. Maughan, the chief operating officer and Mr.
Buffett's heir apparent, describing how a sleeker and better-organized Salomon would emerge from a Government inquiry into the firm's role in a Treasury market scandal last year.
Inquiry's End Is Near
Speaking to institutional investors and analysts, the Salomon executives said the investigation of the firm's bidding violations was "nearing the end," and would be resolved within months.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League


CHRONICLE
The invitation is enticing: a real old-fashioned St.
Valentine's Day celebration, with elixirs of love and classic love poems in a romantic 19th-century setting of high sculptured ceilings, crimson damask curtains, marble fireplaces, fine crystal and bronze gaseliers.
It's happening tomorrow -- albeit two days late -- at the Old Merchant's House, 29 East Fourth Street, near the Bowery in Manhattan.
Tours of the house and readings by RICHARD HUTZLER, a poet, will take place from 1 to 4 P.M.
Admission, including elixirs and cookies, is $6 ($3 for museum members).


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Carter-Wallace Inc., New York, a pharmaceutical concern, said its board had voted unanimously to authorize a 3-for-2 stock split. *
Corestates Financial Corp., Philadelphia, a bank holding company, and First Peoples Financial Corp., Haddon Township, N.J., announced a definitive agreement for Corestates to acquire First Peoples in an exchange of common stock.


Ex-Soviet Atom Scientists Ask Baker for West's Help
Some of the top nuclear bomb designers of the former Soviet Union, aware of Western concern that they not sell their expertise to hostile powers, presented Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today with a list of commercial scientific projects they were ready to work on if the West would just invest in them.
In a remarkable encounter, Mr.
Baker became the first Western official known to have visited Chelyabinsk-70, a top-secret military nuclear complex near the old industrial city of Chelyabinsk in the Urals.
Chelyabinsk-70 and other secret military towns were not listed on published Soviet maps.
A Russian official said the numerical suffix on the name was for postal reasons.


Sports of The Times; Beyond Innocence and Guilt Lies Sexism
For the last two weeks we've all weighed in with our respective takes on Mike Tyson.
There has been anger directed at Tyson, compassion for his victim; apologies for Tyson, piercing questions directed at the victim.
Now the case has escalated to another level.


Patents; Tumor Treatment Made From Sharks
Dr.
I.
William Lane, a biochemist in Millburn, N.J., has obtained a patent for using shark cartilage as a drug to fight cancerous tumors and other malignant growths.
Dr.
Lane, a consultant on fisheries and a former vice president in charge of the marine resources division at W. R. Grace &amp; Company, said the invention was based in large part on previous research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology showing that an extract of shark cartilage appeared to block the formation of blood vessels in tumors.
That, in turn, appears to shrink the tumor itself.


Review/Dance; Hawkins as the Storyteller, Dionysos as the Protagonist
Erick Hawkins is best known as a contemplative choreographer of dances that tend to address metaphysical issues.
In recent years his pieces have become slightly more abstract and physically abandoned as if, with a good half-century in dance behind him, Mr.
Hawkins had decided it was time to hurl a few thunderbolts.
But he is also a fine storyteller.
And a good example of that skill is "God the Reveller," performed by the Erick Hawkins Dance Company on Thursday night at the Joyce Theater.
Mr.
Hawkins manages an amazing amount of narrative detail in a dance of no great length.
And he tells his story for the most part economically, taking Dionysos from his world travels to a battle with Death, a disembowling by Titans and a robust rebirth.


Holyfield-Holmes Bout Is Being Considered
A verdict by an Indianapolis jury, his own decision over a previously unbeaten heavyweight and excessive financial demands by another ranked contender may have paved the way for a 42-year-old former champion, LARRY HOLMES, to fight the 29-year-old current champion, EVANDER HOLYFIELD, in a title fight in Las Vegas, Nev., in May.
That was the prospect shaping up yesterday when Holyfield's manager and promoter said they would meet with Holyfield today to discuss a possible match against Holmes.


Knicks Need Emotional Rescue in Chicago
After being embarrassed by the Chicago Bulls on Thursday, the Knicks did not have much time to regroup before the rematch tonight in Chicago.
How the Knicks will respond is anybody's guess.
Perhaps being outclassed so badly in Thursday's 106-85 loss at Madison Square Garden would inspire the Knicks to play better.
Then again, maybe Thursday's game shook the Knicks' confidence so much that they would not have time to recover.


Corrections
The Home Video column on Thursday referred incorrectly to a video-store chain and one of its officers.
Frank Slugaski is a vice president of New Jersey Blockbuster Ltd., not of the stores' franchiser, the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation.


RIFT OVER MILITARY WIDENS AT MEETING OF EX-SOVIET LANDS
With Ukraine adamantly opposed to entering into a common defense force with the larger Russia, the former Soviet republics seemed to slip deeper into disarray today over the future of their new Commonwealth of Independent States.
Leaders of the 11-member commonwealth met in eight hours of private talks that officials later described as hardening their differences into two camps.
One is aligned with Russia, which favors a single multirepublic conventional force as the successor to the Red Army, and the other with Ukraine, which fears a common defense could become dictatorial and is pushing ahead to form its own army.


Editorial Notebook; Celebrities in the Audience
"They treat you much nicer here than they did at the '$10,000 Pyramid.' I don't remember getting any doughnuts and coffee there," my daughter said.
Then she, and about 50 others, screamed.
A spokeswoman for "The Maury Povich Show" had just stuck her head into the big room where we, the audience, were eating our freebies to announce that today's guest was Kimberly of "Days of Our Lives."
Once calmed down, my companion continued.
The hairspray action in the ladies' room was very heavy at such shows.
Suppose the camera panned your way!
Suppose your friends were watching!
Suppose your hair looked stringy!
I prayed for a seat in the back row.
My daughter prayed for a seat in the first.
We got the second row, on the aisle.
She was radiant.
I was not.
In the drama that is a daytime talk show, the host, the guests and the audience have equal billing.
I feared not being able to live up to my role.


In Vietnam, Race Sets New Course
Le Buu was once a dedicated Vietcong guerrilla, fighting first the French, then the Americans, whom he called "the invaders."
But today, dressed in a dapper white suit and a pinstriped shirt, he greeted his former enemies as friendly competitors and welcomed them to the first Ho Chi Minh City International Marathon.
The race will take place Sunday, with runners making their way through the heart of this elegant city, which residents still call Saigon.


Review/Jazz; Improviser's Rare Chance To Hear His Orchestrations
Because of jazz's generally miserable financial condition, musicians with orchestral ambition rarely get a chance to air what they know.
Compositions are orchestrated only to land in a desk drawer.
The music vanishes and enters legend on the strength of a few hearings with a rehearsal band.
Sometimes the arrangements turn up in performance, the beneficiaries of repertory programming, but that is rare.
Bobby Watson, the saxophonist and composer, had the privilege of having his compositions played by a big band at Kathryn Bache Miller Theater at Columbia University on Thursday night, and the arrangements showed Mr.
Watson off as an arranger confident and schooled, someone who could wring a gorgeous mixture of bitterness and lush consonance from the big band.


Conner Deep-Sixes a Radical New Keel
It made no sense these last few weeks that Dennis Conner, the man who wrote a book entitled "No Excuse to Lose," could remain so good-humored after losing so many races to his America's Cup defense rival, William Koch.
Those who watched Conner as he turned up smiling each day after trial racing off San Diego wondered whether he was building a second boat.
Skeptics seemed sure that "he had something up his sleeve."


OPEC Ministers Near Accord on Output Cut
OPEC oil ministers are close to an agreement that would cut the group's total oil production by a little more than a million barrels a day, from its current 24.2 million.
But Saudi Arabia's continuing hard-line position is likely to delay an accord that was widely anticipated soon.
Iran's oil minister told reporters today that all 13 members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries had agreed to a new 22.5 million ceiling.


Racial Hatred Through Fresh Eyes
The 1989 murder of Yusuf K. Hawkins, a black youth who was looking for a used car in the largely white Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, was a terrible chapter in this city's often terrible record in race relations.
But for a couple of dozen eighth graders on the Upper West Side, the killing, and the events surrounding it, are as fresh as a 13-year-old's imagination.
They are students in creative writing, and the Bensonhurst crime is the subject of their startlingly compelling scribblings.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Bush, Slipping in New Hampshire, Hopes for Rally and 'Home Run'
President Bush arrives in New Hampshire Saturday for a final two-day spurt of campaigning, facing a deteriorating political situation and the need to stage a late rally like the one that brought him victory in 1988.
Although the White House continues to maintain that all is going according to plan, Bush strategists here are seeking a decisive victory and are increasingly worried about the challenge of Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator.
One said today, "We're slipping again, and the President needs a home run this weekend to turn it around."


Meade Roberts, Writer, 61, Dies; Tennessee Williams Collaborator
Meade Roberts, a playwright and screenwriter associated with Tennessee Williams, died on Monday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 61 years old.
He died after a heart attack, said Joyce Chase, his manager.


Washington Journal; For Conspiracy-Minded, Archives of Their Own
The front door opened with a creak.
Down a dark hallway, a custodian opened the cast-iron gate of an antique elevator and nodded vacantly, muttering something about murder and paranoia.
The elevator opened onto a corridor crammed with file cabinets stuffed with records from the Los Angeles Police Department and and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Challenger; As a Candidate, Buchanan Shows Compassionate Side
To listen to Patrick J. Buchanan on the stump is to witness a startling transformation.
While it has not vanished completely, the fire-breathing, hard-edged, economic and social Darwinism that made Mr.
Buchanan famous in his columns and on television shows like "Crossfire" has been tempered.
In its place is a candidate striving to be seen as a sensitive, caring populist.
As a writer, Mr.
Buchanan called AIDS "nature's retribution" against homosexuals and said the disease was spread by "promiscuous sodomy -- unnatural, unsanitary sexual relations between men." On the campaign trail he talks of showing compassion for people with AIDS, which he now compares to the cancer that killed his brother.


Foote, Cone Reports Losses
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications Inc. in Chicago has reported large net losses for the fourth quarter of 1991 and for the full year.
The losses, reported on Thursday, were in connection with previously announced charges that the advertising company took to restructure direct-marketing operations and to sublet excess office space.


Ex-Aide Is Said to Tell About Dinkins's Fund
After pleading guilty to fraud and theft charges, Mayor David N. Dinkins's former campaign finance chairman is trying to lighten his punishment by providing investigators with tips and leads about what he says are irregularities in the Mayor's 1989 election campaign, the investigators said yesterday.
But the investigators also said that the former treasurer, Arnold I. Biegen, a Manhattan lawyer, had not provided strong evidence to support his allegations.


Walrus-Headhunting Ring Uncovered in Alaska, U.S. Agents Say
Federal wildlife agents posing as ivory traders say they have uncovered a network of walrus headhunters and buyers illegally trading tusks for money and drugs.
A dozen people were arrested this week around Alaska as a result of a two-year undercover investigation by agents of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
An additional 17 people were named in criminal charges and either are being sought or were issued summonses to appear in court.
The authorities say the investigation could lead to charges against 25 to 30 more people.


Antley Fined $1,000
The jockey said it was an accident and the stewards at Aqueduct agreed that it was.
Nevertheless, CHRIS ANTLEY was fined $1,000 yesterday for hitting his mount, Entrust, in the face with his whip near the finish line in the first race on Wednesday.


Fatal Shooting of 14-Year-Old by East Hartford Officer Is Investigated
The investigation into a police officer's fatal shooting of a 14-year-old boy who had escaped from Connecticut's juvenile detention center proceeded slowly yesterday as the police questioned witnesses in the East Hartford neighborhood where the shooting occurred.
The youth, Eric Reyes, was shot on Wednesday by Officer William Proulx after a half-mile foot chase that ended in the parking lot of an apartment complex on Main Street, the authorities said.
Witnesses said the officer drew his gun after several other young people joined in a struggle between the two, beating and kicking the officer in an effort to free their friend.


Journeys to Nowhere Fill the Nights of the Homeless
Hours after thousands of straphangers had journeyed home along the F line in Queens, Lee Connery began her nightly commute to nowhere.
While a dusting of snow settled on the streets above, Ms.
Connery and a handful of other homeless men and women rode the rails of the city's longest subway line, fighting off the cold and deep sleep.
The police allow them their nightly journey, as long as they do not lie down and doze off on the hard plastic seats.


Margaret B. Craig, 78, Dog and Horse Trainer
Margaret Berol Craig, a champion shower of horses and trainer of dogs, died Monday at her home in Danbury, Conn.
She was 78 years old.
Mrs.
Craig had been a part owner of her family's company, the Berol Corporation, the manufacturers of Eagle pencils.
It was founded in Germany in the early 1800's, moved to New York City in 1856 and later to Danbury, and was sold in 1987.


Your Money; Whether to Buy An Annuity Now
Most tax-deferred annuities would suffer a knockout punch if one provision of President Bush's tax plan is enacted, and that has led many investors to wonder whether it is advisable to buy now lest the opportunity be lost.
Financial experts are mixed in their responses to that question.
David A. Berenson, national director of tax policy for Ernst &amp; Young in Washington, said of the proposal, "This is not the time in the cycle to weaken insurance companies," which distribute annuities, given the industry's recent financial problems, nor is it a good idea "to take money out of a private-sector retirement concept."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  DIFFERENCES IN EX-REPUBLICS
With Ukraine opposed to entering into a common defense force with the larger Russia, the former Soviet republics seemed to slip deeper into disarray today over the future of the Commonwealth of Independent States.  1  DESTINATION: CHELYABINSK-70
Secretary of State Baker became the first Western official known to visit a secret town that was not on Soviet maps, Chelyabinsk-70, a military nuclear complex near the old industrial city of Chelyabinsk.  1  PROPPING UP THE RUBLE
The United States and other Group of Seven nations have begun laying the groundwork for a multibillion-dollar fund to stabilize the enfeebled Russian ruble, and some officials say such a fund might be set up in three to four months.  4  HIGH COURT GETS PLEA ON HAITIANS
The Bush Administration, arguing that legal challenges to the forced return of Haitians amount to an "unprecedented assault" on the prerogatives of the Executive, asked the Supreme Court to reject a plea by lawyers for Haitian refugees that repatriation be halted.  3  CEASE-FIRE IN SOMALIA
Representatives of the two factions fighting a bitter civil war in and around the Somali capital of Mogadishu agreed to an immediate cease-fire and promised a more detailed peace accord would be complete at the end of the month.  5  SAME SOLDIERS, NEW BATTLE
He was a young panzer commander when Hitler invaded the Soviet Union in 1941.
Today he is one of a number of German business leaders who have personal histories and experiences that seem to give them an advantage over their competitors in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.  2  BALANCE TIPS IN ZAIRE
Six months ago Zaire seemed on the brink of political chaos and the 26-year rule of President Mobutu Sese Seko began to crumble.
But he now seems more entrenched.  5  TALLY SHOWS TALLY-HO IS A GO
The trumpet has given a somewhat uncertain sound at the end of the debate in the House of Commons on the legality of fox hunting.
A bill to outlaw the sport was defeated, but animal rights advocates are still in pursuit.  3  National 6-10  WORRY IN THE BUSH CAMP
The President goes to New Hampshire today for a final round of stumping, amid evidence that the Buchanan campaign is enjoying a late surge.  1  His behavior suggests a kinder, gentler Pat Buchanan.  8  THE CLINTON CAMPAIGN REGROUPS
Trying to put aside the questions about his past, Governor Clinton appeared on New Hampshire television and toured the state with a renewed attack on the Bush White House.  1  Of the two men who were drafted when Mr.
Clinton wasn't.  9  From Senator Harkin, there are more attacks to come.  8  A former aide to Governor Cuomo is organizing a write-in drive.8  Back in Omaha, Senator Kerrey's business has grown steadily.  9  HUGE SETBACK TO FARMERS
The Federal Government, the biggest supplier of water in California, said it no longer had enough to give to the state's farmers.
The Government's action, a result of six years of drought, threatens to disrupt the national supply of several crops, and farmers put the direct cost to them at $1 billion.  1  A RARE ABORTION CASE
A poverty-stricken North Dakota woman addicted to sniffing paint fumes is at the center of a kind of tug-of-war among an anti-abortion group, abortion rights advocates and local prosecutors.  6  PENTAGON ACTS TO PROTECT OZONE
The Defense Department, whose hardware uses millions of pounds of ozone-destroying chemicals a year, plans to step up efforts to eliminate their use.  7  THE NASA CHIEF'S DEPARTURE
The Adminsitrator of the space agency was forced to resign as part of a move to bring the agency under more direct control of the National Space Council, headed by Vice President Quayle, a trade publication reported.  7  SCOTTSBORO REVISITED
The same small Alabama town that first drew national attention for the trial of the Scottsboro Boys more than half a century ago got some more unwelcome notice this week.
A snake-handling fundamentalist preacher there was convicted of the attempted murder of his wife, who was bitten by a rattler when she stuck her hand into its cage.  6  Washington Journal: Where the conspiracy buffs congregate.  6  Beliefs: The Persian Gulf and the just-war test.  10  Federal agents uncovered a walrus poaching network.  6  Metropolitan Digest, 25  DINKINS DENOUNCES EX-AIDE
As investigations into his former campaign finance chairman widened, Mayor Dinkins moved for the first time yesterday to distance himself from his once-trusted aide, denouncing him as "a common thief." 1  THE 'NIGERIAN CONNECTION'
Drug smugglers from Nigeria are expanding their share of the heroin trade, officials say.
Arts/Entertainment 12-18  Networks bolt actors' talks.  14  Music: Brazil's Leny Andrade.  12  Concert operas in Chicago.  13  Neil Young and guitar.  13  Dance: Romantic Balanchine.  13  Consumer's World 52  Do-it-yourselfers can have tax help at fingertips.
Paying off a loan early can hurt.  For boat or ballgame, flexible binoculars.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials 22  Trading down at the U.N.
Bashing lawyers.
Turkey's new leader and role.
Mary Cantwell: Celebrities.
Letters 22  Julian Bond: How the draft dodged me.  23  Georges de Menil: The useful lessons of 1919.  23  Tara Sonenshine and Jay LaMonica: The most polluted spot.  23  Marc Weller: Libyan terrorism, American vigilantism.  23


New Leader, New Role for Turkey
Washington has habitually viewed Turkey less as a country and more as a cold war asset located, in timeworn jargon, on NATO's southeastern flank.
But the Soviet threat has vanished and Turkey enjoys a transformed role at the center of a turbulent neighborhood: the Balkans and the Caucasus, the Middle East and Central Asia.
Hence the interest in this week's U.S. visit by Ankara's new Prime Minister, Suleyman Demirel.
In the phrase of a canny Turkish diplomat, Mr.
Demirel presented President Bush with a business card rather than an arms shopping list.
Turkey has become a logical base for potential investors in the newly independent Central Asian states.
Its democracy and free market economy offer Muslim republics an attractive alternative model for development to that of theocratic Iran.
And Turkey already provides essential logistics for humanitarian airlifts to Central Asia.


Protecting Their Pastime
The officials who run the game of baseball in Japan made it clear this week that an American-owned company would find it very difficult to do in this country what the Nintendo Company wants to do in the United States: acquire a major league baseball team.
The reason, they say, is that Japanese fans regard baseball as a part of the national culture no less than some Americans do.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finance; Kerrey's Varied Business Ventures Raise Some Questions About Propriety
As a bitter wind pierces the early dusk, families with red-cheeked children wait for tables at the local Grandmother's, a chain of family-style restaurants.
Just across the highway, at the Prairie Life Center, a flashy health club, young people jump in aerobics classes and pump the exercise equipment.
Dollars in the cash registers at both businesses are money in the pocket of Senator Bob Kerrey, the 48-year-old Democratic Presidential aspirant and former Nebraska Governor.
He is part-owner of a family business that takes in more than $13 million a year.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the shooting of a student at Park West High School in Manhattan misstated statistics on shootings at New York City public schools since September and omitted their source.
According to the United Federation of Teachers, 44 shootings have occurred in and near schools (not solely in them).
Twelve students were shot (not 10), two fatally (not four).
The Board of Education disputes the union's figures, reporting fewer than a dozen shootings in and near schools.


How the Draft Dodged Me
I too received an exemption from the draft that kept me from fighting in Vietnam.
But my exemption didn't entail entry into the National Guard, as Vice President Dan Quayle's did; I don't think the Guard in Georgia admitted blacks when I became draft age in 1961.


Panel's Democrats in Tax Accord
House Democrats agreed today on a tax-cut bill they said would show that they cared about the middle class and that Republicans catered to the rich.
Announcing agreement on a package that will go to the full House later this month, Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, whose Democratic members approved the bill tonight, said: "I think we need fairness in the tax code. That's the difference between Democrats and Republicans. We're going to see to it that middle-income Americans have a better tax break."


Review/Music; An Outbreak of Concert Opera In Chicago With 3 From Mozart
Dementia operatica is perhaps the most interesting medical phenomenon to visit symphony orchestras since stick fever.
The latter, if you will remember, refers to the baton and befalls instrumental virtuosos who are unassuaged by their power over a mechanical apparatus and wish to exercise it over an entire orchestra.
This newest condition involves conductors who already run superior orchestras and itch to add opera to the symphonic stage.
A virulent case was reported in Boston last year when Seiji Ozawa and the Boston Symphony put on Tchaikovsky's "Pique Dame," a concert version replete with small elevated stage, sophisticated lighting, sparse props and costumes.
Last week, opera in concert appeared in its plainer form at Carnegie Hall: Luciano Pavarotti and others singers, with music stands and scores, singing in front of the Philadelphia Orchestra.
The opera was "Pagliacci," the conductor Riccardo Muti.


Ice Dancers Follow Script, Even on the Leader Board
The ice-dancing competition began tonight with 19 couples dancing the paso doble, with its bullfighter themes, then gliding to blues music.
It sounds like good entertainment, and it is, but there's a catch: Everyone dances to the same music.
To make matters worse, except for a couple of fancy moves at the start and finish, everyone dances to the same steps, as outlined in the rule book.


Greeks Protest Pressure For Macedonian State
In an apparent move to warn the European Community against recognizing the Yugoslav republic of Macedonia, more than 200,000 demonstrators from the Macedonian region in Greece protested today in the local capital.
The rally in Salonika was intended to emphasize that Macedonia is a historic region that stretches beyond Yugoslavia's borders, and to advance the claim that it is a Greek entity, historically and culturally.


Review/Ballet; Balanchine, the Unlikely Romantic
Something for everybody is not exactly the New York City Ballet's motto.
Those looking for a steady diet of story ballets will have to go elsewhere.
No ballet troupe concentrates more on pure dance, or formalist values, than the company founded by George Balanchine and Lincoln Kirstein.
Yet variety does creep into the repertory and, paradoxically, it was Balanchine, the great objectivist, who was responsible for the most emotion-laden work on the program Thursday night at the New York State Theater.


Dinkins Denounces Ex-Treasurer As Inquiries on Campaign Widen
As investigations into his former campaign finance chairman widened, Mayor David N. Dinkins moved for the first time yesterday to distance himself from his once-trusted aide, denouncing him as "a common thief."
Law enforcement officials said that prosecutors in the Manhattan District Attorney's office were trying to verify a range of tips and leads from the former aide, Arnold I. Biegen, concerning Mr.
Dinkins's 1989 mayoral campaign.
These include Mr.
Biegen's assertion that he took cash contributions on the campaign's behalf that might have been illegal.
Investigators have subpoenaed financial records of some contributors.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In the Wings; Ex-Cuomo Aide Pushing Write-In Drive
Ignoring a request from the state Democratic chairman, a former political aide to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is recruiting New York volunteers to help Mr.
Cuomo win write-in votes in the New Hampshire primary on Tuesday.
William Hennessy, who was state Democratic chairman during Mr.
Cuomo's first term as Governor, said today that he hopes to send up to 50 volunteers to New Hampshire by Monday.
The first group of about 15, led by Mr.
Hennessy's son, was to leave for New Hampshire today, Mr.
Hennessy said.


METRO DIGEST
THE PAIN OF THE CITIES
While the entire region has suffered from employment losses during the recession, the sharpest drops have struck the cities, with some declines so steep that they wiped out in a year or two all of the gains of the boom years in the mid-1980's, according to a university report released this week.
Page 28.
NEW YORK CITY FOOT SOLDIERS OF THE DRUG TRADE


Quayle's Influence Seen in NASA Shake-Up
The space agency's administrator, Richard H. Truly, was forced to resign as part of a move to restructure management of the nation's space program and bring it under more direct control of the National Space Council headed by Vice President Dan Quayle, a trade publication reports.
Mr.
Truly, a former astronaut who has been administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration since July 1989, resigned on Wednesday at the request of President Bush after long-running disagreements with the council, which advises the President on space policy.


Cuomo Halts Planned Cut In Medicaid
Hours before the action was to take effect at midnight, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo last night temporarily suspended a 10 percent cut in the state's $550 million program of reimbursing pharmacies for the prescription drugs they dispense to 2.5 million poor people covered by Medicaid.
"We're temporarily suspending the implementation of these cuts to allow for further discussion with the pharmacists," Terry Lynam, a spokesman for the Governor, said in Albany after discussions involving Mr.
Cuomo, legislative leaders and lobbyists for trade groups representing some 3,700 pharmacies.


Patents; New Fax Paper Provides A Shield From Prying Eyes
"What's your fax number?" With facsimile machines now almost ubiquitous in the white-collar world, that question has become so natural that many people never consider the possibility that an office might not be equipped with one.
Still, despite their speed and convenience, facsimile machines are not a particularly private means of sending or receiving documents.
While traditional mail and messages brought by courier arrive in closed envelopes, which most people would refrain from opening without permission, a faxed document arrives fully exposed and can be read by anybody who happens to be near the machine.


Recital Debut at the Y
David Carroll, a singer and actor, is to make his solo recital debut at 8 tonight at the 92d Street Y, on Lexington Avenue in Manhattan.
Mr.
Carroll, who was a Tony Award nominee for his roles in the musicals "Chess" and "Grand Hotel," is to be accompanied by the pianist Wally Harper.
The concert is part of the Y's new Cabaret on Carnegie Hill series.
Tickets are $25.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Rider Pleads Not Guilty
J.
R.
RIDER, the leading scorer on this season's U.N.L.V. team, pleaded not guilty yesterday in Las Vegas to misdemeanor charges of obstructing a police officer.
Justice of the Peace BILL JANSEN set an April 1 trial date and allowed Rider to remain free on his own recognizance.


A Chief Is Appointed For the USAir Shuttle
Gordon Linkon, who got his start in the airline business by heading two start-up carriers during the tumultuous 1980's, was named yesterday as president and chief executive for the new USAir Shuttle.
The airline announced in late December that it had reached an agreement with the Trump Organization and the Trump creditors to manage the hourly shuttle linking Boston, New York and Washington for up to 10 years and then buy it.
It expects to take over the shuttle in March.


F.C.C. Shouldn't Disrupt Radio Services
To the Editor:
You report a Federal Communications Commission proposal to strip a band of radio frequencies from primary use by police, fire and other emergency services (front page, Jan. 16).
Utility companies also use these frequencies to control power plants, operate transmission grids, dispatch emergency repair crews and for public safety coordination.


Anne Averbuck Wed
Anne Averbuck, a daughter of Mrs.
Milton L. Rosenberg of New York and the late Dr.
Samuel H. Averbuck, was married yesterday to Thomas E. Dewey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas I. Dewey of Jermyn, Pa.
Kurt Zimbler, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the couple's home in Stamford, Conn.
Mrs.
Dewey, 46 years old, is a computer consultant with Intercor Technologies in Stamford.
Mr.
Dewey, 49, is a vice president of G.E.
Capital Services, a computer services subsidiary of G.E.
Financial Services in Stamford.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.


Do-It-Yourselfers Can Have Tax Help at Their Fingertips
About half of the 115 million people who file yearly Federal income tax returns do not use a professional tax preparer.
But very often, the instructions in the Government tax package do not help them enough to complete all the required forms and schedules.
That's where the annual income tax guides come into the picture.
These books, by tax experts, are primarily designed to help those who do their own returns.
And the books offer valuable information to help people who want to develop short-term and long-term financial strategies.


'More Salt in Wounds'
If Federal investigators think Nevada-Las Vegas might have shaved points during last year's Final Four or even dumped the semifinal game to Duke, they have stayed out in the desert sun too long.
That, more or less, was the expert word in Las Vegas, Nev., yesterday from one of the city's most prominent sports gamblers, LEM BANKER, who said he had been interviewed by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in connection with their probe of links between a convicted sports fixer and members of last season's U.N.L.V. team.


In the Cold, a Warm Nook Beats the Streets, and Often the Shelters


Yale Unions Set Monday Strike
Two union locals that represent 3,500 clerical, technical, maintenance and food-service workers at Yale University set a new strike deadline, 6 A.M.
Monday, after contract negotiations stalled today.
The locals have been working without a contract since Jan. 18.
The union leaders had planned to strike on Wednesday but they extended negotiations after making what they said was significant progress on the issues of job security and health benefits.


Where Are the Stores Of New York in 1955?
To the Editor:
If, "The Big Store" (editorial, Jan. 30) notwithstanding, Macy's fails to climb out of debt, only 8 of the 47 department and specialty stores I recall flourishing when I moved to New York in 1955 will be left: A.&amp; S., Bergdorf Goodman, Bloomingdale's, Henri Bendel, Brooks Brothers, Lane Bryant, Lord &amp; Taylor, Mark Cross.


Quote of the Day
"They don't smoke as a group. They rarely travel by automobile. They are less likely to be victims of street crimes. So a lot of things that put people in the hospital don't put animals there." -- MICHAEL WALTERS of the American Veterinary Medical Association, on pets as insurance risks.  [ 50:4. ]


Bridge
If you had asked a bridge historian a year ago to name the strongest pairs tournament of all time, in average quality, he would have been puzzled.
Now, however, he would surely point to the Cap Gemini Pandata, played in the Netherlands in January 1991.
Included in the field of 16 pairs were four pairs who have won bunches of world titles: Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff, Chip Martel and Lew Stansby, Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell, all from the United States, and Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco from Brazil.
And almost all the other pairs were of comparable quality.


Corrections
An article yesterday about efforts to publish a paperback edition of Salman Rushdie's novel "The Satanic Verses" misstated the date of Iran's call for his death.
As the article noted elsewhere, yesterday was the third anniversary, not the fourth.


Court Upholds Prison Sanctions On Inmate Who Refused Review
A 13-judge Federal appeals panel has ruled that Fifth Amendment rights against self-incrimination did not bar Connecticut officials from revoking a prisoner's work-release privileges after he refused to answer questions about his conviction.
The panel said that while the Fifth Amendment would prevent prison officials from using the answers against the inmate, Steven M. Asherman, the state had a legitimate interest in asking the questions in a psychiatric review.


Treasury Issues Mixed, With Bonds Rising
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, as short- to intermediate-term issues continued to fall while bonds staged a bit of a recovery.
While some market participants were cheered by the upturn in bond prices, economic reports released yesterday should have benefited the entire fixed-income market.


O.K., Let's Start the Playoffs Right Now
Adam Graves set the tone for the Rangers by knocking the Islanders around with several early body checks, but he also employed other skills last night when the local rivals met at Madison Square Garden.
By game's end, Graves had three goals, the Rangers had a 9-2 victory and the Islanders had little to be proud of.


Love Is a Last-Minute Affair for One Valentine


Slovenia's Goal: Sharpening Its Image
Like their Croatian counterparts, the athletes from Slovenia are using the 1992 Winter Olympics to tell the world simply that they exist.
Despite limited financial resources, the 29 Slovenian athletes here are doing whatever they can to promote themselves.
Using $310,000 raised from the Slovenian Government and 60 private companies in Slovenia, the National Olympic Committee rented a large ski chalet here with a striking view of the Alps to make receptions and parties more inviting.


Corson Is Suspended
Despite an apology to his teammates, SHAYNE CORSON was suspended indefinitely by the Montreal Canadiens yesterday for his involvement in a brawl in a bar early Thursday morning that club management said hurt the team's reputation.


Prices Rise At Saturn And Toyota
Two auto makers raised their prices today, a day after a report that showed signs of an upturn in sales.
The Saturn Corporation, the fledging small-car subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, said it would raise prices an average 1.8 percent, effective March 1.
The Toyota Motor Corporation increased its prices by 3.2 percent for Toyota brand cars and by 5 percent on Lexus luxury cars.


A Days Inns Executive Is Promoted to President
Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc. yesterday promoted Doug Collins to be president of its Days Inns of America unit.
Mr.
Collins had been senior vice president and chief financial officer of Days Inns since 1990.
Hospitality Franchise acquired Days Inns last month for $259 million from the Tollman-Hundley Lodging Corporation.
Hospitality, a wholly owned subsidiary of a unit of the Blackstone Group investment firm, also owns the Ramada and Howard Johnson hotel chains.
All three hotel chains operate as franchisers.


Classical Music in Review
Inaugural Concert Walter Reade Theater Lincoln Center


Pentagon Plans Move to Protect Ozone
The Department of Defense, which uses millions of pounds of ozone-destroying chemicals each year in its weapons, plans to step up efforts to eliminate their use.
The new policy, which could be made public as early as next week, directsArmy, Navy and Air Force contracting officers to take more aggressive steps to purchase new military equipment that can be manufactured and maintained without using the ozone-destroying chemicals.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Industrial production fell sharply in January and factory utilization slid as businesses struggled to bring inventories back in line with sales; producer prices also slipped, thanks to sharply lower energy and food prices.
But economists are paying more attention to Thursday's rosier reports.  [ Page 37. ]


Classical Music in Review
Chris Gekker Trumpeter Merkin Concert Hall


2 Jail Barges To Be Closed And Removed
More than four years after they opened as a temporary measure, two jail barges docked off Lower Manhattan will be removed, city officials announced yesterday, in response to a threat of a lawsuit by Federal authorities.
The two barges, the Bibby Venture and the Bibby Resolution, will be sold or leased, said Milton Mollen, the Deputy Mayor for Public Safety.


With a Stroke of Sandpaper, U.S.S.R. Is Wiped From the Face of the Globe


Review/Pop; Body Language And Plain Lyrics
When Neil Young plays acoustic guitar, his body language speaks as loudly as his words.
He never stops moving.
At the Beacon Theater on Thursday night, performing the first of six solo acoustic shows, Mr.
Young spent most of his set sitting down, but his body was always rocking slowly back and forth.
His boot struck the floor in an easy front-porch rhythm, and his left hand made a strumming motion even when it wasn't actually hitting the strings.
Mr.
Young's acoustic style is like no one else's.
In a single sweep he controls percussion, rhythm and melody, his thumb striking a bass note that resonates through the entire chord, his fingers picking delicate notes off the high strings.
He is hushed, but never static.
Mr.
Young's acoustic shows are the latest installment in his singularly unpredictable career: a mere number of months after releasing "Weld," the heavy-grunge live album from his "Ragged Glory" tour, and its companion piece, "Arc," (both on Reprise), a 35-minute opus of feedback and electric guitar distortion, he has flipped to the other side of the coin.
With the exception of a few old favorites like "Heart of Gold," "Long May You Run," "Sugar Mountain" and a version of "After the Gold Rush" played on an ornate antique organ, his set was devoted exclusively to new material from a coming album titled "Harvest Moon," intended as a sequel to his 1972 album "Harvest."


Winds Rise, So the Global Balloon Doesn't
The launching of the Earthwinds balloon on its planned round-the-world flight was postponed today because of high winds that arose shortly before the balloon was to begin its 22,000-mile journey.
The winds came up unexpectedly before dawn after a ground crew of more than 100 technicians and experts had moved Earthwinds's pressurized crew capsule from a hangar to an adjacent airfield and were preparing to haul out its helium-filled lift balloon and an anchor balloon filled with compressed air.
Meteorologists forecast that the earliest possible new launching date would be next Monday morning.


Croatia Competes From the Heart and Not for Medals
His best friend and longtime skiing partner, Davor Sefic, died after volunteering to defend Dubrovnik.
Ozren Muller, Alpine skiing trainer for the Croatian Olympic team, cannot forget; nor can he forgive.
In the athletes' village at the men's Olympic Alpine venue in Val d'Isere, which is supposed to represent a brotherhood of competing nations, Muller walks past men who not very long ago were his countrymates, teammates and friends.
He will not stop or smile or even say as much as hello.


Guidepost; Old Car, Young Looking
A good many of America's car owners are coping with lean financial times by keeping their vehicles longer.
To get the most out of your car, proper care is essential.
Fellow drivers and the weather can cause dents and other damage.
Here's how to deal with some of these problems.
Door Dents and Scratches


Review/Dance; 2 Ends of the Spectrum: Evanescent and Rousing
Jerome Robbins's "Mother Goose," presented by the New York City Ballet on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater, is an odd little ballet.
It lives up to its subtitle, "Fairy Tales for Dancers," by taking its mostly young cast through brief dances in which each plays a fairy-tale character on a stage decorated with familiar props, backdrops and elements of sets from other ballets in the company's repertory.
Ravel's music, from "Ma Mere l'Oye," is delicately melodic.
And the end effect has the elusiveness of a faint lingering scent of perfume.
The opening, in which a woman reads to dancers sprawling about her on the floor, has a leaden, obligatory tone.
But then the stories begin, as the Good Fairy saves Princess Florine (Sleeping Beauty) from death and arranges for a series of fairy-tale dreams to entertain her while she slumbers.
The tales of Beauty and the Beast, Hop o' My Thumb and Laideronnette, Empress of the Pagodas, unfold in abbreviated fashion, then Prince Charming arrives and kisses her into wakefulness and marriage.


Videotapes of Visitors to Ravenite Club Played at Gotti Trial
It was time for home movies in the courtroom yesterday, as Federal prosecutors played videotapes of John Gotti and dozens of associates walking in and out of the Ravenite Social Club, which investigators call the Manhattan headquarters of the Gambino crime family.
With the courtroom lights dimmed, Mr.
Gotti turned in his chair to look at his own image flickering across a large screen behind the defense table, while an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation used a laser beam to point out people appearing in the silent surveillance tapes.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a student blockade of a building at Columbia University misstated the university's position on the possibility of disciplinary action.
The administration told some students that it would recommend to their deans that no action be taken, but no one was promised amnesty.


Bashing Lawyers. Also Justice.
Playing off public distaste for lawyers, the Bush Administration embraces "reform" of civil justice.
"Let's stop America's love affair with lawsuits," the President says.
And Vice President Quayle condemns the costs and delays of litigating civil cases.
Bashing lawyers may be fun, but this campaign risks harm.
Lawyers have indeed encouraged an increasingly litigious society.
But Mr.
Quayle addresses himself mainly to richer Americans, like manufacturers, municipalities and doctors.
He offers nothing for the poor and middle class who need lawyers but can't afford their fees.


Trading Down at the U.N.
At an inopportune time, and for unedifying reasons, the Bush Administration is reshuffling its team at the United Nations.
Thomas Pickering, who for three years has been a superlative U.S. envoy, is headed to New Delhi as Ambassador.
His expected replacement is another career diplomat, Edward Perkins, whose credentials are less impressive.
And President Bush has found a top administrative job at the U.N. for former Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, who is known as a heavy-footed administrator.


Mostly Mozart on the Road
The Lincoln Center Mostly Mozart Festival will embark on its first tour of the United States on Feb. 22 at the New Brunswick Cultural Center in New Brunswick, N.J., after which the festival orchestra will travel to eight other cities: Chicago, Iowa City, Lincoln, Neb.; Macomb, Ill.; Bloomington, Ind.; Granville, Ohio; Fairfax, Va., and Danville, Ky.
Gerard Schwarz, the festival's music director, will conduct two different all-Mozart programs featuring the pianist Bella Davidovich.


Krista Schmidinger


Blair Strikes Gold Again to Glide to U.S. History
Bonnie Blair assured her place in American Winter Olympic history today by winning her second gold medal in speed skating at the Albertville Games and the third of her career, giving her the most of any female athlete from the United States.
Only one American, Eric Heiden, who swept all five men's speed-skating events in 1980, has won more gold medals than Blair at the Winter Games, and only one other woman, Pat McCormick, a diver, has won more in the Summer Olympics, four.


Dusseldorf Journal; A Would-Be Conqueror Is Now Russia's Booster
Friedrich Wilhelm Christians was a young panzer commander when Hitler invaded the Soviet Union in 1941 and his force was ordered through the Ukraine to Baku, Azerbaijan, places he says younger Germans barely know.
At the end of the war he was stationed near Konigsberg, today Kaliningrad, then surrounded by advancing Soviet forces, until he and a comrade jumped on a tramp steamer that took them across the Baltic to Sweden to escape the Soviet onslaught.


Housing Agency Expenses Questioned
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that his office was investigating whether the chairwoman of the New York City Housing Authority had improperly spent hundreds of thousands of dollars of the authority's money on renovations and travel since she took office in November 1990.
The Mayor's comments came as the chairwoman, Laura D. Blackburne, angrily defended the expenses, including the authorization of $345,000 to renovate her office and several others that share the same floor at Housing Authority headquarters in lower Manhattan.
She said the renovation was needed to make people feel at ease.


Buhner and Milacki Win in Arbitration
After players had staggered to 8 losses in 10 arbitration hearings, Jay Buhner of Seattle and Bob Milacki of Baltimore won their cases and whopping raises yesterday.
The common theme in their hearings was that both were represented by Randy and Alan Hendricks, their agents.
The Houston-based brothers had not argued any of the previous 10 cases.
But they argued for Buhner and Milacki on Thursday in Chicago before different arbitrators, and next week they have three of the biggest cases on this year's arbitration schedule -- Doug Drabek, John Smiley and Greg Swindell -- on successive days.


Street Woman at Center Of an Abortion Drama
A poor North Dakota woman, a street person who is addicted to sniffing paint fumes to get high, is at the vortex of a bitter fight over abortion.
The woman, Martina Greywind of Fargo, has said she is 12 weeks pregnant and undecided about continuing her pregnancy.
In a bid to encourage her to have the baby, an antiabortion group, the Lambs of Christ, has offered to pay her at least $10,000 after she gives birth and has identified two families who want to adopt the baby if she does not want to raise the child.


Albany Republicans Show Bias on Bias Bill
To the Editor:
In trying to answer "Where Republicans Stand on Hate-Crime Legislation" ("Q.&amp; A," The Week in Review, Jan. 26), New York State Senate majority leader Ralph J. Marino proves his party has no rational basis for opposing a meaningful bill.


A New Health-Insurance Crisis Underfoot
Imagine an undiscovered health crisis in America: 110 million of the nation's residents living with no health insurance and suffering in silence.
Well, sort of silence.
The Presidential candidates have yet to mention the problem, but some insurers say this may be the year when America finally is ready to invest in a big way in health insurance for pets.
With a $99 policy, one company says, an owner no longer has to wince at the cost of a $1,000 CAT scan for a cat, a pacemaker for a geriatric retriever or ultrasound for a pregnant Pekingese.


Star Principal Embraces a Congenial New System
In the vast New York City school system, Naomi Hill was a star, winning constant praise for turning Public School 87 on Manhattan's Upper West Side into a national model of diversity and academic innovation.
Teachers clamored to work there.
Parents raised money for supplies.
The school drew hundreds more applicants than it could handle.
But last June, Mrs.
Hill found the Board of Education's early retirement offer irresistible.
She became one of 211 principals -- a fifth of the total -- who left.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Harkin: Projecting a Softer Image


Holiday on Monday
Washington's Birthday will be observed on Monday. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and city closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Option to close.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION: No street cleaning, pickup or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Saturday schedule, Long Island Rail Road on holiday schedule, Metro-North on weekend schedule.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal and state closed, local option to close.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit rail service on Saturday schedule, N.J.
Transit bus schedules vary, with most on Saturday schedule.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and municipal closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: New Haven line on weekend schedule.


For a Boat or the Ball Game, Flexible Binoculars
For most sports, a good pair of binoculars can come in handy.
Boaters may need binoculars to look for channel markers, and baseball fans may want to scan the outfield.
But when it comes to buying binoculars, deciding on the right magnification level often depends on how you intend to use them.
Cameron International of Huntington, L.I., imports electronic binoculars that offer a range of magnification, which makes them useful for a variety of purposes.
The binoculars, called Look, have a power zoom that allows the user to change from 7-power to 15-power magnification with the touch of a button.
Made by Copitar, a Japanese optics manufacturer, the binoculars are compact and light, and can be easily packed or carried.
They weigh 11.3 ounces without batteries.
Two AAA batteries power the zoom feature.


Nigerian Connection Floods U.S. Airports With Asian Heroin
They come into John F. Kennedy International Airport looking like other trans-Atlantic passengers: tired, a bit disheveled and glad the trip is over.
But these people -- students, salesmen, construction workers, taxi drivers, even a few grandmothers and pregnant women -- are on a dangerous mission, smuggling Asian heroin for traffickers in the huge West African nation of Nigeria who the authorities say now run the biggest network of drug couriers in the world.


European Car a Winner
To the Editor:
In "Why Favor Less Sturdy Japanese Cars?" (letter, Jan. 27), David J. Rivkin states that a Road &amp; Track comparison of a European and two Japanese cars named one of the Japanese cars a winner, though we scored the European car higher.


Mary Kiernan Wed in Florida
Mary Agnes Reilly Kiernan of Hobe Sound, Fla., and Robert Francis Callahan of Greenwich, Conn., were married yesterday at St.
Christopher's Church in Hobe Sound.
Msgr.
John J. Murphy and the Rev.
Hugh Hines performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
Mrs.
Callahan was the widow of Peter deLacy Kiernan, who was the chairman and chief executive of Fleet Norstar Financial Group, a bank holding company in Albany and Providence, R.I.


Sharing Memories of a Boy Within the Brute
There was the verdict -- guilty as charged -- and then came Mike Tyson walking through that ever-present gantlet of reporters amid shouts from his admirers.
Around him were the bright lights of TV cameras.
And in the midst of the hubbub, Tyson was moving forward, holding his emotions as neutral as he could.
Guilty as charged.
It was a moment that, like so many others involving Tyson, will be frozen in time -- a slice of grim business in the variegated odyssey of a street hood who meant to be more -- and for a while was.


A New Baja California
WHEN Mexico's 1,059-mile Transpeninsular Highway No. 1 finally opened in 1973, Baja California Sur, one of the least traveled regions in the world, seemed ready to emerge from centuries of isolation.
Until then, Baja, the world's longest peninsula, longer than the Italian peninsula, was reserved for rugged adventurers in four-wheel-drive vehicles for whom communing with cardon cactus in the desert or watching gray whales on magnificent deserted white beaches was sufficient reward for the arduous journey over rutted dirt roads.
But development came slowly.
Despite its grand name, the "highway" was a narrow winding two-lane road without shoulders that quickly became pocked and rutted and easily washed out during rains, as it did during last January's downpours.
Moreover, gasoline supplies were uncertain, accommodations limited and water scarce.
For better or worse, Baja resisted tourists, much as it had Spanish explorers and missionaries and other invaders during its turbulent history.


Free Fax Reports From Ski Areas
Skiers with fax machines can order free weather reports and basic information on 38 resorts across the country under a test marketing program that its organizers hope will become a permanent winter service.
By calling (800) 873-9803, skiers can ask for a report by fax that includes current ski conditions and regional weather forecast and map for a specific resort as well as information ranging from its number of trails, lift capacity and ticket prices to lodging and day-care facilities.
The program, called Snow Country Resorts and Reports, is a joint effort by P.R.
Newswire, which sends press releases to news organizations, and Snow Country Reports, which gathers daily ski condition reports for newspapers and radio stations.
A spokesman said the 38 ski areas in the test included major resorts in the Rockies, Far West and Northeast.


Vigilantes Fight Crime in Colombian Cocaine City
Far from the tennis courts and turquoise swimming pools of Medellin's industrial elite, the steep streets of the northeast slums have long been mean streets.
"It was like in the western movies -- whoever shot first, survived," Jorge Meza Piedrahita, a 26-year-old accountant, shouted over the din of an unmuffled motorcyle laboring up a lane near his cement block house.
"There were shootouts in the street. Stray bullets killed children."


Sharing Memories of a Boy Within the Brute
There was the verdict -- guilty as charged -- and then came Mike Tyson walking through that ever-present gantlet of reporters amid shouts from his admirers.
Around him were the bright lights of TV cameras.
And in the midst of the hubbub, Tyson was moving forward, holding his emotions as neutral as he could.
Guilty as charged.
It was a moment that, like so many others involving Tyson, will be frozen in time -- a slice of grim business in the variegated odyssey of a street hood who meant to be more -- and for a while was.


It's Time to Ask Croations Whether Peace Is at Hand
Barring an explosion of violence between edgy Croatian and Serb forces entrenched along the Yugoslav battlefront, United Nations peacekeeping troops could begin landing here within several weeks in an operation designed to shore up the flimsy Yugoslav cease fire.
Then, European Community negotiators might be able to chip away at the deeper Serb-Croat dispute over Yugoslavia's breakup.
Whether such talks make progress, however, will largely depend on how seriously both sides embrace the concept of compromise.
And even before the peacekeepers arrive, the Croats are digging in their heels about the terms of a final settlement.


And Now, a Word About the Sponsor . . .
I THINK the statute of limitations has run out, so I guess I can finally tell the truth: I stole my first car.
Actually, I didn't believe that my grandfather would prosecute.
But I also knew that he wouldn't lend me the car.
It was a 1936 Chrysler, dark green, with a hard black wheel and a long shift lever coming out of the floor.
It was the car I took my driver's test in, and I remember it well.


A Pungent Comic Novel Emerges From Tar Beach
NOVELS lie, said Richard Elman, a poet and novelist.
"But," he added, "they are lies that tell the truth, sometimes truer than true. Sometimes the truth, even in the guise of fiction, is just too hard to face."
Mr.
Elman, who has written 20 books including three volumes of poetry, said his newest novel, "Tar Beach," had been 15 years in the making.


Q and A
Master Antenna vs.
Cable Question: I moved into a building two years ago and found to my happy surprise that there was a hookup to the building's television antenna, which provided me with clear reception.
About two weeks ago my reception very suddenly became terrible.
Two days later a letter from Paragon Cable arrived describing the advantages of cable service.
The superintendent of the building and cable installers on the street have told me that tenants in my building have been disengaged from the antenna because the building is being made cable-ready.
It would seem that I now have two choices; pay for cable service or suffer with a barely visible picture.
Is there any reason why I should not be reconnected to the antenna if I am content with network offerings? . . .
Debra Victoff, Manhattan


Correction
A review of "Still Life With a Bridle" by Zbigniew Herbert on Jan. 19 misstated the location of the Ridderzaal, a Gothic building in the Netherlands where Mr.
Herbert reflects on medieval architecture.
It is in The Hague, not Delft.


250 March in Rain to Protest Teaneck Verdict
About 250 blacks staged a milelong march and a 50-minute rally in a chilling rain here today to protest the acquittal of Gary Spath, a white Teaneck police officer, in the fatal shooting of a 16-year-old black youth, Phillip Pannell, here nearly two years ago.
"We were set up -- perpetrated," the dead youth's father, Phillip, told the crowd huddled under umbrellas in front of the Teaneck Municipal Building.
"We said we'd go through the system, and once again the system failed us."


Blossoms Brighten the Wait for Spring
MANY people who long for some kind of flowers in bloom at this time of year turn to house plants.
Lucky indeed are those who have cool greenhouses or heated sundecks, because they can enjoy the bounty of camellias, gardenias and jades.
All these beautiful plants have abundant blossoms now, and they reward modest care if one criterion is met: cold growing conditions.
If this growing condition cannot be satisfied, the flowers are never seen.
Garden centers are well aware of the longing for some kind of flowering plant indoors now, and they offer bountiful sources of bloom.
One of the most delightful plants available is the dainty primrose, which is garden hardy, and those who are lucky enough to keep it going after the blossoms fade can plant it in the garden sometime in late March or early April, as soon as the weather settles.
The little primrose may not bloom this year, but if it is nurtured during the summer, it should do so next year at this time.


Bush's Bright Idea At Market Examined
To the Editor:
In "Bush Encounters the Supermarket, Amazed" (front page, Feb. 5), describing President Bush's visit to a supermarket of the 1990's, neither he nor your reporter noticed an even more startling change than the automatic scanner in the checkout lane.
The light bulb Mr.
Bush purchased is a compact fluorescent lamp.
Like electronic scanners, these light bulbs were all but unknown when the President entered the White House as Vice President, but in the last few years have become increasingly prevalent and inexpensive.


Making a Difference; A Customer-Driven Idea to Speed Things Along
Last week, I.B.M. announced it would be opening a laboratory devoted to designing computers that link up hundreds or thousands of chips to gain tremendous speed, an approach to supercomputing known as massively parallel processing.
For many in the industry, it was the final seal of approval on a technology that remained controversial as long as it was exclusive to smaller, less conservative computer makers.
But that interpretation does not sit well with Irving Wladawsky-Berger, who is responsible for the supercomputing business at the International Business Machines Corporation.


Daniel Hendey to Wed Ms. Toepfer
Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth H. Toepfer of Leonia, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Anne Toepfer to Daniel Francis Hendey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Hendey of Granville, Ohio.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Toepfer, 34 years old, is studying for a doctorate in counseling psychology at Columbia University, where she also received a master's degree in education.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father, the senior vice president of American University in Cairo, is a professor emeritus of education and a former provost at Columbia.
Her mother, Nancy G. Toepfer, who is retired, was a teacher in Leonia.


Imagine if Schools Ran Child Care
As long as child-care programs are self-sustaining and are completely divorced from the regular operations of schools and school buildings, then education would not suffer.
The regular schooling of kindergarten-to-12th-grade students is all most schools can adequately handle, and unfortunately, they are doing poorly in the endeavor, so adding an extra non-educational dimension would be very detrimental to its cause  [ "Child-Care Programs, Before and After School Hours, Are Mushrooming," Jan. 12. ]
Child-care and day-care programs should be separate entities and completely separate from the school scene and operated by private organizations.
Once they become part of the school system, they become bureaucratic and exorbitant.
One can visualize a teacher's getting $70,000 plus for the job and administrators' getting on the bandwagon, amassing salaries of six figures, for operating highly dubious babysitting programs.
Then when the child-care programs become incorporated into the educational system and the self-sustaining feature disappears, taxpayers will be burdened with another expensive fun-and-games operation.


Lisa Feuerstein Weds Gary Maier
Lisa Ann Feuerstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Feuerstein of Fort Lee, N.J., was married last evening to Gary Stewart Maier, a son of Helene Maier of Philadelphia and Stanley Maier of Wayne, Pa.
Rabbi Irving Spielman officiated at the Pierre hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Maier, 25 years old, is a vice president at Rema Foods Inc., a food importing company in Teaneck, N.J., that is owned by her father.
She graduated from Barnard College.


Children and Video Games
To the Editor:
And so do the ethnographic studies I did with my own 8-year-old son and with children at a video arcade and a day-care center, which are described at length in two appendixes.


3-Month Visa Fee For Australia
Visitors to Australia who plan to stay more than three months now have to pay a $25 processing fee for their visas.
Visas are free for travelers planning to stay for less than three months.
The new fee, imposed Feb. 1, applies only to visa applications for one or more visits of between three and six months.
The visas are valid for four years or until the applicant's passport expires.
A fee of about $150 will be charged to visitors who have traveled to Australia on a free visa and wish to extend their stay to more than three months.


Milwaukee Jury Says Dahmer Was Sane
Jeffrey L. Dahmer, the serial killer who claimed that sickness drove him to murder and dismember 15 men and boys, was found to be sane by a jury here today.
After two weeks of testimony, the jury rejected arguments by Mr.
Dahmer's defense lawyer, Gerald Boyle, that he could not control himself.


May Wedding For Miss Adams
Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Adams Jr. of Bethesda, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Willard Adams to Clifford Adam Lasser, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerry J. Lasser of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Adams, 31 years old, is a strategic planning analyst at the Boston Company, an investment management firm in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Her father is a vice president in Washington at Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith.
Her mother, Millicent Adams, who is retired, was a production associate with the CBS News program "Face the Nation."


Another Storm Faced Down in West
Surrounded by walls of soggy sandbags, fast-rushing creeks and, in some places, floating furniture, Southern Californians congratulated themselves today on facing down yet another major rainstorm.
"We feel now we can put up with practically anything," said Caroline Mirano of Topanga Canyon, just north of Los Angeles.
In recent months she has also lived through some of the other caprices of nature that California has to offer: earthquakes, drought and brushfires.


Silver Medal Caps Painful Comeback
She is an only child who asked her parents not to come with her to France.
They would make her nervous, she said.
"It's because we're all very close," Hilary Lindh said.
"I want to please them so much."


Free Speech on Campus Wins a Victory in Court
The Constitution's protection of free speech, no matter how unpopular, outweighs any prohibitions against compelling college students to support political positions they oppose, a Federal appeals court ruled on Friday.
The ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan, decided a suit brought by a group of students who opposed the use of mandatory student activity fees by their school's chapter of the New York Public Interest Research Group.
The students at the State University of New York at Albany contended that the organization spent some of the money it received from student fees on activities at other state university campuses and for the organization's legislative lobby office in Albany.
Cut Off Support
The students, who were opposed to the positions taken by the organization and dismayed to find themselves financing them, sued to cut off all campus financing to the organization on the ground that they were unconstitutionally being forced to support or associate with positions they opposed.


Wall Street; A Changing Landscape for Junk-Bond Profits
Anyone looking for further evidence of the steady revival of the junk bond market can find it in a recent report from Merrill Lynch.
A team led by Martin S. Fridson, high-yield research manager, noted that the pattern of junk-bond yields changed dramatically in the course of last year.
In January 1991, the yields on publicly traded junk bonds were clustered at the extremes, with a large chunk of the issues at the upper end of the yield scale and another crowd at the lower end.
"With no refinancing sources visible at that point," the analysts said, "highly leveraged companies with substantial near-term debt maturities were generally thought to be headed for insolvency."


Miss Merselis, Teacher, Weds
Margaret Ruth Merselis, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John G. Merselis Jr. of Williamstown, Mass., was married yesterday to Frank Wright Burr Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burr of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J.
The Rev.
Arnold Thomas officiated at the First Congregational Church in Williamstown.


Appearances Can Be Deceiving
To the Editor:
After seeing Nirvana on television and reading Karen Schoemer's explanation of the band's sudden popularity  [ "The Art Behind Nirvana's Ascent to the Top," Jan. 26 ] , I am reminded of what Mark Twain said about the music of Richard Wagner: "It's better than it sounds." DAVID FARKAS Cleveland Heights, Ohio


Luxury Takes Back Seat For N.H.L. Talent Scouts
The general managers are staying six to a chalet, standing in line for their tickets, paying $30 or more for every lousy seat they get in the corner of the ice rink.
They are not complaining about it, either.
The National Hockey League executives pouring into Meribel to watch the Olympic tournament learned long ago that international scouting trips are short on luxury and long on rewards.
If one Unified Team member can be signed, if one new Czechoslovak star can be spotted, the trip will have been worth the inconvenience.


Ice-Fishing Decoys Lure Other Species as Well
Fish decoys -- lures without hooks vividly embellished with paints, glistening fins, glass eyes and iridescent glitter -- are the closest many collectors come to the sport that spawned them: ice fishing.
Made since prehistoric times to attract fish so they could be speared through holes in the ice, these carvings evolved in the 20th century into witty, sometimes weird artifacts.
Ice fishing flourishes around the Great Lakes, the region that produced the majority of items in "Fish Decoys," an exhibition through March 28 at the American Primitive Gallery, 596 Broadway, south of Houston Street.
Organized by Aarne Anton, the gallery owner, the show is the most ambitious dealer presentation of this folk art to date.


Coins
Ration Coupons as Money
The breakup of the Soviet Union has created hope among collectors that each of the emerging republics will create several new coins and bills.
So far this hasn't happened, and Ukraine's new use of rationing coupons as money doesn't go a very long way toward diversifying the currencies.


Portable Children


Camera
Three weeks ago in Boston, Jon Falk stood before a gathering of 150 New England press photographers to present his workshop, "Adventures in Location Lighting." His delivery style is half Don Rickles, half teacher in a one-room schoolhouse.
He was a hit, as he has been around the country over the past few years.
Mr.
Falk, who is the night picture editor for The Philadelphia Daily News when he is not lecturing, has been a photographer for 26 years.
He now joins the ranks of an exclusive group in photography: those who can hold the attention of a diverse group and deliver ready-to-use information in an entertaining way.


15-Year-Old Boy Is Stabbed to Death in Brooklyn
A 15-year-old boy was stabbed to death in Brooklyn early yesterday morning after leaving a Valentine's Day party with some friends, the police said.
Dexter Rennie was attacked at 3 A.M., as he left a doughnut shop at 1538 Flatbush Avenue in Kensington, said Sgt.
Norris Hollomon, a police spokesman.
He died at the scene.


Despite New Rule, Credit Cards Sold By Alumni Group
There are some who would do well to leave home without it, administrators at the University of California at Irvine decided, so last year they established a policy restricting credit-card sales on campus.
But an exception to this rule is the university's own Alumni Association, which was permitted to set up a Visa booth for a week in mid-January, just as it did last January, a month after the policy forbidding student booths was authorized.


Fiscal and Political Forces Move Pakistan to Seek Afghan Peace
After nearly 13 years of war in Afghanistan, the Pakistani Government has moved decisively to end the conflict, which has left more than a million people dead, devastated the country's economy and driven three million refugees, nearly a fifth of the country's population, across the border into Pakistan.
A vital supporter of the fundamentalist Islamic guerrillas in Afghanistan since Soviet tanks roared into the country in December 1979, Pakistan late last month abruptly ceased supplying arms to the rebels and endorsed United Nations efforts to end the fighting and bring democracy to the country.
Economic Motivations
In doing so, Islamabad is no longer insisting on the installation of an Islamic government in Afghanistan.
Instead, Pakistan now favors a United Nations plan to bring together all the factions, including representatives of the former Communist Government in Kabul, to form an interim government that would rule until elections could be held.


The House of Scassi
IT HELPS IF YOU LIKE RED. Arnold Scaasi loves red.
His foyer is red; his telescope is red; his favorite chairs are very red.
They are also very Chinese and very rare, having been made sometime between 1710 and 1730, Scaasi says, "for Lord, er, da-da-da."
He shrugs. "I am not a furniture person."


An Uneasy Look in the Mirror
To the Sports Editor:
I woke up Tuesday to a glaring headline: Mike Tyson Guilty of Rape.
There was a picture of a big man with nothing in his eyes.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  PAKISTAN THE PEACEMAKER


Talking: Tax Proposals; All That Glitters Isn't Great
THE goodies in the Bush Administration's tax proposals designed for those buying or selling a home appear to offer a windfall.
But careful analysis by tax attorneys and real estate consultants suggests the rhetoric may outshine the reality.
The proposed $5,000 tax credit for first-time buyers will probably offer the most help.
But other benefits, such as the tax deduction available if a home is sold at a loss, the ability to withdraw IRA money without penalty to buy a first home or even the revival of more favorable capital gains tax rates may have very limited impact.
And the proposed changes in passive-loss rules are being so tightly drawn they are likely to affect only full-time developers.


We Need a Real National Rebuilding Program
To the Editor:
It looks as if we will not see prosperity for a long time.
The programs proposed are bits and pieces, which may be of help, but are more likely to give us what was called stagflation in the 1950's -- the continuation of an economy operating far below capacity.
Something needs to be added to provide more jobs and invigorate the flow of goods and services.
An enormous area where unfilled needs might be used as the catalytic agent is the infrastructure.
We have not properly maintained our assets nor kept pace with the requirements of change.


POSTINGS: Long Island Incubator; Nurturing High-Tech Firms
Fledgling high-technology companies often need a special, supportive environment.
Providing it for up to two dozen companies will be the Long Island High Technology Incubator, a nonprofit group whose one-story glass-and-brick building of the same name is under construction on a five-acre site at the State University Center at Stony Brook.
Completion is expected by September.
The $5 million, 42,000-square-foot structure, with a library, conference room and secretarial services, is designed by Ehasz Giacalone Associates of Garden City.
It is an offshoot of a six-year-old program set up by the school's Center for Advanced Technology, which has accommodated 19 tenants in temporary space.


INSIDE
Turmoil at the N.A.A.C.P.
Benjamin L. Hooks Jr. said he would step down as head of the civil rights organization, and the president was ousted from its board.
Page 24.
Poker in the Woods
Thousands swarmed toward the blackjack, roulette, craps and poker tables as Connecticut's first casino opened, on Indian land.
Page 36.
William Schuman, 81, Dies
The composer's distinctly American style won two Pulitzer Prizes and guided him as the founding president of Lincoln Center and the president of the Juilliard School.
Page 48.


Devils Win 30th With Rangers Lurking in Shadows
The Devils had a good explanation for the rather uninspired performance in their 4-1 victory over Hartford here this afternoon: The Rangers come calling Sunday.
It was obvious from the way the Devils played against the Whalers that they were conserving energy for the Rangers, their cross-river rivals, who have the best record in the league (37-18-3).


NIGHT WANDERINGS
I hope John Stone is as thoughtful and compassionate a doctor as he is an author.
In these days of healthcare upheaval, it is a rare physician who takes the time to help his patients "try somehow to touch, to reckon with the ghost in every darkness." LAURA A. BARBER, R.N.
Plainfield, N.J.


Deborah Dodds To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Dodds of Nevada City, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Deborah Montgomery Dodds to Gregory Carter Smith, a son of Charles J. Smith 2d of Naples, Fla., and the late Elizabeth C. Smith.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Dodds, 31 years old, is a director of East Coast member relations for Mastercard International in New York.
She graduated from Smith College and received an M.B.A. degree from Northwestern University.
Her father is a lawyer and real-estate investor in Nevada City, where her mother, Pauline P. Dodds, is an interior decorator.


Into the Woods
JACK CZARNECKI, AN INVETERATE MUSHROOMER AND THE OWNER OF JOE'S Restaurant in Reading, Pa., says that after a while the feeling of the ground beneath your feet tells you things when you enter a forest.
The sink and the mush of it, the lay of nature's flotsam and jetsam, tell you where to look for the little humps of earth that could be home to a pleurotte, a blewit or a cepe.
You use an old kitchen knife to push aside the fallen leaves, the pine needles and the dirt that may have shifted like a dune over the fungi, and you hope for a mushroom that won't kill you.
Jack Czarnecki has been studying the subject since he was old enough to walk.
As a child, he would shimmy up a piney hillside on his stomach, following a vein of tricholoma (called "steelies" or "pinies" in his part of the country), his nose a few inches from the ground, a wicker basket on his wrist.
Proximity to the earth, he says, is why dogs and pigs and young children make the best 'shroomers.


Mary Cassidy to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Cassidy of Huntington, L.I., have announced April wedding plans for their daughter Mary Elizabeth Cassidy and John Morley Haskin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Haskin of Mendota Heights, Minn.
Ms.
Cassidy and her fiance, both 29 years old, are account supervisors at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College; he from Hobart College.


Bangladesh Cyclone Survivors Still Suffering
The first thing Kala Miya remembers was the rising wall of water that day last April.
"I had a home right here," he said, pointing to a placid stretch of sand gently sliding toward the Bay of Bengal.
"I saw the water coming. When it was up to my knees, I picked up my children, and with my wife I ran to that building."


Drabek Reaches Accord With Pirates
DOUG DRABEK, who a year ago won the highest salary awarded in a salary arbitration hearing, $3.35 million, reached agreement with the Pittsburgh Pirates last night on a $4.5 million salary, fourth-highest for a pitcher this year.
The settlement could have an impact on tomorrow's scheduled hearing for DAVID CONE and the Mets.
The settlement salary, $207,500 above the midpoint of the submitted figures of $3,685,000 and $4.9 million, seemingly could help Cone's bid for $4.25 million over the Mets' $3 million figure.
But General Manager AL HARAZIN said, "I feel better about my case now than before because of the settlement." He declined to explain his view, but he noted that the starting point is different because Cone's salary last year was $1 million less than Drabek's.


The Years of Little Sunlight
UNQUIET DAYS
At Home in Poland. By Thomas Swick. 286 pp. New York:  Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.


POSTINGS: Ashforth Severs Ties; Goodbye, Manhattan
For decades, Albert B. Ashforth was one of the white-glove management companies that ran Manhattan's grand cooperative apartment houses.
But in recent years the company has concentrated on its growing commercial real estate operations in Stamford, Conn.
In 1988, it sold its New York residential management division to William B. May Company.
Now, snipping the last tie that bound Albert B. Ashforth to Manhattan, the company has sold its residential brokerage division to a group of its employees.


Flying Higher Than the Shuttle
The grip of what some call the shuttle mafia on the space program eased last week as a former pilot of the winged spaceships who rose to NASA's top job was forced by the White House to step down.
Richard H. Truly, 55 years old, the first astronaut to lead the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, announced his resignation after a two-and-a-half year tenure marked by growing friction with the White House.
He was known for promoting the $25 billion shuttle fleet and putting fellow astronauts in positions of power.
But the White House wanted more innovation, economy and excitement.
It had come to feel that the $15-billion-a-year agency, charged with charting new worlds and exploring the heavens, was in a tailspin.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Jan. 26 misidentified a biking scene on the Big Island of Hawaii.
It showed the North Hilo district just south of the Hamakua Coast, not the South Kohala Coast.


High-Strung


CAMPUS LIFE: Skidmore; Tradition, Age 3: Take My Festival Of Comedy, Please
For the third year in a row, students from across the country came to Skidmore College here last weekend to be laughed at by their peers.
They came to be drowned, shot, pulverized and incinerated through accidents involving hair spray and cigarettes.
What brought them to Skidmore was a one-of-a-kind national college comedy festival that is a "mix of education and entertainment," said a 1991 Skidmore graduate, David Miner, the founder of his alma mater's own comedy troupe, Ad Liberal Artists, and the executive producer of the festival. 'Communicative Theater'
Mr.
Miner, who now lives in Manhattan and is the manager of comedy development at Foxboro Entertainment, a production company, said he was looking for "more diversity geographically" for the event, called the Annual National College Comedy Festival.
At this year's festival, more than 125 thespians from 16 campuses performed in three shows on Feb. 7 and 8 in the Janet Kinghorn Bernard Theater on campus.


A la Carte: Pastas, All Homemade
VERY few restaurants make the pastas they serve.
Even the expensive northern Italian gourmet palaces generally purchase their pastas.
Yet the two-year-old Larkfield Cafe, a modest storefront trattoria at 277A Larkfield Road in East Northport, makes all its fettucine and linguine from scratch.
Actually, the noodles are made next door at a shop that preceded the Larkfield Cafe by about eight years.
What is now the Larkfield Cafe was an ice-cream parlor.
When the owner wanted to sell, he turned to his pasta-maker neighbors, who purchased the premises and turned it into a restaurant.


Headliners; Salesmanship
As buy-American sentiment continues to simmer in the United States, a Japanese political leader stepped forward last week to warn his colleagues that bluntly criticizing Japan's best customer is not a real shrewd move.
Shin Kanemaru, whose title of vice president of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party belies his raw power as a broker of political patronage, said last week that Japan needs the United States too much to risk alienating the American people.
"If we belittle the United States, there is no future for Japan," the 77-year-old politician said.
"Japan can exist because the United States exists, but it is not the other way around." Mr.
Kanemaru is widely considered more powerful than Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, whom he helped put in office and who has been among the most prominent Japanese critics of American industry, which he said "may lack a work ethic." But Mr.
Kanemaru did not rebuke the Prime Minister by name.
"We owe our prosperity to the United States," he said.
"Many Japanese forget this fact."


Susan Walsh To Wed in May
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Walsh of White Plains have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Susan Maria Walsh, to Patrick Francis McCarthy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis D. McCarthy of Island Park, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Dr.
Walsh, 30 years old, is an attending pediatrician at Albert Einstein Hospital in the Bronx.
She graduated from New York University, from which she also received her medical degree.
Her father is an attending obstetrician and gynecologist at St.
Vincent's Hospital in New York.
Her mother, Dr.
Wanda S. Walsh, is an associate professor of pediatrics at N.Y.U..


Catholic Schools in Danger of Closing
For days now, forlorn principals of Roman Catholic schools, accompanied by equally concerned pastors, parents and often the school accountant, have marched into the offices of John Cardinal O'Connor to argue for keeping their schools open.
Worried about rising deficits and low enrollments, the Cardinal has already decided to close one of the 304 schools in the Archdiocese of New York.
In the next few days, his office is expected to announce the shuttering of others.


Speed the Peace in Yugoslavia
The risks are daunting.
But to their credit, U.N.
Secretary General Boutros Ghali and his special mediator, Cyrus Vance, are pressing the Security Council to approve a peacekeeping force for Yugoslavia, even though all parties are not yet committed to hold their fire.
Dispatching peacekeepers risks getting outsiders caught in a crossfire.
But further delay invites resumption of Yugoslavia's barbaric civil war, which has already cost 10,000 lives.
Rapid U.N. deployment is the wiser course.


Can There Ever Be Too Much Italian Food?
FAIRFIELD COUNTY may be awash in a tidal wave of Italian restaurant openings, but you'll hear nary a complaint from us -- not when they're the quality of Terra.
The Greenwich restaurant's very name suggests what it is about: honest food of the earth, natural and real, expertly prepared in a straightforward way.
Esthetically, Terra is a gem.
A small, narrow storefront now has a touch of Tuscany, with pale apricot walls, pin-spot lighting and a terrazzo floor.
In front, rounded arches and charming lunettes are painted with delicate scenes; in the rear are a natural wood ceiling, bar and wood-fired oven that create an even more casual mood.


Crazy for Dance, a Broadway Gypsy Creates Her Own
The first-act curtain has been up a few minutes when a limousine rolls out on the stage of the Shubert Theater on Broadway, where "Crazy for You," the new Gershwin musical, opens on Wednesday.
The car comes to a stop in a glittering nightscape of Times Square, the orchestra swings into "I Can't Be Bothered Now" and Bobby Child, a rich young real estate tycoon who only wants to dance, leaps to the roof for a burst of tapping.
Out from the hood pops a luscious show dancer.
Another nine emerge from the back of the limousine and, suddenly, the stage is a vision of fluffy pink chorines, neon lights -- and dance.
For "Crazy for You" is a show about dancing, whether a waltz for two across a desert under a wide-open Western sky or a scene in which miners and chorus girls dance with and on every loose prop in sight: corrugated tin-sheet roofing gets skidded across, metal trays are tapped on, pickaxes become swings and just about everything handy serves as a musical instrument, including a tire pump, a washboard and a saw.


Michelle Iacovelli and James Najarian to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Iacovelli of Lyndhurst, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Michelle Anne Iacovelli to James William Najarian, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Johnnie Najarian of River Edge, N.J.
A wedding in the summer of 1993 is planned.


The 1992 Campaign; Democrat Sees Draft Scenario
Senator Wendell H. Ford, Democrat of Kentucky and Senate majority whip, said today that he would be willing to serve on a committee of Democratic leaders to draft a candidate for President if none of the Democrats wins a commanding lead in the New Hampshire primary.
In an interview, Mr.
Ford said there was concern that the party's candidates were failing to capture the allegiance of voters in New Hampshire.


Topics of The Times; The Shame of Rape
Desiree Washington, an 18-year-old college freshman from Coventry, R.I., has been a victim twice over.
First she was sexually violated by the fighter Mike Tyson, during last July's Miss Black America contest.
Then she had to endure the slurs of those who thought her either a nincompoop ("Any woman fool enough to go a man's hotel room at 2 A.M. is asking for it.") or a slut ("She's after his money.")
That an Indianapolis jury believed Ms.
Washington's story and found Mr.
Tyson guilty of rape last week must have gone a long way toward healing the damage wrought by those two assaults.
Ms.
Washington has now taken the rest of that journey on her own, by identifying herself to the public.


'Sarah and Abraham,' 2 Plays at Once
IF you care to brush up on a favorite story from the Bible, here's "Sarah and Abraham," Marsha Norman style.
The playwright, winner of a Pulitzer (" 'night, Mother") and a Tony ("The Secret Garden"), has chosen the tale of the barren high priestess who consents to her husband's adultery with a slave, Hagar, so that he can father a child, Ishmael.
Later, through divine intervention, Sarah, at 90, gave birth to Isaac.
And so forth.
In its explications and in its reminders, the new play at the George Street Playhouse can be edifying.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Poison Ivy in Winter
Q.
Is it possible to get a poison ivy rash in winter, even though the plant is dormant? -- Annabelle Jordash, Brookline, Mass.


Tech Notes; Keeping Clothes Defect-Free
For clothing makers, defects in garments are costly.
Defective apparel must be discarded, reworked or sold at a discount.
But researchers at the Georgia Institute of Technology are testing devices to allow sewing machines to detect problems in sewing needles and thread before they can cause defects.
A piezoelectric sensor is used to monitor the motion of the thread as it is fed to the needle.
This motion registers as pulses of voltage measurements and is fed to a computer.


Ruddock Aims for a Balanced Attack
Against Mike Tyson last June, Razor Ruddock promised to be a two-fisted fighter rather than the left-hook-oriented boxer he was several months earlier, when he fought Tyson for the first time.
Promises, promises.


Preservationists Win Oldest County House
BENEATH the porch of the modest shingled house at 265 Rye Beach Road here, some of the hand-hewn beams still have bark clinging to them.
With Indians and winter both threatening, stripping the beams was not a priority for the small band of settlers who helped build the house three centuries ago.
The beams are just one of the unusual features in the 322-year-old Knapp House, believed to be the oldest house in Westchester.
As a result of recent negotiations, the private owners have agreed to sell the house to the Rye Historical Society, assuring its preservation as one of the county's most significant historic landmarks.


Onward, 'Up'-ward With Apted
There have been a number of notable documentaries in recent years: Marcel Ophuls's "Sorrow and the Pity" and Claude Lanzmann's "Shoah," both epic in scope; Ken Burns's vast series, "The Civil War"; Errol Morris's "Thin Blue Line," about justice's miscarriage, and Michael Moore's scathingly satiric, tough and rudely biased "Roger and Me," in which a politically savvy wolf in hayseed's clothing devours General Motors down to its hubcaps.
Yet none of these has the narrative, emotional and even esthetic impact of the enchanting, singular "7 Up" films that have been made by Granada Television of England over the last 28 years, most of them directed by Michael Apted.
"35 Up," the latest installment, is currently at the Film Forum and will eventually be seen on public television, but you should go now.
You may want to see it twice.


Sports of The Times; Already Camping Out For First Frozen Rope
BASEBALL is near.
To be quite truthful, I have not yet spotted a frozen rope or a can o' corn or a snow cone or any of those other exotic specialties of the ball field, but the other night while driving in Miami I did hear the solid "thunk" of batting practice.
Ooops, that was Jose Canseco, ramming his Porsche into his wife's BMW.
Well, everybody prepares for the season in his own way.


Cabaret Economics 101: Sing, Record, Then Hope
The economics of cabaret today are so treacherous that most artists have to do almost everything themselves, including making records.
Despite the success of Linda Ronstadt's and Natalie Cole's albums of standards, most cabaret singers find it impossible to interest a major label in their work.
Those who want to record must either do so privately or sign with small companies -- notably DFG, Audiophile and the new Cabaret -- that care about a form of music whose artistic value exceeds its profitability.
The singers may never make a cent in royalties, but the prestige of having a commercially available recording is more important.
Among recently released cabaret albums are titles by the female trio Betty, Jackie Cain and Roy Kral, Dixie Carter, Andrea Marcovicci, Amanda McBroom and Weslia Whitfield, a San Francisco-based singer who has created a profilic recording career through sheer determination.


Thank You, Kirk
"Sight Unseen," a new play by Donald Margulies at the Manhattan Theater Club, examines, among other issues, what the protagonist regards as the emptiness and pretentiousness of middle-class America.
At one point, the character of Jonathan, an American painter who has become the darling of the art world, scoffs at the response to the van Gogh exhibit at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1984.
Here is his tirade.


Dr. Lisa Roth to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Roth of Murray Hill, N.J., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Dr.
Lisa Caren Roth, and Allen David Klein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Klein of East Rockaway, Queens.
Dr.
Roth, 30 years old, is a senior resident in internal medicine at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University and St.
George's University School of Medicine.
Mr.
Klein, 31, is a C.P.A. and a partner in Klein &amp; Klein, an accounting firm in East Rockaway.
He graduated from Hofstra University.


Technology; Flirting With a Coinless Pay Phone
Pity the poor pay phone, especially one in New York City.
A public telephone in the city is in a kind of seventh circle of hell.
Every three minutes, a thief, a vandal or some other telephone thug breaks into a coin box or yanks a handset from a socket.
That's more than 175,000 times a year.
New York Telephone spends $10 million annually repairing the city's 58,000 pay phones, the largest number of public phones of any city in the country.
But more than cost is at stake.
Public safety is also endangered when a citizen cannot call 911 for the police or an ambulance because the pay phone has been battered into insensibility.


An Art Museum Lifts Seattle's Cultural Profile
The Seattle Art Museum may do for Robert Venturi what no building has done for him yet: make him a popular architect.
Mr.
Venturi is among the most celebrated architects of our age; he won the Pritzker Prize last year, and three months later saw the completion of his addition to the National Gallery in London, perhaps the most prestigious foreign commission any American architect has won.
Through his writings, many done jointly with his wife and partner, Denise Scott Brown, he has long been established as the essential theorist of the last generation.
Yet it's not hard to understand why his work has never quite caught the public's fancy.
Even though Mr.
Venturi and Ms.
Scott Brown brought about a sea change in American architecture, helping to shift its focus away from modernism and toward a wealth of other styles, their own buildings have exhibited a kind of 20th-century mannerism that soars over the heads of most laymen.
Mr.
Venturi and Ms.
Scott Brown have rejected a simplistic, self-indulgent replication of the past in favor of designs that make highly studied comments on other styles -- more stimulating intellectually, but less likely to provoke a comfortable visceral response.


Lisa Gayle Beardwood Is Married
Lisa Gayle Beardwood, a daughter of Marjorie J. Beardwood of Portsmouth, R.I., and Bruce Beardwood of Wilmington, Del., was married yesterday to Matthew David Haradon, a son of Mary Haradon of Pompton Plains, N.J., and the late Paul Haradon.
The Rev.
Vincent A. Fasano, a minister of the Reformed Church in America, officiated at St.
Mary's Episcopal Church in Portsmouth.
Mrs.
Haradon, 28 years old, is a sales representative in medical products for W. L. Gore &amp; Associates, the fabrics and medical products conglomerate in Wilmington, Del.
She graduated from the University of Delaware.
Her father is a vice president of investor affairs at Du Pont in Wilmington.
Her stepmother is Judith F. Beardwood of Wilmington.


Making a Difference; Moving Up at Salomon and Getting Back to Deals
Investment bankers at Salomon Brothers were not surprised last week when Richard J. Barrett was named to be the new co-head of the firm's investment banking division, sharing the title with Leo I. Higdon Jr.
Mr.
Barrett has been working by Mr.
Higdon's side since late last year, and his no-nonsense manner and evident intelligence made him seem a natural for promotion at a time when Salomon was in flux.


Miss Rosen to Wed A. H. Weisbach
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Rosen of Commack, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Andrea Tracy Rosen, to Andrew Howard Weisbach, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin H. Weisbach of East Hills, L.I.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Rosen, 25 years old, is an account executive at Bohbot Communications, a media planning company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Hartford.
Her father is the production development director at The New York Times in New York.
Her mother, Barbara Rosen, is the president of Come Party With Us, an event planner in Great Neck, L.I.


Two Skaters Give Couture a Whirl
The Olympics is not only a splendid athletic event.
This week it will also have, in the women's figure skating competition, a tiny fashion show.
For in ice skating, even costumes have had their trends.
From the 20's through the 70's, ice skaters at the Olympics wore plain, demure costumes bought at stores or sewed by their mothers or local dressmakers, according to Dale Mitch, director of the World Figure Skating Museum of the United States Figure Skating Association in Colorado Springs, Colo.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 16, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
41
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
3
4
TWILIGHT'S CHILD, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) When she becomes the owner of a hotel, a woman finds herself haunted by past heartaches.
4
3
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) An elderly woman reminisces about six decades of life in rural Alabama.
5
4
DAZZLE, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $5.99.) The familial, professional and romantic life of a woman who becomes a celebrity photographer.
6
4
ETERNITY, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.50.) A mail-order bride in 19th-century Maine.
7
3
FORGIVING, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A woman finds family problems and love when she establishes a newspaper in Dakota Territory.
8
3
VITAL SIGNS, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A physician's quest for fertility brings her horrifying experiences.
9
4
THE CAT WHO KNEW A CARDINAL, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran investigates the murder of a despised man.
10
2
THE SECRET PILGRIM, by John le Carre. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A member of British intelligence recalls his three decades as a spy.
11
13
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
12 *
2
MAGIC HOUR, by Susan Isaacs. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The romantic and professional lives of a detective become entangled as he investigates a murder in the Hamptons.
13
7
COYOTE WAITS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The murder of a Navajo tribal policeman involves an ancient artifact.
14
9
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Plume, $15.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
15 *
2
SPARTACUS, by T. L. Mancour. (Pocket, $4.99.) The crew of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise is menaced by aliens when it goes to their aid.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
8
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
2
3
AND THE SEA WILL TELL, by Vincent Bugliosi with Bruce B. Henderson. (Ivy, $5.99.) An enigmatic 1974 murder case.
3
39
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
4
13
HIGH TREASON, by Robert J. Groden and Harrison Edward Livingstone. (Berkley, $6.99.) Evidence to suggest that the assassination of John F. Kennedy resulted from a massive conspiracy.
5
31
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6
3
CROSSFIRE, by Jim Marrs. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $13.95.) A Dallas journalist presents the case that a conspiracy caused the death of John F. Kennedy.
7
117
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
8
432
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
9
16
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, feel, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
10
46
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspiration.
11 *
32
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) U.S. history.
12 *
1
PLAIN AND SIMPLE, by Sue Bender. (HarperSanFrancisco, $10.95.) An urban woman finds peace of mind and a satisfying way of life in visits to Amish communities in Iowa and Ohio.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
27
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
75
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
56
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
24
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
5
10
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1992. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Gaucho Country
To the Editor: I returned from Buenos Aires in December, and I write to comment on Nathaniel C. Nash's article "Weekending in Gaucho Country" (Travel, Oct. 20).
Having been raised in Argentina, I was visiting family and friends, but the highlight of my trip was to be a stay at La Portena.
I ride horses six days a week, so horses were important.
I was told they would have "something" for me to ride.


Ms. Parkhill Plans to Marry
Alorie and Craig Parkhill of Sudbury, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Rebecca Crowley Parkhill, to Robert Jolyon Willett, the son of Mary and Allan Willett of London.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Parkhill, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is pursuing a master's of divinity degree at Yale Divinity School.
Her father is president of MFPA Inc., an architectural firm in Natick, Mass.
Her mother is the assistant head of the Cambridge School of Weston, Mass.


Kurds Won't Stop Short of Independence
To the Editor:
A pilot study (presented at the Middle East Studies Association conference in Washington last November) suggests that Iraqi Kurds may be telling Westerners more what Westerners want to hear than what Kurds really want.
William Safire has been helping Iraqi Kurds do just that.


An Uneasy Look in the Mirror
To the Sports Editor:
I woke up Tuesday to a glaring headline: Mike Tyson Guilty of Rape.


Miss Cardone Wed on L.I.
Katherine Frances Cardone, the psychiatric nursing coordinator at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington, and Timothy Gerard Uehlinger, an NBC-TV producer for "Today" in New York, were married yesterday in Long Beach, L.I.
The Rev.
Walter Burghardt performed the ceremony at St.
Ignatius Martyr Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Uehlinger, 32 years old, is the daughter of Mrs.
Anthony B. Cardone of Long Beach and the late Mr.
Cardone.
She graduated from Georgetown, where she also received a master's degree in nursing administration.
Her father was a field agent for the Internal Revenue Service in New York.
Her mother, Julia Cardone, manages family-owned real estate in New York.


Daunting New Task: Helping Minority Companies
When Mayor David N. Dinkins announced last week that he wanted to insure that businesses owned by minorities or women receive a larger portion of city contracts, his motive was clear: to broaden opportunities for those who have been disadvantaged.
But the experience of many other cities, as well as several states and the Federal Government, suggests that it is much easier to articulate goals in government contracting than to achieve them, many experts say.


Borromini's Rome
To the Editor: As Borromini fans, we loved Olivier Bernier's "Borromini's Rome" (Travel, Dec. 22).
We have a few observations that may be useful to those visiting Rome.
Visiting hours are a sometime thing in Rome.
So far, we have been unsuccessful in gaining access to San Carlino.


Ms. Cohen Wed In California
Cambria Lee Cohen, an advertising copywriter, and Howard Michael Gordon, a television and film writer and producer, both in Los Angeles, were married last evening in Encino, Calif.
Rabbi Harold M. Schulweis officiated at Valley Beth Shalom Temple.
Mrs.
Gordon, 29 years old, graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles and works for Foote Cone &amp; Belding Advertising.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin L. Cohen of Encino.
Her father, a former psychiatrist, is president of Cohen Brown Management Group, a management consulting concern in Los Angeles.
Her mother, Sharleen Cooper Cohen, is a novelist.


From Knight to Pawn
TERRY WAITE AND OLLIE NORTH
The Untold Story of the Kidnapping -- and the Release.
By Gavin Hewitt.
Illustrated. 230 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.


Celebrating Gifts of the Good Sports
After the jury handed down its guilty verdict in the Mike Tyson trial, the special prosecutor connected the former heavyweight boxing champion to the swaggering athlete and the verdict to a line the public is now drawing for all the miscreants on the fields, the courts and in the ring.
The latter sentiment expressed by the prosecutor, J. Gregory Garrison, is all well and good when applied to Tyson.
The suggestion that Tyson somehow represents professional sports and all that is wrong was a wild punch that unfairly hit a multitude of people below the belt.


New York State Eases a Bar to Homeless Housing
Westchester County spent $56 million last year to place homeless people in motels, shelters and emergency apartments.
It did not, however, build any permanent housing.
But that could change thanks to an interpretation of the State Constitution that, for the first time, permits counties in New York to build housing for the poor.


Stacey Major to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Major Jr. of New York have announced 1993 wedding plans for their daughter, Stacey Ann Major, and First Lieut.
Karl Matthew Murphy Jr. of the Army, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murphy of Highland, N.Y.
Ms.
Major, 24 years old, is the assistant to a director of marketing at Metropolitan Life Insurance in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Georgetown University.
Lieutenant Murphy, 24, is assigned to the 82d Airborne Division at Fort Bragg, N.C.


Bonnie Egelberg Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Egelberg of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Bonnie Lisa Egelberg, to Christopher Francis DeVito, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank DeVito of Huntington Bay, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Egelberg, 26 years old, graduated from Haifa University in Israel and is an account executive at Young &amp; Rubicam in New York.
Her father teaches mathematics at the Bronx High School of Science.


The 1992 Campaign; In One 'Base' of Support, Clinton Is Tottering
No matter what they think about whether Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas dodged the draft when he was a college student in the 1960's, the people in this small middle Georgia city generally concede that his appeal to fellow Southerners and what they term his "electability"have now pretty much evaporated.
For some, this is a sad state of affairs, highlighting the hypocrisy associated with the Vietnam War years.
For others, the fading gleam of Mr.
Clinton's image is a simple case of reaping what one has sown.


When the Time Is Right, So Is CBS
Halfway through its 16-day marathon broadcast of the Winter Olympics, CBS is gradually balancing, rather than juggling, daily deliveries of action, features and studio chitchat.
The 10 1/2 minutes of commercials each hour, the cutaways to features at dramatic junctures and the still-stilted repartee between the prime-time anchors, Tim McCarver and Paula Zahn, remain apparent.


The (Mis)Match Game: Bulls vs. Knicks
Basketball coaches often use the term "matchups" when talking about their opposition.
Some teams, because of personnel or playing styles, are more difficult to match up against than others.
And it is clear that during the last two seasons, the Knicks have had extreme difficulty matching up against the Chicago Bulls.
The Bulls give every team trouble, which is why they had the best record in the National Basketball Association, 41-9, heading into tonight's game against the Knicks.
But no team has dominated New York over the last two seasons like Chicago.
Consider these facts:


Margaret Mankin Wed in Virginia
Margaret Ruth Mankin, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Hart T. Mankin of Washington, was married yesterday to Christopher Barton, a son of Mrs.
William H. Barton of Bethesda, Md., and the late Dr.
Barton.
The Rev.
Mark S. Anschutz, an Episcopal minister, officiated at Christ Church in Alexandria, Va.
Mrs.
Barton, 36 years old, is a policy adviser in the office of intergovernmental and interagency affairs at the United States Department of Education in Washington.
She graduated from the University of the South.
Her father is an associate judge of the Federal Court of Veterans Appeals in Washington.
Her mother, Ruth Larson Mankin, is the director of government and public relations for the White House Conference on Aging.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LOVE IN BLACK AND WHITE The Triumph of Love Over Prejudice and Taboo.
By Mark Mathabane and Gail Mathabane.
HarperCollins, $20.


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Dec. 91
Nov. 91
Dec. 90
New York
1,691
2,008
1,764
New Jersey
1,377
1,821
1,079
Connecticut
491
817
415
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.84
8.93
9.65
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.98
6.00
7.68
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.75
8.78
9.46
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.84
5.85
7.52
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.78
8.82
9.47
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.85
5.91
7.60
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.96
9.11
9.85
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.43
6.39
7.95
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.19
4.23
6.23
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.25
8.25
9.58
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Celebrating Gifts of the Good Sports
After the jury handed down its guilty verdict in the Mike Tyson trial, the special prosecutor connected the former heavyweight boxing champion to the swaggering athlete and the verdict to a line the public is now drawing for all the miscreants on the fields, the courts and in the ring.
The latter sentiment expressed by the prosecutor, J. Gregory Garrison, is all well and good when applied to Tyson.
The suggestion that Tyson somehow represents professional sports and all that is wrong was a wild punch that unfairly hit a multitude of people below the belt.


Jan M. Gilboy to Wed
A 1993 wedding is planned for Jan M. Gilboy, a daughter of Terrence B. Gilboy of Elm Grove, Wis., and Constance A. Robotka of Allen Park, Mich., and Joshua A. Sroge, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marshall I. Sroge of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Ms.
Gilboy, 25 years old, is a marketing assistant for Primis, the electronic publishing group for college textbooks at McGraw-Hill Inc. in New York.
Mr.
Sroge, 24, is a guitarist and an artists' representative for Shaw Concerts, a management company for classical musicians. management company, also in New York.
Both graduated from Hunter College.


In Corner of Asia, Hope for New Trading Center
Frozen cornfields and mud-brick villages now dominate the landscape around this remote town, where a shallow river called the Tumen marks the intersection of the borders of Russia, North Korea and China.
As local peasants huddle for warmth on the kang -- the beds built over fireplaces in each room of their cottages -- officials in a half-dozen Asian capitals are considering an extraordinary plan for jointly developing this bleak spot into an international trading center that would rival Rotterdam as the world's busiest port.


Budget Shift Stirs Fears for Landmarks Panel
Zero dollars. Zero employees.
Preservationists and planners in and out of New York City government were startled last week when City Hall presented those figures for the Landmarks Preservation Commission for the next fiscal year.


Making a Difference; Tracking Bias in Banks
When the Federal Reserve published a study last year showing that black and other minority customers who applied for a mortgage were nearly twice as likely to be turned down as whites with the same income, community activists said the truth was actually much worse.
They claimed that unfair discrimination starts early, when bankers discourage minority customers from filing applications.
Steven Roth, president of Barry Leeds &amp; Associates, a New York-based market research firm for banks, says such charges of early discrimination are true.
In a recent study at one bank, which he declined to name because the bank is his client, Mr.
Roth found "a subtle pattern of discrimination that started almost as soon as a black walked in."


Hartt School Celebrates Black History
SCHOOLS, colleges and conservatories are prime locations for musical activity this week, starting this evening at 8, when several Hartt School student and faculty artists join forces at Millard Auditorium in West Hartford to present "The Songs, the Dance, the Music: A Celebration of Black History Month."
At 8 P.M. on Tuesday in Millard Auditorium, three wind virtuosi -- the oboist Humbert Lucarelli, the bassoonist Frank Morelli and the flutist John Wion -- salute Italian and American composers.
At 8 P.M. on Wednesday visitors to the Hartt School can find a free demonstration of new electronic pieces in the Bliss Music Room.
Also free of admission charge is a concert on Friday at 8 P.M. by the Hartt Sinfonietta, with Gene Young conducting his own "Herb Songs," Hindemith's "Herodiade" and the "Emperor" Waltz of Johann Strauss.
Cathy Thorpe will be the soprano soloist in the songs, then serve as narrator for the Hindemith composition.


Topics of The Times; A Petty Primary
For awhile there, it looked as though contenders in New York's Democratic Presidential primary had come to their senses and would avoid the costly, tedious business of challenging one another's nominating petitions.
Valid petitions get candidates on the April 7 ballot; invalid ones can knock them off.
Under the state's ultra-strict election law, to challenge petitions -- often on ludicrous technicalities -- is a popular campaign sport that distracts candidates and detracts from the integrity of primaries.


Politics of Blame on Display in Hartford
WIDENER GALLERY at Trinity College in Hartford is sharing a show with Real Art Ways, the city's chief alternative space, and, for some reason, the show has both a curator and an organizer.
The first is Susan Canning, who is an associate professor in the art department at the College of New Rochelle; the second is Anne Pasternak, a former curator at Real Art Ways.
This production, involving nine artists, is called "The Order of Things: Toward a Politic of Still Life" -- not exactly a title to bring in visitors pawing the air with excitement.
Never mind.
The spectacle bears the faint imprint of Real Art Ways, a feistier organization than it was a few years back and one that works hard to acquaint Connecticut with what is new and contentious and, more important, to bridge the gulf between art and real life.
There is seldom art for art's sake in alternative spaces, and on this occasion it is very much art for politics sake.
But the most effective statements are also the best works of art, with Mel Edwards's sculptures heading the list.


How Can You Tell a Recovery When You See One?
Everybody's doing it, peering through the thick fog of dismal economic data, company layoffs and gloom-and-doom punditry for glimmers of an economic rebound.
For those who would like to join the search for early signs of economic revival here are some suggestions about where to look.
Start with a glance at the calendar.
Post-World War II recessions have tended to be relatively short, a year on average, while expansions have been relatively long.
On that score, a recovery is overdue.
The last wave of economic expansion crested in July 1990.
Technically, the recent recession ended last spring, when the economy stopped shrinking, but actual recovery remains painfully stalled, especially for the approximately 9 million people out of work.


Perspectives: Harlem Brownstones; Picking Up the Ball in Hamilton Heights
THE hope in 1974 when a historic district was created in the Hamilton Heights section of Harlem was that the designation would work toward the preservation and strengthening of the housing stock.
Most of the brownstone-like rowhouses in the district were built between 1886 and 1906 and the styles were diverse -- Romanesque Revival, Flemish, Dutch, French and Italian Renaissance and Beaux-Arts.


CAMPUS LIFE: Michigan; Men's Day Out: Professors Splash Lunch Hour Away
When a group of University of Michigan professors and Ann Arbor residents gather at lunchtime every Monday, Wednesday and Friday, it's not for a tuna on rye.
Nor is it for a cheeseburger with fries.
Eating comes later.
First these men, who call themselves the Flounders, disrobe, dive into the pool at the intramural sports building and for the next 40 minutes, dodge, chase and dunk one another as they try to get a rubber ball into the pool's gutter.


Lives and Loves of Tall, Charismatic Presidents
To the Editor:
"Social scientists," Leslie Hawke states (letter, Feb. 2), "should not ask whether or not Gov. Bill Clinton has had an affair, but whether or not there is a correlation between poor political leadership and infidelity. My guess is that they would find no correlation -- but what if they uncovered the opposite?"


Photographer Captures Dump Children's Plight
WHEN R. T. Speck, a freelance photographer, offered to tag along with a television news crew on its way to a children's mission in the Guatemala garbage dump last November, he hoped he would just get a couple of unusual pictures for his portfolio.
"I was pretty naive at the time," Mr.
Speck said in a recent interview, "and, if you had asked me, I could not have pointed to Guatemala on a map."


Electrical Repairs Require Knowledge of Safety Codes
BEFORE undertaking any project involving wiring, ascertain from the building inspector the electrical and safety codes, but never begin electrical repairs without turning off the power.
Most household wiring consists of cable, several solid wires grouped together in flexible plastic or metal sheathing.
Plastic-sheathed cable is called nonmetallic sheathed cable or Romex, a brand name.
Metal-sheathed cable is called armored cable or BX, another brand.


NIGHT WANDERINGS
Like John Stone, I, too, experienced a period of sleepwalking provoked by unusual stress (About Men: "Night Wanderings" by John Stone, Jan. 19).
Other than the night I broke an easel, my "midnight mischief" was benign (a tray of house plants found atop the washing machine; hat and gloves jammed into the refrigerator).
And I always managed to make it back to my own bed.
In his article, Stone draws us into his nights of pain and lost bearings and gives an intriguing look at the mind and body dealing with catastrophic loss.
SHELBY WHITE COBB Atlanta


On the Street; Snow or Faux, Clothes Make The City Skier
Designer ski clothes are emerging in Central Park with even the lightest dusting of snow.
On a recent single-digit-temperature Sunday, with only an inch of fresh snow over the frozen lake, skiers promenaded and bikers made tracks under the lake's Bow Bridge.
A week ago, snow-making machines were enlisted to turn part of the park's Great Lawn into a winter carnival that soon became a trampled mudhole.
But that didn't stop the fashion parade.


Russia's Central Bank Resists Cuts in Lending
Responding to Western pressure to cut back lending, a top official of Russia's Central Bank says that if the bank fails to provide fresh financing for the farm sector before spring planting, Russia's already damaged economy could go into a tailspin.
"We are under pressure from the International Monetary Fund to shrink credit and we want to shrink credit, but we can't right now," said the official, Nikolai Domonov, a Central Bank director in charge of supervising Russia's new commercial banks.
"If we pull back, the agricultural sector has no other means of obtaining credit."


Two Prince Charmings For 'Elaine's Daughter'
"BETH, did you want to watch me make pecan rolls?" asks Elaine, Beth's fastidious mother, for whom a blender, a manicure and a man add up to bliss.
The question could hardly be more ridiculous.
To the uncouth Beth, the kitchen is a danger zone.
Striding into it, she hurls insults at her mother and has to be stopped from devouring the raw dough.
Don't expect her to learn how to bake rolls.
And by all means, keep Beth away from the oven.


A Mother and Daughter Sparring in the Kitchen
"BETH, did you want to watch me make pecan rolls?" asks Elaine, Beth's fastidious mother, for whom a blender, a manicure and a man add up to bliss.
The question could hardly be more ridiculous.
To the uncouth Beth, the kitchen is a danger zone.
Striding into it, she hurls insults at her mother and has to be stopped from devouring the raw dough.
Don't expect her to learn how to bake rolls.
And by all means, keep Beth away from the oven.


Political Formula for a Tax Proposal
The tax bill put forward by House Democrats as an alternative to President Bush's proposals has three underlying purposes, and the first is plainly the most important: to make a political argument for the Democrats about tax fairness.
The second goal is to do that without harming the economy by generating excessive stimulus or creating tax loopholes.
And the third goal, where it can be done at little fiscal or political cost, is to clean up the the tax code a bit.


For Torborg and Mets, Attitude Is Everything
In early spring, baseball teams are all theory, statistical projections and elaborate constructs of the heart.
As such, the Mets, perhaps the recession's most conspicuous consumers, are at the moment an extraordinary, even exquisite abstraction.
There is the image of Bobby Bonilla looping doubles into either gap from both sides of the plate.
There is the confident calculation that Vince Coleman's speed and Willie Randolph's subtle mastery of the fundamentals of offense can create a perpetual threat at the top of the order.
There is the perilous leap of faith that Howard Johnson can convert into a center fielder and the rather more secure assumption that he will continue to consistently convert men on base into runs scored.
And then there is the enormous exercise in optimism that the entire organization is engaged in: that Dwight Gooden can return from surgery and return to form on the mound.


Satyajit Ray Honored, Without Profit in His Land
Slouched in his favorite leather armchair, a fine wool shawl pulled around his cloud-white cotton pajama-style kurta, Satyajit Ray peers around his familiar study, books and manuscripts stacked and crammed into sagging wooden shelves, a desk smothered with letters -- many congratulatory epistles for winning an Oscar for his life's work -- while an overhead lamp flickers momentarily as Calcutta's persnickety power supply seems to dither over what to do.
As he often does, he lets his fingertips play along the edge of his lips, almost as if he wants to sculpt each word, each thought.
In the streets beneath his genteelly shabby and rambling apartment on the third floor of what Indians call a "mansion," horns blat and trucks grind their gears as they attempt to navigate a maelstrom of vehicles, people and ideas.
At each sunrise, there seem to be more people, more slums, more garbage, more political rallies, all compressed into a metropolis of blackening buildings, moonscaped roadways and thick swaddlings of air pollution.
Visitors shake their heads here, wondering what can become of this city, once so grand and now often politely referred to as a hellhole.


Say It Again, Paul Frees
To the Editor:
I enjoyed ". . . And Some Call for a Voice"  [ Jan. 19 ]  on the behind-the-scenes actors who have supplied the on-screen voices for some of Hollywood's biggest stars.
However, the article overlooked the career of one of the most talented voice artists the industry ever heard: Paul Frees.
In his later years, Frees became best known as the television voice of Boris Badenov, Prof.
Ludwig Von Drake, the unseen philanthropist of "The Millionaire" series, and the Pillsbury Doughboy, among many others; he also had a career as the uncredited voice of many movie and TV actors.


Modifier's Lib
I was watching a
soap
on
cable
and wishing it were a
western
when the thought struck: will I need a
physical
to get
major medical
?
Native speakers have no difficulty with the foregoing.
Liberated modifiers have swept through the language, and these adjectives and attributive nouns now stand alone; the words they once modified have been cast into what the Old Bolsheviks used to call "the dustbin of history."


The 1992 CAMPAIGN; Surging in New Hampshire, Tsongas Is the First to Marvel
Before the last candidate debate, Paul E. Tsongas was in a practice session with his aides when he suddenly asked a question that sent the room into a hush.
"What do I say if they ask me, 'Did you ever?' " the sad-faced candidate said.


Miss Brown to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel P. Brown Jr. of West Granby, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nannie Wright Brown, to William Plummer Clough 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clough 3d of Bethel, Me.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Brown, who is 23 years old, and Mr.
Clough, 24, graduated from Colby College.
The bride's father is a partner in the Hartford law firm of Shipman &amp; Goodwin.
Her mother, Nannie Brown, is a teacher and the staff director at Valley Pre-School in Granby, Conn.
The bridegroom's father is the headmaster of the Gould Academy, a preparatory school in Bethel.


Not a Grandma Moses Picture: Poker in the Woods
The Connecticut countryside was covered with frost today when the first early bird appeared at the doors of the Foxwoods High Stakes Bingo and Casino at 6 A.M. for the state's first day of legal casino gambling.
By the time a loud cheer went up four hours later, as the gaming floor finally opened and thousands of people swarmed toward the blackjack, roulette, craps and poker tables, more than the frost had disappeared from the landscape.


Family Reaps Rich Rewards From Symbol of Vast Wealth
The Rockefellers are very sensitive about the complex deal in which they sold a controlling interest in Rockefeller Group Inc., the company that owns the 12 original buildings in Rockefeller Center, to the Mitsubishi Estate Company, the oldest and largest real estate company in Japan.
They are especially sensitive to the suggestion that they sought the deal as a means of cashing out.
The family prefers to describe the deal, in 1989, as a means of diversifying its portfolio from a single illiquid asset that paid virtually no dividends.


Review/Jazz; David Tronzo And Guitar
David Tronzo's instrument -- a metal dobro guitar, made of nickel-plated brass with a pie-plate-sized resonator and etched with palm trees -- promises down-home music, the twang of country or slide-guitar blues.
Mr.
Tronzo has worked with downtown improvising groups, like Wayne Horvitz's President, that want a touch of Americana.
Leading his own trio on Monday night at the Knitting Factory, however, Mr.
Tronzo made music that might have come from a chicken shack converted into an antigravity lab.
Of course he played a blues, though with a virtuoso twist; he picked out both bassline and rhythm chords simultaneously.
Yet he may be the only slide guitarist alive who would also play Thelonious Monk's harmonically daunting "Monk's Dream," making its melody sultry and sly, or who would quote Ornette Coleman's "Lonely Woman." Along with bluesy lines, he also played fast themes that would be at home in a jazz-rock band, or he would pluck and damp a handful of fast notes so that the guitar sounded like an African hunter's harp.
His trio, with Jeff Hirschfield on drums and Stomu Takeishi on electric bass, could easily shift from breezy jazz to assertive rock.


Campaign Trail Leads To New York for Cash
In the last desperate days before the New Hampshire primary, as each candidate spins wildly from one quaint village to the next, often it is cocktails in Manhattan that is really on their minds.
"It's cash," said Stanley Greenberg, a poll taker for Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who traveled with the candidate to a New York fund-raiser on Monday.
"Everyone needs a lot of it, and a lot of it is here. After New Hampshire, the campaign goes on. But if you can't buy a plane ticket it's hard to get your message out."


Making a Difference; Dr. Healy's Big Push on Patents
Despite a $9 billion budget that funds thousands of medical research projects, the Government's National Institutes of Health has until recently shown little interest in staking property claims to advances it has underwritten, even in hot fields like biotechnology.
That is now changing quickly, under the tough new patent strategy being pursued by Bernadine P. Healy, who took over as director of N.I.H. last April.
Under Dr.
Healy, a 47-year-old cardiologist who served as deputy science adviser to President Reagan, N.I.H. has in recent months retained a small army of high-powered patent firms, challenged the patent claims of the Burroughs Wellcome Company to the AIDS drug AZT and applied for patents on thousands of genetic fragments before knowing what purpose they serve.


Lynn S. Nusbaum Is Married to John C. Scott
Lynn Susan Nusbaum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence G. Nusbaum Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday evening to Dr.
John Charles Scott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald W. Scott of Flushing, Mich.
Rabbi Albert Sturmer officiated and the Rev.
Giles Spoonhour, a Roman Catholic priest, assisted at the Harmonie Club in New York.


All About/Martial Arts; The Black Belts of the Screen Are Filling the Dojos
IN the 80's it was "Karate Kid." Before that it was David Carradine's "Kung Fu." But today it is the Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles who are sending their fans to the local martial arts school.
This rough and tumble world of martial arts schools and studios -- dojos to the initiated -- is one of the most fragmented segments of the highly fragmented health and fitness industry.
Exactly how large it is remains open to debate.


World Markets; A Coup in Latin American Bonds?
Lincoln Y. Rathnam, a director of Scudder, Stevens &amp; Clark's Latin American group, doesn't get too many phone calls at home at 5:30 in the morning.
But when he does, they're usually memorable.
"There's a coup going on, but it doesn't seem to be serious," reported A. Peter Monaco, a Scudder portfolio manager, when he roused Mr.
Rathnam from bed on Feb. 4.
He was in Venezuela on business.


U.S. to Cancel Israel-Only Passports
Many people who travel extensively in the Middle East carry two passports: one to go just about anywhere, and the other valid only for Israel.
But the United States is about to invalidate its Israel-only passports.
The twin passports are convenient because some countries, including most member nations of the Arab League, deny entry to travelers whose papers show they have visited Israel.
For years, the State Department has made the second passport for Israel one of the few exceptions to the general prohibition against carrying two passports.


Gulotta Record Is Defended
I regret that self-proclaimed environmental "expert" Sarah J. Meyland chose, once again, to allow her own political agenda to supersede the facts in her recent interview  [ "Long Island Q&amp;A," Jan. 19 ] , when she states that "Nassau County has virtually no environmental track record."
To set the record straight, County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta has done more to promote environmental protection in his four years in office than previous administrations had done in 40 years!


Dara Caponigro, Editor, Is Married
Dara Caponigro, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Carmine Caponigro of Suffern, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Steinberger, a son of Dr.
Naomi Steinberger of Tenafly, N.J., and the late Norbert Steinberger.
The Rev.
Orlanda R. Brugnola performed the Unitarian ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University.
Ms.
Caponigro, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, is a senior editor at House Beautiful magazine in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is an oral and maxillofacial surgeon in Suffern.


When Kids Take To Skies Alone
MANY parents will not leave a young child alone in the library or a park, will not let a 5- year-old cross the street by himself, will not trust a waiter to watch over a child eating dinner by herself.
But every year hundreds of thousands of parents hand their children over to the airlines, to be cared for by strangers for hours at a stretch as they make solo journeys across the country.
Few situations are so routine yet so fraught with anxiety.
"Every parent is terrified when their kid is in that airplane," said Anita Borden of Glen Ridge, N.J., a travel agent who has sent her children on dozens of solo trips in the last decade.


English Garden Limits Visitors
The number of people allowed into Sissinghurst, the garden in England created by the writer Vita Sackville-West and her husband, Sir Harold Nicolson, will be limited this year to reduce the damage caused by crowds of visitors.
In the 25 years since the garden at Sissinghurst Castle, about an hour's drive south of London, came under the care of Britain's National Trust, the number of visitors has increased from 20,000 in 1967 to nearly 200,000 last year.
About 450 visitors will be allowed into the garden at one time and may stay as long as they wish.
On the busiest days, later arrivals will have to wait their turn until people in the garden leave.
Some may be asked to return another day.
A spokesman for the National Trust said the average time spent in the garden was about one and a half hours, though this depends on the weather.
Sundays are always busy; visitors are advised to call ahead to find out whether a wait is likely.
The Sissinghurst shop, restaurant and surrounding fields, woods and lake will be open to visitors.


And If You Play 'Bolero' Backward . . .
During a discussion about Schubert's homosexuality recently at the 92d Street Y, the musicologist Susan McClary suggested ways in which the second movement of Schubert's "Unfinished" Symphony resembled contemporary gay literature.
Hearing that made me nostalgic for old-fashioned formalist criticism -- no muss, no fuss; just name the chords, describe the structure, and listen.
Her suggestion, casually linking arts separated by more than 160 years and a chasm of ideologies, also made me feel sympathy for an audience member who later asked, with deadpan seriousness, whether members of the panel thought Schubert's being short and fat affected his music.
But there must be musical importance to Schubert's homosexuality (which I take as fact unless Maynard Solomon's persuasive 1989 paper on this issue in the journal 19th Century Music is seriously dented by scholars).
Once we accept that the style of even the most abstract composition is related to the personality and culture of its creator, how could homosexuality be unimportant?


Brian Shimer


Going to School on Fire Island in Dead of Winter
FOOTPRINTS in the sand give way to tire-track winding paths on Fire Island beaches this time of year.
When no ferries are running, the only way on and off the island is by authorized four-wheel-drive vehicles.
It's a bumpy trip along the beach.
Like snow-skiers, drivers have to decide whether to follow in the tracks of others or break out on their own.
The more adventurous head down to the water and race along the hard-packed sand, trying to outrun the incoming waves.
At low tide, the beach can resemble a sandy speedway, as station wagons, Broncos and Blazers jockey for position.


Elway Is Lucky Handley Is Here
To the Sports Editor:
I was saddened to read recently that Gary Kubiak had retired.
It's a shame that he wasn't playing for Ray Handley when he single-handedly brought Denver back into the championship game against Buffalo last month.
Under Handley, Kubiak would be Denver's starting quarterback next season, while John Elway, who was stupid enough to get hurt, would pace the sidelines as Handley's multimillion-dollar backup.
RICHARD T. MERMELSTEIN New York


Sarah Eusden Is Engaged to Charles A. Gallop
The Rev. and Mrs.
John Dykstra Eusden of Williamstown, Mass., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Sarah Jewell Eusden and Charles Andrew Gallop, the son of Luis A. Gallop of Francestown, N.H., and the late Kathryn N. Gallop.


Children and Video Games
To the Editor:
And so do the ethnographic studies I did with my own 8-year-old son and with children at a video arcade and a day-care center, which are described at length in two appendixes.


Ian Condry to Marry Margot Stone
Mr. and Mrs.
Alan J. Stone of Chappaqua, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Margot Elise Stone to Ian Richard Condry, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Condry of Ithaca, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Stone, 26 years old, graduated from Duke University and is a project manager for Manna Inc., a developer of low-income housing in Washington.
Her father is an executive vice president of Sisti, Zinbarg &amp; Howard, an advertising agency in Paramus, N.J.
Her mother, Ilse Stone, is a personnel administrator for Xerox in Stamford, Conn.


It's a Different World From the '88 Games
When the Germans, Soviets and Americans packed their bags and left Calgary, Alberta, four years ago, how could they comprehend that the Olympic world as they knew it was about to disappear?
Now, for these Winter Games, the German and Soviet teams don't even have the same names.
And the Americans?
They've got the same name, but are waiting to see whether an enormous influx of money will provide the benefits they hoped for.


Struggling Ukrainian Miners Are Put Off by Diet of Nationalism
The Donets Basin coal miners, whose strikes in recent years helped weaken the Soviet Union and undermine Communist power, are now complaining openly about life under the independent Russian and Ukrainian states that have emerged from the wreckage of the old system.
Leaders of the independent miners' union were interviewed recently in their two-room headquarters in a massive, Stalinist-style palace in this city of 1.2 million, from which the 21 mines that ring Donetsk and its satellite towns are administered.
They spoke sardonically about the consequences of the political success to which they contributed.


Christie Mastrangeli, Trader, Is Wed
Christie Mastrangeli, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred Mastrangeli of Johnstown, N.Y., was married yesterday to Rudy David Green, the son of Kay Green of Brooklyn and the late Stanley Green.
Acting Justice Phyllis Gangel-Jacob of New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated at the home of the bridegroom's mother.
Ms.
Mastrangeli, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant equities trader in New York for New Japan Securities International Inc., a securities brokerage in Tokyo.
She graduated from the Rochester Institute of Technology.
Her father is a professor emeritus of business at Fulton-Montgomery Community College in Johnstown.


Poland Again Saddles Up the Steed of Reform
After riding to power on growing public opposition to Poland's economic reform program, the new Government is reluctantly embracing the main tenets of its predecessors.
An economic program to be announced Monday promises a loosening of the money supply and a bit of help for the ailing state sector.
But Premier Jan Olszewski's Government is insisting that the total deficit will be held to 5 to 6 percent of the gross national product, slightly more than 1991.


2 North American Women Spring Upset in Downhill
The crowd was suddenly so quiet that snowflakes could almost be heard falling gently to the ground.
Not a cow bell rang.
Not a chant could be heard.
Not a flag was raised.
Two North Americans had roared down the mountain, and, for one improbable race, they extinguished the Olympic Alpine flame of the European community.


Argentina Faces Some Evil History, But Not All
"Goebbels was an intelligent, capable, marvelous man," said Wilfried von Owen of his former boss.
"I have the utmost admiration for him." The comment has the ring of a newspaper account 45 years ago.
But it appeared just this month, in the Argentine daily Pagina 12, in an account of an interview the day before with Mr.
Von Owen, whom the paper had found living in a modest home in this capital city.
A senior aide to the Nazi propaganda chief from 1943 to 1945, Mr.
Von Owen came to Argentina under his own name in 1951 and had lived in obscurity.
He has not been charged with war crimes.


POSTINGS: Gramercy Park; Restoring Old Sidewalk
One reason Gramercy Park still feels like a 19th-century enclave is under foot: the bluestone sidewalk around its perimeter.
Well over a century in age, the walkway is made of stone slabs as large as 6 by 6 feet and as small as 2 by 2 feet.
But the sidewalk has been ravaged by time and carelessness.
Tree roots have grown and spread, pushing up the 4-inch-thick slabs and creating hazards.
Stones have occasionally been reset in haphazard fashion.
And the city came through and removed the bluestone at two corners to create cement curb cuts for the disabled.


U.N. Finds Haitians Who Fled Anew
United Nations officials said today that interviews at a United States-run refugee camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, were turning up numerous cases of Haitians who fled their country and were intercepted and returned, only to flee a second time from what they said was repression by the army or police.
The statements from these people, gathered by officials from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, contrast starkly with the Bush Administration's position, repeated in arguments before the Supreme Court on Friday, that there is no evidence of mistreatment of Haitians who are forcibly returned to their country. 'Specially Targeted'?
The United Nations refugee specialists said that in recent days 35 Haitians who fled their country a second time aboard small boats have already been identified, and one official predicted that "many more will be emerging."


Finally, Graf Gets To Start Her Year
Another new year, another new catastrophe for Steffi Graf.
"At least, the year is finally starting for me," she said Friday, lounging in her hotel suite here after an evening of watching John Malkovich emote onstage.
Tonight, she was to play Jana Novotna in a semifinal of the Virginia Slims of Chicago, her first tennis tournament of 1992.


The (Mis)Match Game: Bulls vs. Knicks
Basketball coaches often use the term "matchups" when talking about their opposition.
Some teams, because of personnel or playing styles, are more difficult to match up against than others.
And it is clear that during the last two seasons, the Knicks have had extreme difficulty matching up against the Chicago Bulls.
The Bulls give every team trouble, which is why they had the best record in the National Basketball Association, 41-9, heading into tonight's game against the Knicks.
But no team has dominated New York over the last two seasons like Chicago.
Consider these facts:


Rink Offers Parisian Panorama
In an effort to oust Parisian couch potatoes from their television screens during the Winter Olympics, which opened Feb. 8 in Albertville, the city government has installed an outdoor skating rink near the hilltop Sacre-Coeur Basilica in Montmartre.
Le Patinoire du Vieux Montmartre will be open until March 31 and, for those who prefer gazing to gliding, provides a spectacular view of Paris.
The rink, which covers 1,000 square feet, is open to the public Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday from 1 to 10 P.M., and Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday from 9 A.M. to 10 P.M.


Walker in a Rush, but U.S. Trails
Herschel Walker made his Olympic debut today, and his rookie eagerness might have added the microsecond that decides a medal in the two-man bobsled.
These might be the Winter Games, but for Walker, a Heisman Trophy winner who is a Minnesota Vikings running back, this was only his second bobsled event in competition.


Cary Grant Recalled As Unpretentious
With reference to "The Cary Grant Few People Knew"  [ Jan. 26 ]  regarding Nancy Nelson's book "Evenings With Cary Grant," while I am now a literary agent representing such show business personalities as George Burns, Bob Hope, Milton Berle and Henny Youngman, among others, several years ago I was also involved in producing record albums for children, and I can certainly back up Ms.
Nelson's story of Cary Grant calling her directly, without the use of any secretary or assistants.
In connection with my own experience with Cary Grant, I had written him inquiring as to whether he would be interested in narrating children's stories for a record album, and to my great surprise my secretary told me one day that Cary Grant was on the phone.
Like Ms.
Nelson, I couldn't believe it, but when I picked up the phone and heard his voice, I had no doubt it was Mr.
Grant himself.
He apologized about not being able to do the record album, as he was too busy, but that he was really flattered that I had thought of him for such a project.


Stressing Foreign Policy Could Cut Both Ways
President Bush has always been supremely conscious of his place in history, insisting on conducting what he considered his statesman's duties long after his political advisers told him he'd better pay more attention to domestic matters.
Mr.
Bush does want to be re-elected, and he recognizes that economics, not diplomacy, is driving the 1992 campaign.
But his aides say he is convinced of two things: There is not much he can really do about the economy, even though he knows he must appear to be trying, and his greatest strength as a candidate is his record as Commander in Chief and diplomat.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
BIGMAMA'S.
Written and illustrated by Donald Crews.
Greenwillow. $13.95. (Ages 5 to 9) This delightful memoir tells of the summers Mama and her children took the train south to Cottondale and of the halcyon days spent in the countryside around their grandparents' house.
THE RIVER ROAD: A Story of Abraham Lincoln.
By Meridel Le Sueur.
Illustrated by Susan Kiefer Hughes.
Holy Cow!
Press. $14.95. (Ages 12 and up) This wonderfully written account of a crucial incident in young Lincoln's life was first published in 1954 and has been reillustrated.


New York City Seems Ready to Let Recycling Falter
Environmentalists rejoiced earlier this month when a New York State Supreme Court judge ordered the Dinkins administration to comply with the city's 1989 recycling law, which requires the Sanitation Department to collect set amounts of glass, metal, paper and plastic.
But their joy may only be short-lived.
City Council leaders and aides to Mayor David N. Dinkins said last week that they are writing a new law that will cancel the ambitious goals of the 1989 one.
Because of a combination of union regulations, citizen confusion and resistance, and low prices for the recycled material, the law, Local Law 19, is proving much more expensive than the city expected when it was passed in Edward I. Koch's administration.


An Underwater Noah's Ark
I RODE a manta in the Sea of Cortez.
This largest member of the ray family, about 15 feet across, flew through the water some 50 feet beneath the surface.
This gorgeous animal looked like a Stealth fighter plane, but behaved like a submarine.
I hung onto the manta's shoulders, lay flat on its back and raced through the water.
I felt as if I were clinging to Superman's cape as he effortlessly and gracefully defied gravity.
I was flying.
This manta was four times bigger than the biggest stingray I had ever seen.
And yet it was actually just a middle-sized manta.
The big ones have wingspans of up to 25 feet.
The large lobe on each side of the manta's head, which resemble radar scanners, make it look like a creature out of science fiction.
These giants are black on the bottom and pure white on top, like the space shuttle.


Martha Jones To Wed in July
Martha Shelburne Jones, a high school mathematics teacher in North Hollywood, Calif., and Mark F. Patricof, a story analyst at the Creative Artists Agency in Los Angeles, are engaged to be married in July.
Ms.
Jones, 26 years old, graduated from Kenyon College and taught in Honduras as a member of Volunteer for Mission, an Episcopal Church program.
She teaches at the Oakwood School.
She is a daughter of Anne Shelburne Jones and Bishop Edward Witker Jones of Indianapolis.
Her father is the Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Indianapolis.


With a Few Changes Austria Comes Up Big
In the 1984 Olympic Winter Games, an embarrassed Austria won a grand total of one medal, Anton Steiner's bronze in the men's downhill skiing.
But in 1988, the Austrians earned 10 medals, 6 in Alpine skiing alone.
Here, the Austrians have been the first-week wonders of these Olympics in the French Alps.
Halfway through the competition, they had 14 medals (4 gold, 5 silver and 5 bronze) and were neck and neck with the Germans for the medal lead.


Commercial Property: Downtown Houston; Hines Renovating 2 Shell Towers He Built in 70's
GERALD D. HINES, the local developer who made a fortune building high-profile projects around the country, has begun his first major office project in downtown Houston since 1983.
This time, however, it is rehabilitation, not new construction.
He has begun a major renovation of two Houston skyscrapers that he developed two decades ago -- the 50-story 1 Shell Plaza and the 29-story 2 Shell Plaza.
The $95 million project is the largest of any kind in downtown Houston in the last five years.


Art of Freeloading
To the Editor: Living in Washington, D.C., a major tourist area, I was fascinated by Pippin Ross's hints on how to be a successful freeloader ("Your House Is My House," Nov. 24).
Perhaps these further suggestions from the other side of the open front door will be helpful:


Virginia Vogel To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Booth Vogel of Beverly Farms, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Virginia Harris Vogel, to Samuel McClay Yonce Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Yonce of Greenwich, Conn.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Vogel, 27 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and is a sales representative in Boston for Princeton Pharmaceuticals, a division of Bristol Myers-Squibb.
Her father is a private trustee in Boston, counseling corporations on investments.
Her mother, Mabel Harris Vogel, is a teacher and tour guide at Harvard University Art Museums in Cambridge, Mass.


New Yorkers, etc.
There's always been a line drawn in the matter of personal questions, but it seems, as the years go by, that not only is it getting fainter but, for many, it's become invisible.
It's being breached by the thoughtless, the ignorant and the arrogant who assume that literally nothing is sacred, no matter how private or intimate.
These people believe that they have a right to know whatever they wish about another person, and that this leaves them free to ask anything that might assuage their curiosity.
Not long ago, it was considered beyond the pale to ask a friend or acquaintance the cost of an apartment or to inquire about salary.
It's still considered bad form, but it's not beyond the pale.
As almost anyone who owns an apartment can testify, there is little hesitation in asking what was paid for an apartment ("and what's the maintenance?") or, if it's applicable, what the rent is.


From Children's Suffering, Creative Work
THE teen-age boy bent over the arts and crafts table, carefully gluing small tiles of many shapes onto cardboard to form his name: Roland.
Roland S., a patient at High Point Hospital, a private psychiatric institution in Port Chester, said he became interested in tiles while he was painting a landscape about his father during an art workshop.
There were clouds in a blue sky, a bridge and blue water with fish swimming by -- a memory of the times that he fished with his father -- but the picture looked too plain, Roland said.
So he outlined the clouds and the bridge with smooth, shiny tiles and little shells -- and liked the result.


Filling That Potato-Shape Space Inside Everyone
OLD habits die hard.
When I was growing up, it was said that everyone had a potato-shape space inside them that no other vegetable could fill.
My Irish grandmother regularly piled our plates high with potatoes freshly dug from the garden, waxing indignant when we refused third or fourth helpings.
"Potatoes are 90 percent water!" she would say, slathering them with butter.
I still crave potatoes, especially with roasts, grilled meat and fish.
One of my favorite recipes is my English grandmother's roast potatoes, which have the added attraction of being surprisingly low in fat.
She used to make them during the war in London when rationing was in effect.
In those days she would have used lard, but I have substituted light olive oil (you can also use safflower or peanut oil).
The potatoes are not really roasted, although they taste as if they are.
First they are steamed, then they are sauteed with only a tablespoon of oil on top of the stove over a low heat.
As long as the heat is kept very low, the potatoes will turn golden brown and crisp without burning.


Traveling Heavy
"ARE all these bags yours?" asks the taxi driver, looking critically at the heap next to the curb.
"Yes," I say, trying not to sound apologetic.
But as I climb into the back seat, clutching my carry-on, I wonder a little resentfully if he would ask Elizabeth Taylor the same question.
I've read with self-justifying relief about how she travels.
James, my husband, pops into the back seat beside me.
"Got everything?" he asks cheerfully, knowing I will have compulsively counted: his duffel bag, my Pullman-on-wheels, the spare folding suitcase for souvenirs and purchases, the totebag of cooking supplies for our kitchen-equipped cottage, his carry-on, my carry-on, the portable computer, and my shoulder-strap bottomless purse.


Borromini's Rome
To the Editor: Three cheers for Olivier Bernier's insightful article on the glories of Francesco Borromini's Roman churches!
And a word of caution, as well.
Borromini was indeed a genius, in fact, very much an architect's architect.
However, the article does slip into a now all too familiar format -- praise for Borromini at the expense of his rival, Giovanni Lorenzo Bernini.
The two may have been contemporaries, opposites in both personalities and their approach to art.
But we are clearly not dealing with a case of Mozart versus Salieri here.


Who Will Make a Mark on Pennant Races? Keep These Moves in Mind
When people sit around during the winter and predict the winners of the next season's pennant races, the "biggest mistake they make is focusing on the off season's comings and goings," Andy MacPhail says.
"More times than not, it's things you don't foresee that determine the winners."
MacPhail, the highly successful general manager of the Minnesota Twins, probably is correct, but it's easier to anticipate the impact of the addition of Jack Morris to a pitching staff than divine the instant development of Chuck Knoblauch from a minor league Class AA player into a star major league second baseman.


OPEC SETS ACCORD TO CUT OIL OUTPUT
OPEC agreed today to reduce its oil output by a little more than a million barrels a day, but both Saudi Arabia and Iran, the group's two largest members, immediately registered serious and conflicting objections to the accord.
Iran demanded further cuts in production, while Saudi Arabia refused to abide by the quota allocated to it by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.


Anne M. Burke To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas C. Burke of Hobe Sound, Fla., and Watch Hill, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Marion Burke to Stephen Michael Manella, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Manella of Glenview, Ill.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Burke, 25 years old, teaches first grade at the Convent of the Sacred Heart in New York.
She graduated from Kenyon College and received a master's degree in elementary education from Bank Street College of Education.
Her father retired as a partner in the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.


Vienna Lodgings
To the Editor: My husband and I are long-time fans of your wise counsel on affordable accommodations in Europe, but your writers really hit the jackpot with the recommendation of the Pension Nossek in Vienna -- mentioned in at least three stories over the past few years (Jan. 26, 1986, July 15, 1990, and Oct. 7, 1990).
Not noted by your correspondents is the fact that the pension has three large and comfortable suites for two people each, at about $110 a night.
Last September, we stayed in one on the top floor with a spacious bedroom and living room and a view over the auto-free Graben, with the spire of St.
Stephen's Cathedral towering above the 19th-century buildings lining the square.
The price includes all taxes and a Continental breakfast, and is one of the best bargains in expensive Vienna.
The address: Graben 17, A-1, Vienna, Austria, phone 533-7041.
ELLEN R. CAULFIELD San Rafael, Calif.


Ms. Paruolo Marries
Theresa V. Paruolo, the daughter of Mrs.
Howard Balsam of New York, and Peter F. Pastorelle, a son of Christine Pastorelle of Brooklyn and Paul Pastorelle of Palm Springs, Calif., were married yesterday at the Water Club in New York.
The Rev.
Louis Gioia performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.


Holiday Tomorrow
Washington's Birthday will be observed tomorrow. Here are holiday schedules.  NEW YORK


Race Is On to Catch the Cheaters
In the cat-and-mouse game between the race mechanics who build stock cars and the inspectors who make sure they build them legally, the inspectors have acquired perhaps the most effective enforcement weapon of all: a cat who thinks like a mouse.
Gary Nelson, who was good enough as a crew chief to twice win the Daytona 500, stock-car racing's biggest event, is starting his first season as technical director of Nascar's Winston Cup series, the sport's major league.
He knows firsthand how difficult it will be to herd crew chiefs from the ranks of those who bend the rules to those who obey them.


Specialists in Brain-Tickling
Alwin Nikolais and Murray Louis presented a low-key season this month; its very lack of pressure made it one of their best in recent years.
Financial necessity dictated a severe scaling-down of the Nikolais-Louis operation.
Yet this arrangement (two companies fused into one) worked to each choreographer's advantage.
Remote from the hoopla they enjoyed in their international heyday during the 1960's and 70's, both seemed to return to their creative beginnings.
There was a sense again of what Mr.
Nikolais has preached as "the unique gesture." Modern dance, in his view, must start from scratch and not from a premise derived from esthetic tradition.
The Nikolais signature is always recognizable, as is Mr.
Louis's, and virtually embedded in the dance vocabulary they have developed.
It is formal movement full of flickering nuances and dynamic shifts, nonballetic despite its gawky arabesques.
Above all, it is a dance idiom averse to body language.
"Motion, not emotion" was their motto, directed at what they perceived to be the psychologically oriented dances of the 1940's and 50's.


Proposals on Insurance Raise Fears in Elderly
Some of the nation's greatest experts on Medicare live here on the southwest coast of Florida, and they are distressed at the possibility that the Government may limit their Medicare benefits to help finance health care for people who have no insurance at all.
In Washington, Federal officials and members of Congress worry about the plight of 35 million Americans without health insurance.
But in dozens of interviews, retirees living here expressed much more concern about the gaps in their own Medicare coverage than about the health insurance problems of people under 65.


Rachel Wineberg and Mark Kaufman to Marry
Dr. and Mrs.
Julius J. Wineberg of Waukegan, Ill., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Rachel Mary Wineberg and Mark Samuel Kaufman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Samuel Kaufman of Scarsdale, N.Y.


Business Diary/February 9-14
COMPANIES Dow Corning Comes to Grips With Its Image Problem


Toys 'R' Ageless - and Timely
A soon-to-be-65 grandfather dropped in on the toy fair the other day, thinking he'd have a quick look and still get to the office on time.
He emerged three hours later, drenched in childhood.
The fair has been a fixture in New York City for 90 years.
Its 1,500 exhibits pull more than 20,000 buyers, overwhelmingly male, even though mothers and grandmothers might be better attuned.


'If I Lost Every Single Penny, We Would Never Look Back'
Whoever invented the saying "nice guys finish last" probably worked in the theater.
So talking with Roger Horchow on the eve of his Broadway debut as the co-producer of the new Gershwin musical "Crazy for You" makes you fear for his safety.
"I've read about the prima donnas," he says in his slow Texas drawl, "which just doesn't suit me at all." Good Lord.
Good luck.


This Week
It's always fun to try something new each season, so add a few unknowns to your seed and plant orders, like peanuts, hardy kiwis or an old-fashioned apple tree.
Gradually build a butterfly garden.
I'm adding a butterfly bush and a spicebush to my garden, and I plan to plant more verbena, sweet peas, nicotiana and salvia to attract butterflies, which love nectar plants.


Political Talk
Holtzman Cries Foul
So much for losing gracefully.


In Rematch, Coleman Over Barkley Again
The real Charles Barkley returned tonight in the second game of a Philadelphia-New Jersey home-and-home series, but the rejuvenated Nets won again anyway, 107-99, to claim their season series from the 76ers, three games to two.
Barkley, who took only 7 shots and scored a mere 6 points last Wednesday night against New Jersey in the Spectrum, fired 15 shots from the floor on Friday.
He made 6, including a 3-pointer, and finished with 23 points, a game-high 12 rebounds, 4 assists and 3 steals.


Proposed Legislative Lines Provoke Complaints
IF newly drawn legislative districts take effect statewide next year as proposed, Mount Vernon will be represented in Albany by two state senators and three assemblymen -- an excess of riches, some in that city say; a key to disenfranchisement, others say.
Mount Vernon, whose 67,000 residents packed into 4.2 square miles make it the ninth most densely populated city in the United States, has a large minority population.
This means it is a key element in the creation of federally inspired minority districts, or those designed to make it possible and even likely for a minority candidate to win.


A Rare Breed, Satire Thrives In Polish 'Zoo'
In the heady days after the Polish Communist Party joined the dustbin of history, the political jokes that had long served as collective catharsis abruptly evaporated.
The Communists, always good for a bittersweet laugh as long as they wielded power, lost their comic value as soon as the forces of history turned on them.
The Solidarity titans who took power were exempted from humor.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE SECRET PILGRIM, by John le Carre. (Ballantine, $5.99.) With the erosion of Communism threatening his job description, Ned, a protege of George Smiley, reminisces about his adventures in the cold war.
"Story elides into story; flashback and flash-forward, reminiscence, analysis and prognosis are lucidly and elegantly controlled," William Boyd said here last year.
"Indeed, 'The Secret Pilgrim' is, technically, Mr. le Carre's most magisterial accomplishment."
DARKNESS VISIBLE: A Memoir of Madness, by William Styron. (Vintage, $8.) Seven years ago, William Styron, the author of "Lie Down in Darkness" and "Sophie's Choice," was overtaken by despair so deep and black that it made "depression" seem a "wimp of a word" for what was really a "howling tempest in the brain." But he fought off thoughts of suicide, and drugs that only seemed to intensify the pain, and is now working on another novel.
In 1990 our reviewer, Victoria Glendinning, said: "The most encouraging sentence in this honest and illuminating book is Mr. Styron's assertion that 'for me the real healers were seclusion and time.' He came through. We give thanks for his sake and for the sake of American writing."


Pat Buchanan's Politics of Pain
He started his New Hampshire primary campaign intending to push President Bush back to old-time Republican religion.
Then he came to New Hampshire, where businesses have failed in record numbers, unemployment in some towns has exceeded 20 percent and welfare rolls have swollen.
Meet the new Patrick Buchanan.
Now the archconservative journalist campaigns by assailing "vulture capitalism." Now the thundering apostle of free-market economics proclaims that "conservatism is about more than the constitutional right of big fishes to eat little fishes."


The Winds of Peace Buffet Connecticut
A rich mix of history and fate combined to create the specialized culture of military manufacturing that has thrived in Connecticut.
Since the Revolutionary War, when George Washington bought his cannon here, through the days of Samuel Colt's Civil War arms empire, the Winchester trench mortar of World War I and later the Seawolf nuclear submarine, hundreds of Connecticut companies and hundreds of thousands of residents have found a niche in supplying the tools of war.
But the onslaught of the recession and the end of the cold war are forcing a stressful re-evaluation of the old military connections with Washington.
Layoff announcements from both Pratt &amp; Whitney, the jet engine maker in East Hartford, and the General Dynamics Electric Boat division in Groton have crystallized the concerns, as the state braces for 16,400 layoffs from those two companies alone over the next six years


Corrections
A report and a headline in the Travel Advisory column on Jan. 19 misidentified a New York State court that ruled in a lawsuit against Zenith Travel, a travel agency in New York City, and misstated the ruling.
The court was the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court; it affirmed a lower court's decision to deny Zenith's motion to dismiss the case.
The report also referred incorrectly to the status of the case.
It is not likely to go to trial soon.


A Life in the Theater II


Risa Mish Plans May Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Joel R. Mish of New Orleans have announced the engagement of their daughter, Risa Mish, to John Albert Lauricella, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Lauricella of East Hampton, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mish, 28 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
She graduated from Cornell University and its law school.
Her father retired as the district director in New Orleans of the United States Customs Service.
Her mother, Judith Mish, is a former account executive at Germaine Monteil Cosmetics.


Low-Strung


BEST SELLERS: February 16, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
HIDEAWAY, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
2
2
19
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
3
3
8
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
4
1
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $21.95.) A dinner party, attended by a woman, her former husband and their two grown children, reveals family strains and love.
5
4
4
LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $21.95.) The fifth volume of "The Corps" tells of an attempt to rescue marines during World War II.
6
6
4
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $21.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware to the rescue of an actress menaced by a man recently released from prison.
7
13
2
FUGITIVE NIGHTS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $22.) Three people on the trail of a dangerous fugitive, through the glamour spots and desert areas of Palm Springs, Calif.
8
1
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles.
9
10
3
McNALLY'S SECRET, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $21.95.) The sleuth Archy McNally's pursuit of a stolen block of priceless stamps uncovers scandals on Florida's Gold Coast.
10
8
13
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the life of Edwina Winfield.
11
1
GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Delacorte, $20.) The private eye V. I. Warshawski probes a case involving pet dogs, a man's disappearance and Chicago scandals.
12
9
26
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
13
5
5
BLINDSIGHT, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $21.95.) A woman physician seeks to find the cause of a series of strange deaths of Manhattan yuppies.
14
7
18
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
15
11
3
SUCH DEVOTED SISTERS, by Eileen Goudge. (Viking, $22.) Jealousy, betrayal, vengeance and love mold the lives of four sisters.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
2
3
11
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
3
2
18
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How four men plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
4
4
13
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5
5
5
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers Group West, $22.95.) A lawyer's presentation of the case for believing that the C.I.A. was involved in the death of John F. Kennedy.
6
6
11
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A reporter's account of an N.B.A. season spent with Michael Jordan and the Bulls.
7 *
11
7
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning.
8
7
22
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
9 *
8
14
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
10
1
SEIZE THE MOMENT, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The former President defines the challenges America faces in the newly changed world and what our country should do about them.
11
14
8
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) An Auschwitz survivor's story, in comic-book form.
12
19
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic France.
13 *
15
35
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
14
10
25
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Thoughts on life's commonplaces. (LP)
15
9
15
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel.
16 *
29
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) The changing role of today's male.
17 *
12
9
THE WORLD IS MY HOME, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) The autobiography of the popular novelist. (LP)
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
3
11
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Financial advice.
2
2
6
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
3
1
11
THE BEST TREATMENT, by Isadore Rosenfeld. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Advice from a physician.
4
4
7
THE CARBOHYDRATE ADDICT'S DIET, by Rachael F. Heller and Richard F. Heller. (Dutton, $19.95.) How to cope with this addiction.
5
11
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.
6 *
1
KEEPING THE LOVE YOU FIND, by Harville Hendrix. (Pocket, $22.) Counsel for single people about maintaining a loving relationship.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
UNTO THE SONS, by Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) Mr.
Talese has brought his enormous reportorial industry to bear on his own family, especially his Italian-born father's side, meticulously reconstructing not only a personal history but a portrait of a way of life now far distant in time and space.
FREEDOM FROM FEAR: And Other Writings, by Aung San Suu Kyi. (Viking, cloth, $25; Penguin, paper, $12.) This collection of work by the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize winner offers her insights into Burmese political history and philosophy; liberal democratic movements, she believes, have been suppressed but not extinguished by Japanese occupation and the Burmese military.
THE LOST FATHER, by Mona Simpson. (Knopf, $22.) This lyrical, astute novel eloquently renders the tumultuous emotional state of a woman totally consumed with looking for her father.
UNDER THE 82ND AIRBORNE, by Deborah Eisenberg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) Dark, complex, thematically opulent short stories conveying an atmosphere of beleaguered disorientation.
THE WRECKING YARD: Stories, by Pinckney Benedict. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $19.) Stories, often violent, steeped in the physical world, ultimately moved by the mess man has made of it.
THE WORLD OF BIBLICAL LITERATURE, by Robert Alter. (Basic Books, $23.) A persuasive exploration of whether the books of the Hebrew Bible
can
be read as literature and of how to relate the literary art of the authors to their religious environment.
HIGH COTTON, by Darryl Pinckney. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) A rich, dense first novel whose wordy, alienated narrator, a black fourth-generation college graduate, is obsessed with racial scenarios but will not conform to any of them.


Greene's Lateral Move to Miami
As an All-Pro defensive lineman with the Pittsburgh Steelers for 13 years, with four Super Bowl victories, and five years as a defensive-line coach with the team, Joe Greene seemed a natural choice to succeed Chuck Noll who resigned as coach at the conclusion of this past season.
Greene was encouraged to be interviewed for the job, but found the invitation was merely a courtesy and a formality.
The Steelers' president, Dan Rooney, decided to hire the Kansas City defensive coordinator, Bill Cowher, who, like Greene, had no head-coaching experience.


CAMPUS LIFE: Wisconsin; Standardized Test Assailed as Unfair By Administrators
Hundreds of juniors here will take a standardized assessment test this month despite opposition from university administrators, faculty members and students.
The test, which is intended to measure math and English skills, is part of a systemwide pilot program mandated last February by the Board of Regents, the governing body of the University of Wisconsin system.


Chicago To Let U.S. Goalie Go
Bob Pulford, general manager of the Chicago Blackhawks, who own the rights to United States goaltender Ray LeBlanc, said today that he expected Leblanc to play at least one game with the Blackhawks this season and then move on to another National Hockey League team through the expansion draft.
"This is a great steppingstone for him," Pulford said.
"But goaltending is not one of our weak areas."


CAMPUS LIFE: Occidental; Suspension For Oral Abuse Spurs a Debate
An Occidental College peer board here suspended Tim Usher, a sophomore from Tarzana, Calif., in early February after finding that he had used abusive language during an argument with another student.
Mr.
Usher is appealing his suspension to the college's associate dean of students in a case that highlights issues involving political correctness and free speech on college campuses.
At least at Occidental, the debate is still strong.
In October, Mr.
Usher tried to enter a locked residence hall to visit a friend, he said.
Knocking on the glass front doors, he attracted the attention of the hall director, Jenn Roth, a senior from La Porte, Ind., a public policy major.
Ms.
Roth said that only students with keys were allowed to enter the hall.
They began arguing and Mr.
Usher knocked repeatedly on the doors, he said, hoping another student would hear him and let him in.


Students Do Community Work In School Hours
ON Wednesday afternoons last semester, when most New Jersey high school students were still in school, Liz Gottfried, a sophomore at Princeton High School, boarded a school-provided bus for Trenton, where she volunteered her time at a center for homeless children.
Her classmate Chip Unruh was at a Princeton elementary school helping pupils at an arts and crafts program.
Princeton High School is one of only a handful of public schools in New Jersey with extensive community service programs conducted largely within the regular school day.
Sophomores at the school are required to volunteer or do career exploration work for at least one semester, usually on Wednesdays after lunch.
Given the choice between helping others or careerism, the majority choose service.


Another Reason For Rejection
To the Editor:
In his article about rap  [ "On Rap, Symbolism and Fear," Feb. 2 ] , Jon Pareles neglects to explain fully the main reason why mainstream listeners turn away from it: it's not music.
The objections have nothing to do with racism or with the message of the lyrics.
I dislike white rap as much as I dislike black rap.
Loud pounding rhythms with shouted lyrics and no melody do not constitute music.
Rap is not intelligible, it has no continuity or structure, and it certainly lacks melody and harmony.


Student Project May Ais Economies of Poor Countries
Undergraduate researchers at the University of Rochester want to help the world, or at least the third world, help itself.
It would be economically and environmentally advantageous for third-world countries to tap into their own energy resources, said Ben Ebenhack, a petroleum engineer and research associate at the university's Frederick Douglass Institute for African and African American Studies.
Working under an $18,000 contract from the World Bank, Mr.
Ebenhack and a team of five students have created an economic model of the cost variables for drilling natural gas wells in countries including Mozambique, Bolivia and Bangladesh.


More to Gathers's Suit
Ever since the cardiologist who treated Hank Gathers before the Loyola Marymount star's death in 1990 agreed last year to pay his family $1 million, lawyers representing the player's mother, LUCILLE GATHERS, and his son, AARON CRUMP, have been squabbling over how to divide the money.


Parental Involvement In Children's Classes
Re: "Where Parents Are a Part of the Fun of Learning," the Feb. 2 article about the Montclair Cooperative School:
Had the reporter wandered just one block farther west on Chestnut Street, he would have found an equally remarkable school having a similar educational mission, but with one important difference -- that of being a public school.


Gifts to the Fund by Estates and Trusts
Following is a list of estates and trusts whose gifts were received before the beginning of the current campaign: TRUSTS First Name M.I.
Last Name


Hamburg
From the delicate spires of its church steeples to the towering cranes that arch over the busiest port on the Elbe, Hamburg is a city that mixes grace, wealth and culture with commerce, trade and sin.
Nestled around two pristine lakes and a warren of narrow canals, downtown Hamburg is invaded by ice skaters during the coldest days of winter and filled with flitting sailboats in the warmer months.
One of Europe's most important ports for the last 800 years, Hamburg, unlike many German cities, looks outward rather than in.
Anglophilia is a municipal pastime.
English -- in some of London's plummier accents -- is spoken often and well, and tweed skirts, cashmere and pearls, and nautical styles are everywhere.
It is a city of old money, based on trade, manufacturing and publishing, and one that prides itself as much on its conservative demeanor as on its liberal political bent.


Miss Bachmann Plans to Marry
Thomas A. Bachmann of Clinton, N.J., and Sarah P. Bachmann of Flemington, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Hillary Ann Bachmann, to Dale Edward Miller, the son of Mrs.
Ross A. Miller of Darien, Conn., and the late Mr.
Miller.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Bachmann, 26 years old, is a merchandise coordinator at Tiffany &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University.
Her father is the senior vice president of Tucker Anthony Inc., a New York investment banking concern.
Her mother is a marketing manager for A.T.&amp;T. in Bedminster, N.J.


Who Is Female? Science Can't Say
For decades, rumors have persisted that some of the best female athletes have in fact been men.
As a result women have been subjected to tests, requiring certificates of femininity before they can compete in national or international events.
But the very idea of certifying femaleness raises a thorny question: Who is a man and who is a woman?
For all its dazzling discoveries about the genes that guide a human embryo along its path to maleness or femaleness, science, it appears, cannot provide a simple answer.


I Do Know What I'm Missing!
To the Sports Editor:
Why did CBS spend all that money to acquire the rights to the Olympics only to fill their broadcasts with an endless stream of behind-the-scene, before-the-scene and after-the-scene human interest stories?


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Essex, Conn. 305,000
33 Book Hill Woods Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; pool, walk-up attic, solarium, 1.1 acres; taxes $3,606.
Lyme, Conn. 169,000
112 Blood Street  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 60-year-old contemporary; whirpool bath, library, secluded setting, 3 acres; taxes $1,162.
Wilton, Conn. 525,000
28 Surrey Glen  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; c/a, custom moldings, brook, 2.2. acres; taxes $6,448.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 370,000
194 Millwood Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old contemporary; fireplace, w/b stove, eat-in kitchen, playroom, office; taxes $8,110.
Larchmont, N.Y. 505,000
2 Dante Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 52-year-old colonial; fireplace, family room, eat-in kitchen, brick patio, playroom; taxes $11,035.
New Rochelle, N.Y. 370,000
9 Aviemore Drive 4-bedroom, 3-bath, 64-year-old brick colonial; fireplace, screened porch, eat-in kitchen, center hall; taxes $5,594.
OTHER AREAS Madison, N.J. 222,000
12 Ardsleigh Drive
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old expanded ranch; fireplace, family room, laundry room; taxes $3,493.
Howell, N.J. 130,000
14 Canann Court
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; patio, deck, fenced yard, w/w carpeting; taxes $2,771.
Levittown, L.I. 135,000
79 Orchid Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Louis S. Goldberg; Tracking the State's Drivers and Vehicles
LOUIS S. GOLDBERG has been Commissioner of the state Department of Motor Vehicles for one year now, and in that time the department has probably gone through more changes than in any 12-month period in its 75-year history.
Mr.
Goldberg, 54 years old, is a native of Reading, Pa., and now lives in Weston.
He was a vice president for human resources at two major companies in the decade preceding his move to government service, first at Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons, from 1979 to 1983, and then at Playtex Inc. in Stamford, from 1984 to 1989.


Police Drug Tests for Drivers Are Ruled Reliable
A RECENT ruling by a Suffolk County judge could make it easier for the police to introduce a controversial test as evidence in cases of driving under the influence of drugs.
The test, whose reliability has provoked nationwide debate, was ruled scientifically valid by Judge Peter Dounias in First District Court in Hauppauge.
He ruled that it could be used as evidence in the nonjury trial of a woman from Suffolk who was charged with operating a vehicle while under the influence of cocaine.
The woman was found guilty and is to be sentenced in April.


Cuomo Puts Off Medicaid Cut After Pleas From Pharmacists
Pharmacists across New York State envisoned economic disaster for their businesses, and Medicaid patients expressed deep misgivings for their health yesterday, as the state went to the brink of a long-planned cut in Medicaid payments for prescription drugs -- then postponed action for a few days.
Under intense pressure from pharmacy trade groups as a midnight deadline approached, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo late Friday night put off a 10 percent cut in the state's $550 million program of reimbursing pharmacies for the prescription drugs they dispense to 2.5 million poor people covered by Medicaid.


Mutual Funds; Adjustables Prove Steady, but Dull
Adjustable-rate mortgage funds were created a few years ago as a lower-risk version of Ginnie Mae funds, for which refinancings can cause high-rate mortgages to be replaced with lower-rate ones.
Homeowners holding adjustable-rate mortgages have less incentive to refinance their loans in a falling-rate environment.
Share prices of the adjustable-rate mortgage funds have been less volatile than Ginnie Mae share prices, just as fund sponsors promised.
But there is a trade-off.
For the first four years of their existence, the adjustable-rate mortgage funds have underperformed Ginnie Mae funds on a total-return basis.


Corrections
The Sunday Outing article last Sunday, about Belleayre Mountain in the Catskills, misstated the skiing admission policy for children under 12.
A lift ticket is $25 on weekends and holidays, and $21 on weekdays.


Headliners; Disconnect
A panel set up in 1989 to make recommendations on strengthening the American semiconductor industry, which produces the computer chips that are the heart of electronic equipment, gave plenty of free advice to the Government.
The White House apparently thought it was worth every penny.
Last week, after the National Advisory Committee on Semiconductors issued its final report, its chairman, Ian Ross, called a news conference to express his disappointment.
"I guess that we will go out of business," said Mr.
Ross.
"We don't really see that there is a role" for the group.
The problem is that the committee's recommendations often had to do with the Government putting up money to further research or provide low-interest venture capital for new companies.
To the Bush Administration, this smacked of "industrial policy," which the White House wanted none of.
In the meantime, said Mr.
Ross, a former president of Bell Laboratories, the United States continues to lose ground in consumer electronics.


Knits Picked Here, And That's Not All
Things are looking up on Fifth Avenue in the 50's, where little by little the "going out of business" stores are being replaced by chic boutiques.
Think about Henri Bendel's spectacular new emporium and the Takashimaya that is under construction.
And don't forget Bijan, Christian Dior and Kenneth Jay Lane.
The newest bright spot is St.
John, which opened its massive glass doors on Thursday at 665 Fifth Avenue, between 52d and 53d Streets.


Risa Plaskowitz, Student, Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin H. Plaskowitz of Bardonia, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Risa Karen Plaskowitz to Dr.
Todd Bradley Askenas, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter J. Askenas of West Nyack, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Plaskowitz, 24 years old, graduated from Cornell University and is studying law at Fordham University.
Her father teaches sixth grade at Public School 42 in New York.
Her mother, Gail Plaskowitz, is a special-education teacher at Seward Park High School in New York.


Sharing Memories of a Boy Within the Brute
There was the verdict -- guilty as charged -- and then came Mike Tyson walking through that ever-present gantlet of reporters amid shouts from his admirers.
Around him were the bright lights of TV cameras.
And in the midst of the hubbub, Tyson was moving forward, holding his emotions as neutral as he could.
Guilty as charged.
It was a moment that, like so many others involving Tyson, will be frozen in time -- a slice of grim business in the variegated odyssey of a street hood who meant to be more -- and for a while was.


NEW YORK REPORT FINDS DRUG ABUSE RIFE IN SHELTERS
Eighty percent of the homeless men housed in New York City's vast armory shelters and 30 percent of the adults in shelters for families use drugs or alcohol, most commonly cocaine, , an extensive survey by a mayoral commission has found.
This is the first survey of the homeless in city shelters to include widespread urine testing as well as face-to-face interviews in which the residents were questioned about drug and alcohol abuse.
What emerged was a portrait of a far more troubled population than had previously been documented.
Only a minority of the homeless needed just housing to get back on their feet, the survey found.
New Agency Is Sought
In addition to extensive drug and alcohol use, the survey found, the city's homeless are hobbled by interwoven afflictions: extreme poverty, mental illness, AIDS, domestic violence and lack of education and job skills.
The survey, which tested and interviewed about 1,000 of the city's 15,500 adult shelter residents, was conducted over three weeks for a mayoral commission studying the problems of the city's shelter system.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
MORRIS AND CIRCLE
"Designing Utopia: The Art of William Morris and His Circle," an exhibition opening today at the Katonah Museum, is believed to be the first American survey of the English designer's work and the work of the contemporaries he influenced -- Sir Edward Burne-Jones, D. G. Rossetti, W. A. S. Benson and others.


Customers Feeling Less Than Friendly To Friendly Bankers
Several weeks ago, with a record number of homeowners seeking new mortgages to take advantage of low interest rates, Bank of America imposed a hefty new fee on refinancing applications in California.
To the San Francisco-based bank, which was struggling to keep up with the immense demand for refinancing, the fee was a reasonable way to discourage all but serious customers from applying, especially since the fee would be applied to the transaction's closing costs or refunded if the loan was rejected.
But to many consumers, the fee -- 1.5 percent of the loan amount, up to a maximum of $3,000 -- was yet another example of arrogance and high-handedness at financial institutions.
"It's outrageous," said Ken McEldowney, executive director of Consumer Action, a consumer advocacy group in San Francisco.
"In the eyes of the consumer, the bank is saying, 'We're so big that you don't have a choice, and if you want to do business with us, you'll have to toe the line.' "


Review/Music; French Baroque Program
It was ladies' night at Merkin Concert Hall on Thursday, when James Richman and his Concert Royal presented a program of French Baroque cantatas.
With no slight intended toward Kevin Deas, a baritone who gave a ringing account of Jean-Philippe Rameau's "Thetis," the most fascinating aspect of the performances overall was the juxtaposition of two fine sopranos, Julianne Baird and Christine Brandes.
And each was given fullest scope in a work by Elisabeth Jacquet de la Guerre: Ms.
Baird in "L'Isle de Delos" and Ms.
Brandes in "Le Passage de la Mer Rouge."
The contrast was striking.
Ms.
Brandes sounded fresher and more penetrating but at times somewhat matter-of-fact.
Ms.
Baird communicated deeper, more mystical meanings and showed her familiar gift for subtle, glinting ornamentation.


Jill Winetsky Has Wedding
Jill Loren Winetsky, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles N. Winetsky of Linden, N.J., was married yesterday evening to Michael Gary Solomon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Solomon of New York.
Rabbi Steven M. Dworken officiated at the Headquarters Plaza Hotel in Morristown, N.J.
Mrs.
Solomon, 26 years old, is an account supervisor at Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc., the public-relations firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father is a lawyer in Linden.
Her mother, Ellen Winetsky, is the chairman of the mathematics department at Bruriah High School in Elizabeth, N.J.


English Garden Limits Visitors
The number of people allowed into Sissinghurst, the garden in England created by the writer Vita Sackville-West and her husband, Sir Harold Nicolson, will be limited this year to reduce the damage caused by crowds of visitors.
In the 25 years since the garden at Sissinghurst Castle, about an hour's drive south of London, came under the care of Britain's National Trust, the number of visitors has increased from 20,000 in 1967 to nearly 200,000 last year.
About 450 visitors will be allowed into the garden at one time and may stay as long as they wish.
On the busiest days, later arrivals will have to wait their turn until people in the garden leave.
Some may be asked to return another day.
A spokesman for the National Trust said the average time spent in the garden was about one and a half hours, though this depends on the weather.
Sundays are always busy; visitors are advised to call ahead to find out whether a wait is likely.
The Sissinghurst shop, restaurant and surrounding fields, woods and lake will be open to visitors.
Sissinghurst Castle Garden, near Cranbrook TN17 2AB, Kent, (580) 712850, opens from April 1 until Oct. 15, from 1 to 6:30 P.M.
Tuesday to Friday; 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Saturday, Sunday and Good Friday (April 17).
Admission is about $8.30 and $4.25 for children and the elderly, except Sunday when it is about $9.25 and $4.60.


CULTIVATING THEIR OWN GARDENS
I want to thank Jason DeParle for his article "Cultivating Their Own Gardens" (Jan. 5).
It depicted the success of Cochran Gardens, a public housing development in an inner-city community in St.
Louis and portrayed the various facets of self-sufficiency generated by a resident management corporation.
There are over 200 resident organizations training community executives to lead their neighbors up the ladder of socio-economic opportunity in this country.
This remarkable movement is nothing less than a populist revolution.
As your article illustrates, resident leaders cannot accomplish the awesome task of moving families out of dependency alone.
We must sweep away the legal and economic barriers that perpetuate the incidence of poverty and despair in our nation's inner cities.


An Addict's Tale
WHEN I WAS STILL young enough to rise before my parents on Sunday mornings, I would run barefoot even in winter to the bottom of the driveway and lug in the loglike Times, which in those days came wrapped by the local distributor in colorful plastic bags left over from Wonder bread.
Back in the house, I would peel away its outer sections -- the dread, perplexing news, the regimental financial tables -- to unfold the Magazine, so cold and flattened there in the middle that it hardly opened: the innermost bud.
At once, I turned within it to the crossword, which was as yet promising and unfulfilled, like the day.
For a boy from the suburbs of Philadelphia, the puzzle suggested the warrenlike mystery of New York City itself: a huge apartment block of tiny, numbered rooms, each with a uniquely apt, but missing, occupant.
I studied the puzzle carefully then, because it would be my last chance to see it unadulterated; indeed the adults were soon staggering in, coffee cup in one hand, pen in the other, ready to begin the ritual slaughter.
For my father's method owed something to that of the weekend hunter: shoot at whatever moves first.
He began the puzzle by answering as many Acrosses as possible, without reference to the Downs.
Later, if the Downs contradicted his entries, he merely overwrote them.
Occasionally he would call for help from my mother, whose answers, presumed accurate, were squeezed in faithfully, regardless of length.
Within an hour the grid would be left an inky mess, half gibberish, half sense.
"Finished!" my father would crow -- and indeed every last apartment was occupied: many, it seemed, by squatters.


Places, Gentlemen, Please


Electrical Repairs Require Knowledge of Safety Codes
BEFORE undertaking any project involving wiring, ascertain from the building inspector the electrical and safety codes, but never begin electrical repairs without turning off the power.
Most household wiring consists of cable, several solid wires grouped together in flexible plastic or metal sheathing.
Plastic-sheathed cable is called nonmetallic sheathed cable or Romex, a brand name.
Metal-sheathed cable is called armored cable or BX, another brand.


Progress This Is Not
To the Editor:
It is no secret that music began with rhythm, progressed to melody and reached its developmental culmination with harmony -- not to oversimplify the case.


Chocolate Profits Are Sweeter as Gift for Neediest
The outbreak of bulging waistlines and achy teeth at Intermediate School 53 in Far Rockaway, Queens, is a mystery no more.
In a terse statement, a group known variously as the "Chocolate Champs" and "Mrs. Rachman's class" has admitted to concocting and distributing the irresistible confections that have plagued the Queens school.
"People like our chocolates," they wrote without pity or remorse to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"We make our chocolates using molds. We use holiday molds for special occasions. Students, teachers, and parents' associations buy our chocolates."


At Work; When Japan Inc. Comes to America
Jiro Ishizaka has an American-style work schedule.
Does this mean that Mr.
Ishizaka works a little Tuesday through Thursday, but saves most of his energy for planning, executing and recovering from a weekend carouse -- the portrait of the typical American worker drawn recently by a Japanese politician?
Not exactly.
Mr.
Ishizaka, the Los Angeles-based chairman of the Union Bank, which is 75 percent owned by the Bank of Tokyo, is a self-described "salaryman." Like other Japanese salarymen, he puts in a long day at the office.
His schedule, Mr.
Ishizaka believes, makes him much like many Americans.
"Look at lawyers in the U.S.," he said.
"They work so hard. They don't mind working through the night."


Abused Child Dies; Foster Mother Questioned
A 6-year-old girl, severely beaten and sexually abused, died yesterday and her 4-year-old sister, who had also been abused, was taken to a Bronx hospital in critical condition, the police said.
The girls' foster mother, Mary Ann Ayala, and four other people who were in the apartment were being questioned last night in connection with the case, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.


Wylie Finishes 2d With a Winner's Glee
In the last 11 United States men's figure skating championships, Paul Wylie has finished 10th, 5th, 4th, 5th, 5th, 5th, 2d, 3d, 2d, 3d and 2d.
In the three world championships in which he has skated, Wylie has finished 9th, 10th and 11th.
In his only previous Olympics, in 1988 in Calgary, he finished 10th.
In short, he had never arrived.
Tonight, he arrived.
He won the silver medal in the XVI Olympic Winter Games.
Several coaches and former skaters said he and not Viktor Petrenko of the Unified Team should have won the gold.
Wylie said he did not know, and he did not seem to care.


Petrenko Gets a Gold, Wylie a Silver Surprise
On a night none of the world's leading figure skaters performed their best, Viktor Petrenko of Ukraine convinced the judges he was slightly better than the others as he won the gold medal at the Albertville Olympics, the first in singles for an athlete from what was once the Soviet Union.
And in a stunning triumph over himself more than anyone else, Paul Wylie of Denver, the 27-year-old Harvard graduate who had never won a national championship in 11 tries, skated the second-highest scored program to claim a silver medal he could scarcely have imagined at any time in his long career.


Rockefeller Family Tries to Keep A Vast Fortune From Dissipating
The Rockefeller name is synonymous with the summits of wealth and philanthropic largesse.
The family has founded museums, universities, philanthropic foundations, and some of the country's biggest national parks.
But, like so many Americans, the Rockefellers -- albeit on a grander scale -- are worried that their future generations may not be able to enjoy the life or influence the family now has.
And so they have begun a vigorous effort to bolster their fortune, which they currently estimate at $5 billion to $10 billion.


The Wink In 'Happy Fella' Is Still There
We really ought to be tossing something in the air this morning.
Our hats.
Confetti.
The bambino.
In a world where things usually go wrong, "The Most Happy Fella" has come through splendidly.
Success has
not
given it a swelled head.
Nobody has thought to gild the sets or pad the orchestra, which consists exactly of two tuxedoed pianists.
Frank Loesser's musical is every bit as warm and endearing at the Booth Theater as it was last summer, when it proved to be a gargantuan hit for the tiny Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam, Conn.


Houston Journal; Cattle Brands: Rite of Bureaucracy
In a ritual that dates from more than a century ago, Charlie H. Allen carefully drew the number 11, followed by the letter X. Then he painstakingly signed his name into a ledger, the beautiful script flowing incongruously from his work-roughened hands.
Dressed in jeans, boots and a cap from an agricultural supply company, Mr.
Allen sat surrounded by computer terminals and civil servants in the downtown building that houses the Harris County Clerk's office.
He made the trek, required once every decade, to record his livestock brand.


An Uneasy Look in the Mirror
To the Sports Editor:
I woke up Tuesday to a glaring headline: Mike Tyson Guilty of Rape.


Car Leasing
To the Editor: In further response to your article onrental cars in Europe (Practical Traveler, Oct. 20) and the letter about leasing (Dec. 15), my experience may add new light.
Several years ago we leased a Peugeot for three weeks for our vacation in France.
After picking up the new car in Paris, we took off to wonderful places.
The lease stipulated that the car be taken to a Peugeot dealer for servicing when the odometer indicated 1,000 kilometers.


The 1992 Campaign; Difference Among the Democratic Candidates
The five main Democratic Presidential candidates agree with each other more than they disagree.
All, for example, favor much more Federal involvement in areas like education and health.
To one degree or another, they support grants or tax breaks to help develop specific industries.
They emphasize more Government spending on what they call "infrastructure" -- highways, sewer systems, airports and the like.
The Democrats also believe abortions should be basically unrestricted.
But on the following issues, they take somewhat different approach.
MAIN THEME
Brown: The country's policies across the board are misguided because the system is corrupt and politicians are greedy.
Clinton: The middle class has suffered most from the mistaken policies of the last 12 years, and that must be reversed.
Harkin: Old fashioned liberalism is the wave of the future.
Kerrey: The first step toward economic and social revival should be comprehensive national health insurance.
Tsongas: The Government should work with business and not at cross purposes. TAXES
Brown: Replace the existing income tax system with a flat, 13 percent tax on all income and a value-added tax, similar to a national sales tax, on business transactions.
Deductions allowed only for mortgage interest, rent and charitable contributions.
Temporary amnesty for tax evaders.
Give business a tax cut for hiring workers from poor neighborhoods.
Clinton: Cut income taxes of middle class by several hundred dollars a year and offset the cost with tax increases of unspecified size on those with incomes above $200,000.
Cut capital gains tax for investment held at least five years in new businesses.
Give investment tax credit to small and medium sized businesses.
Expand earned income tax credit.
Prohibit businesses from writing off the cost of excessive salaries and bonuses for executives.
Harkin: Give no tax cut to middle class or reduction in capital gains tax.
Provide investment tax credit for specified industries.
Kerrey: Give two-year refundable tax credit worth 20 percent of Social Security and Medicare taxes, which would save a family earning $30,000 about $400 a year.
Increase taxes by an unspecified amount on incomes above about $200,000.
Allow tax credit for investments in plants and machinery.
Cut capital gains tax by not taxing the part of the profit attributable to inflation.
Impose a 4 percent payroll tax on employers and 1 percent on workers to pay for national medical insurance.
Tsongas: Do not cut income taxes.
Tax capital gains on profits from stocks at progressively lower rates depending on how long the stock is held and impose an even lower rate on gains from investments in small businesses.
Raise income taxes on the wealthy.
Increase the gasoline tax by 3 cents to 5 cents a gallon.
Give temporary investment tax credit.
Provide more favorable tax treatment of individual retirement accounts.
MILITARY AFFAIRS
Brown: Cut the military budget in half over the next five years.
Clinton: Cut military spending by one-third over the next five years.
Stop production of the B-2 bomber and the Star Wars missile defense system.
Harkin: Reduce military spending and the size of the armed forces by half over the next 10 years.
Cancel B-2 bomber but continue to develop weapons that might stimulate a useful commercial industry like the V-22 tilt-rotor aircraft.
Rely more on the National Guard and Reserves.
Kerrey: Reduce military spending more than President Bush wants but avoid a meat-ax approach and be careful that the military is large enough and well enough equipped to meet any possible threat.
Tsongas: Reduce military spending by an unspecified amount.
Cut overseas bases rather than those at home.
Require economic rivals like Japan and Germany to bear a larger share of the cost of their own defense.
Stop selling weapons to third-world countries and persuade allies to do the same.
HEALTH
Brown: Install a national health insurance system that bypasses private insurance companies.
Emphasize preventative care, "acupuncture, chiropractic and wellness programs."
Clinton: Require employers to provide insurance coverage for workers or pay an additional tax into a public fund to cover the uninsured.
Establish a Government board to regulate medical-care prices.
Harkin: Bring labor, business and Government experts to a negotiating table to work out the best form of comprehensive national health insurance.
Kerrey: Abolish Medicare, Medicaid and the existing employer-based insurance system.
Pass revenue from new taxes to the states.
Allow people to choose insurance from their state's plan or from private policies that meet minimum Federal standards.
Pay the private companies a fixed amount based on the number of people they enroll.
Have doctor and hospital fees set by the state governments.
Tsongas.
Enroll everyone in a group like the company where they work and provide a public plan for those who are not part of another group.
Have private insurance companies and health maintenance organizations bid for contracts from the groups.
Let sophisticated purchasing agents employed by the groups decide which plan is best for their members in terms of fees and services.
TRADE
Brown: Has not stressed this issue the way the other candidates have.
Clinton: Says he is basically a free-trader.
Blames the Japanese for about one-quarter of the United States's trade difficulty, and says this country should retaliate if Japan does not change its ways.
Otherwise, says businesses, workers and the Government must work together to compete better in international commerce.
Harkin: Supports tougher enforcement of existing trade laws and new forms of retaliation if necessary to force trading partners to open their markets to American goods.
Voted against giving President Bush authority to negotiate a free-trade agreement with Mexico.
Kerrey: Favors whatever steps are needed to force other countries to open their markets.
Voted to give the President authority to negotiate a free-trade agreement with Mexico.
Tsongas.
Says trade restrictions are counterproductive.
Believes the only way the United States can compete in international commerce is to improve the quality of its own products.
Foreign companies should not be allowed to take over certain strategic industries in the United States.


Miss Schuler To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Harold Schuler Jr. of Huntington Valley, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Gretchen Platt Schuler to Andrew Charles Van Buren, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter H. Van Buren of Meadowbrook, Pa.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Schuler, 28 years old, graduated from Dickinson College and is a benefits administrator at the Philadelphia law firm of Pepper, Hamilton &amp; Scheetz.
Her father is the mid-Atlantic advertising manager for The New York Times in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Joan Schuler, teaches fifth grade at the Meadowbrook School.


Ms. Dalton Marries
Theresa Mary Dalton, an assistant public defender with the State of Connecticut, and Michael Kevin Conway, a lawyer, both in Waterbury, Conn., were married there yesterday.
The Rev.
Richard Dill performed the nondenominational Christian ceremony at the Bible Church.


Miss Nicol Wed In Connecticut
Pamela Jane Nicol, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Nicol of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to David Allyn Manuel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Manuel of Culver, Ind.
The Rev.
Charles Smith officiated at the Congregational Church of New Canaan.
Mrs.
Manuel, 26 years old, is a sales representative for Lotus Development Corporation, the computer software manufacturer in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from Colby College.
Her father is the head of the New Canaan office of Laing Construction Inc., a construction company in London.


L. O. Graham Weds Pamela Thomas
Pamela Alexis Thomas, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Thomas of Detroit, was married yesterday to Lawrence Otis Graham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Graham of White Plains.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the ceremony at the St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Graham, 28 years old, is an associate at the management consulting firm of McKinsey &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and cum laude from the Harvard Law School, where she was an editor of The Law Review.
She also received an M.B.A. from Harvard.


Baker's Trip to Nations Unready for Independence
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's journey through six former Soviet republics began a week ago in Moldova with a small scene that set the tone for the whole trip.
When Mr.
Baker's sleek white-and-blue Air Force 707 rolled up to the V.I.P. terminal at Moldova's main airport, there was no one at the bottom of the stairs to greet him.
Karen Groomes, Mr.
Baker's protocol aide, descended the stairs first, looked around, and saw five men standing stiffly about 30 feet away, staring at Mr.
Baker's plane with that deer-caught-in-the-headlights look in their eyes.
It seems that the Moldovans had entertained few state visitors recently, and they had forgotten the drill.
Ms.
Groomes gently motioned them to come to the bottom of the stairs to receive Mr.
Baker in the manner to which he is accustomed.


Tracey McCoy Has Wedding
Tracey Anne McCoy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. McCoy of Boston, and Robert Barry Cleary Jr., a son of Mr.
Cleary of Weston, Mass., and Carol H. Reeve of Melbourne, Fla., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
John Boles, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Paul's Church in Cambridge, Mass.
Mrs.
Cleary, 27 years old, is an account executive at Arch Advertising Company in Windham, N.H., and a graduate of Rollins College.
Her father is a partner in Colley &amp; McCoy Company, a restaurant and real-estate investment company in Windham.


Stop Beating Up on Employees
To the Editor:
When will corporate America wake up?
Workers cannot give their most productive and creative performances within a system that holds them in utter contempt. ("Take This Job and Love It," Jan. 26) The International Business Machines Corporation has an annual review process that will assign failing grades to 10 percent of its workers.
That I.B.M. is not unique is an American disgrace.
Corporate America has a long tradition of beating up its workers, and this tradition is responsible for much of the economic malaise infecting this country.


The Dollar: Up, Up and Away
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
127.88
125.28
130.50
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6265
1.5584
1.4785
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1874
1.1778
1.1528
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7715
1.8390
1.9670
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$353.25
$354.50
$363.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


For Some Seeking Presidency, Winning Isn't the Only Thing
ONE is an out-of-work commercial pilot from Brick Township.
Another is a Rahway homemaker.
A third is a general contractor from Manahawkin, and a fourth is in a Kansas prison, serving time for murder.
What the four share is a mission: to be elected President of the United States this fall.
Though two are registered as candidates with the Federal Election Commission and two are on the ballot for the New Hamphsire primary on Tuesday, their campaigns bear little resemblance to those of the major party candidates.


Celebrating Gifts of the Good Sports
After the jury handed down its guilty verdict in the Mike Tyson trial, the special prosecutor connected the former heavyweight boxing champion to the swaggering athlete and the verdict to a line the public is now drawing for all the miscreants on the fields, the courts and in the ring.
The latter sentiment expressed by the prosecutor, J. Gregory Garrison, is all well and good when applied to Tyson.
The suggestion that Tyson somehow represents professional sports and all that is wrong was a wild punch that unfairly hit a multitude of people below the belt.


L.I. Diggers, and Clams, In a Battle for Survival
It could have been an Arctic dawn, with numbing temperatures and muted sunlight glinting off sheets of ice on a seascape whipped by biting wind.
It was 7 A.M. on the Great South Bay and Jonathan R. Mentzel was raking the bottom for clams under the appraising eyes of his yellow Labrador, Digger.
Harvesting clams is an increasingly hard way of life, indeed almost an obsession, for the Long Island bayman who has been scratching a living out of the bay for 22 of his 39 years


Sunday Menu; '90s Lasagna Is '60s Redux But Veggies Are Co-Stars
Back in the 60's and now again in the 90's lasagna appears to be the company dish of choice for young people.
The difference, for some, is that the new lasagna is vegetarian. (Is chicken Tetrazzini far behind?)
Of course, you can't make lasagna in 20 or 30 minutes.
But there is nothing to stop you from enjoying the flavors and textures in a stove-top version.
And if you want to put a finishing touch to it, you could run it under the broiler at the last minute to brown the Parmesan.


Filling That Potato-Shape Space Inside Everyone
OLD habits die hard.
When I was growing up, it was said that everyone had a potato-shape space inside them that no other vegetable could fill.
My Irish grandmother regularly piled our plates high with potatoes freshly dug from the garden, waxing indignant when we refused third or fourth helpings.
"Potatoes are 90 percent water!" she would say, slathering them with butter.
I still crave potatoes, especially with roasts, grilled meat and fish.
One of my favorite recipes is my English grandmother's roast potatoes, which have the added attraction of being surprisingly low in fat.
She used to make them during the war in London when rationing was in effect.
In those days she would have used lard, but I have substituted light olive oil (you can also use safflower or peanut oil).
The potatoes are not really roasted, although they taste as if they are.
First they are steamed, then they are sauteed with only a tablespoon of oil on top of the stove over a low heat.
As long as the heat is kept very low, the potatoes will turn golden brown and crisp without burning.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayport 145,000
226 Snedecor Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 67-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $4,200.
Levittown 135,000
79 Orchid Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.
Massapequa Park 150,000
25 Eastwoods Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
Sayville 158,000
132 Colton Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Plainedge 161,000
3899 Miller Place  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement; taxes $4,000.
Seaford 172,500
3838 Cordwood Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; basement, 1-car garage, aluminum siding; taxes $4,000.
OTHER AREAS Essex, Conn. 305,000
33 Book Hill Woods Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; pool, solarium, 1.1 acres; taxes $3,606.
New Rochelle, N.Y. 370,000
9 Aviemore Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 64-year-old brick colonial; fireplace, screened porch, eat-in kitchen, center hall; taxes $5,594.
Freehold, N.J. 175,000
3 Longview Avenue
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; c/a, family room, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,459.


Attacking Habits To Battle Pollution
ABOUT a fourth of the county's car owners change their own motor oil to save money.
The bad news is that most of those economy-minded people pour the used motor oil into the nearest storm drain, polluting nearby ground water.
A chapter of the League of Women Voters in Westchester is determined to change the out-of-sight-out-of-mind mentality that has contributed nearly 80 percent of the oil pollution in the Hudson River by using a grant from the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.


Running Business Like Government
To the Editor:
As I was reading "The Gadfly C.E.O.'s Want to Swat" (Feb. 2), I started to think that maybe if the corporate gadfly is successful, people will start to encourage business to be run like government rather than the other way around.
While a number of corporate executives are earning many millions a year, our top elected officials receive substantially less.
The salaries of both corporate and elected officials should be based on an incentive system.
We could determine problems and base part of the chief executive's salary on how the problem was dealt with.
PAUL FEINER  Elmsford, N.Y., Feb. 3  The author is supervisor of the town of Greenburgh, N.Y.


Celebrate Magic, but There's More Work to Be Done
Magic's number goes up today, to hang from the rafters of the Forum in Los Angeles in celebration of Earvin Johnson's brilliant 12-year career as a performing genius of basketball.
No other player has ever retired with so breathtaking a highlight reel.
Or so uncertain a future.
The technicolor of history is already fading into a gray and cloudy present as Johnson's personal struggle for physical/spiritual survival continues to be shaped and spun as a political/commercial campaign.


Review/Music; Andrew Davis Leads New York Philharmonic
What gives us the sense that a space exists within music, the sense that a landscape is taking shape in sound?
The question was raised Thursday night by a subtly colored, tensile performance of Sibelius's Fifth Symphony by Andrew Davis conducting the New York Philharmonic.
Recordings of Sibelius symphonies generally picture mountains and waterfalls from the composer's native Finland on their covers, and Sibelius himself made no secret of his national interests.
But performances like this one made it clear that the associations are not arbitrary.
Mr.
Davis, in fact, treated the score, revised by the composer in 1921, with the sort of disciplined patience good musicians bring to long compositions, knowing from the start that there was much to come and that it would have to unfold at its own pace.
In the first movement, nothing was rushed and each musical texture had its place: the winding thirds of the winds, the sustained calls of the horns, the syncopated patter of the strings.
The main theme is deliberately off balance in every way, beginning on a weak beat and then emphasizing weak beats with disproportionate sustained tones.
Mr.
Davis turned the theme into a leitmotif, its strange, disruptive rhythms gradually becoming more tame as the movement proceeded.


'A Marginal Jew'
To the Editor:
The two attacks made in your columns (Letters, Jan. 19) on my review of John P. Meier's book "A Marginal Jew" are strange.
Jacob Neusner is justly celebrated as a pioneer in the critical evaluation of the attribution of statements to named sages in rabbinic texts.
It is odd that he apparently advocates a fundamentalist attitude to the sayings of Jesus in the Gospels ("No Judaism known to us maintains its founder superior to the Torah's teaching, as Jesus does in His own words . . . and none declares, as does Jesus in His own words, that Israel should deny at least two of the Ten Commandments").
Father Meier himself favors a far more cautious approach.


2 Shows Where Rich Colors Glow
THE turn-of-the-century stained glass at the Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum has the same luminous colors as the state-of-the-art enameling in the New Jersey Designer Craftsmen Gallery, a few blocks away in downtown New Brunswick.
But the glass techniques, time frames and art styles of the two exhibitions set them far apart.
The six stained- and leaded-glass windows and a group of drawings for window projects at the Zimmerli were selected from the Gordon Henderson Collection of Stained Glass Designs, a recent gift to the museum.
Gordon Henderson, a third-generation stained-glass maker who lives in Towaco, had saved sample windows and drawings made by his family's firm and other regional studios.


POSTINGS: 'Millionaire's Row'; A Campus Castle for Sale
King's College in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., is selling its campus, including the three stately homes that lie along its "Millionaire's Row."
The sale of a 15-bedroom stone castle on 11 acres, an imposing, six-bedroom white-frame colonial on 13 acres and a smaller colonial on 1.75 acres are among the steps in the college's move to Warwick, N.Y., in the summer of 1993.
For 40 years, the 83-acre campus has been in Briarcliff Manor, which was created at the turn of the century as one of the nation's first planned communities and a playground for the wealthy.


Corrections
The headline last Sunday on a report about the engagement of Michael Dana Bernot referred incompletely to the bride-to-be.
She is Randye Sue Resnick.


What's Inside the Helmet Counts Too
Explain why you think you're a great football player.
If you found a wallet, would you return it?


The Executive Life; At This Ad Agency, Creative Lunacy Reigns
Everyday is a circus at Deutsch Advertising.
The office is more like a set of "Saturday Night Live" than a New York advertising agency -- one that creates campaigns for Ikea stores, Pontiac dealers and the Pitney-Bowes Corporation.
Rock music blares from an office at one end of the hall.
In another, several executives are singing the theme songs from vintage television programs like "The Patty Duke Show." People are running down the hall, shouting.
One young man seems to be practicing a stand-up comedy routine, to which no one pays the slightest attention.
To most Madison Avenue executives, this raucous scene might seem to verge on anarchy.
But to Donny Deutsch, the creative director of Deutsch Advertising, it is delightful -- the kind of disciplined chaos that is the heart and soul of the creative process.
"If I'm going to spend most of my life doing something, it's got to be fun," he said.
"Otherwise I'd be a very unhappy guy. The last thing the world needs is another boring ad."


Blossoms Brighten the Wait for Spring
MANY people who long for some kind of flowers in bloom at this time of year turn to house plants.
Lucky indeed are those who have cool greenhouses or heated sundecks, because they can enjoy the bounty of camellias, gardenias and jades.
All these beautiful plants have abundant blossoms now, and they reward modest care if one criterion is met: cold growing conditions.
If this growing condition cannot be satisfied, the flowers are never seen.
Garden centers are well aware of the longing for some kind of flowering plant indoors now, and they offer bountiful sources of bloom.
One of the most delightful plants available is the dainty primrose, which is garden hardy, and those who are lucky enough to keep it going after the blossoms fade can plant it in the garden sometime in late March or early April, as soon as the weather settles.
The little primrose may not bloom this year, but if it is nurtured during the summer, it should do so next year at this time.


Greene's Lateral Move to Miami
As an All-Pro defensive lineman with the Pittsburgh Steelers for 13 years, with four Super Bowl victories, and five years as a defensive-line coach with the team, Joe Greene seemed a natural choice to succeed Chuck Noll who resigned as coach at the conclusion of this past season.
Greene was encouraged to be interviewed for the job, but found the invitation was merely a courtesy and a formality.
The Steelers' president, Dan Rooney, decided to hire the Kansas City defensive coordinator, Bill Cowher, who, like Greene, had no head-coaching experience.


Noted With Pleasure
The Universal Instinct
Virginia Woolf reminds us of the true meanings of many of literature's most famous heroines in a wry piece included in "The Essays of Virginia Woolf: Volume Three, 1919-1924," edited by Andrew McNeillie (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, paper).


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
WHITNEY SHOW
Sol LeWitt, Eva Hesse, Carl Andre and Jonathan Borofsky are among the 14 artists featured in the exhibition at the Whitney Museum in Stamford, titled "Immaterial Objects: Works from the Permanent Collection."


Democrats Dread a Season Without Heavy Hitters
The not-so-secret secret of this year's Democratic Presidential campaign has been the reluctance of the party's A Team to take the field.
Is that judgment too harsh?
Well, here's what Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska thinks of his main rivals, according to a radio commercial broadcast in New Hampshire this weekend: Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas?
"His campaign is in trouble." Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts?
"Another Massachusetts candidate who's strong in the Northeast but has little support in the rest of the country." Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa?
"The kind of old-style Democrat who's failed before." All this from a candidate who himself has struggled to attract the support of one Democrat in 10 here -- yet still touts his electability.


CBS Critique: Dull and Drab
To the Sports Editor:
While I sympathize with CBS's need for revenue, the frequency and duration of commercial breaks in its Olympic coverage is alarming.
More annoying and less excusable are the innumerable special programming features.
Consider Charles Kuralt's story on the unflattering CBS credential photos that resulted from the staff's long trip to Albertville: how non-customer focused can you get.
And, Paula Zahn's and Tim McCarver's hollow dialogue on a truly drab set has added absolutely no value to the broadcast.
TED WILKINS Philadelphia


Napier Art Deco
To the Editor: Napier is indeed a treasure trove of Art Deco architecture as reported in "Seaside Art Deco in New Zealand" (Travel, Dec. 15).
I would like to recommend a most informative and pleasurable book to enrich a visit there: "Art Deco Napier, Styles of the Thirties," by Peter Shaw, published in 1987 by Reed Methuen in Auckland, N.Z.
ELLEN CROWLEY New York, N.Y.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
FROM DOO-WOP TO SWAHILI
IT was not something that Dr.
Rob Leonard was eager to do.
"I'm in my academic world," he said, sitting in his third-floor office at Hofstra University.
"I don't want people to get the wrong impression."
Oh please, Dr.
Leonard.
A visit with van Gogh would have included a peek at his paintings.
A talk with Fred Astaire would have included a few spins.


Sunday Outing; Washington Really Slept Here
A three-day celebration of the 260th birthday of George Washington started yesterday at Washington's Headquarters here on a bluff overlooking the Hudson River.
The party will continue today and tomorrow, from 1 to 5 P.M. each day, with a series of lectures, films, an artillery demonstration, a crafts workshop, a puppet play, a concert and a reception at which a large birthday cake will be cut and distributed to all visitors.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Wednesday
Consumer Price Index, percent change
0.3
0.3
C.P.I. except food and energy
0.3
0.3
Housing starts, in millions
1.10
1.13
Thursday
Merchandise trade, in billions
-3.6
-5.0
Initial jobless claims, in thousands
437
455
Monday: Presidents' Day holiday  Tuesday: New Hampshire primary  Wednesday: Japan's Mieno to meet with Fed's Corrigan  Real earnings for January  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Keeping the Pipeline Filled at Merck
Every company has its legends.
At Merck and Company the latest is about Proscar, the new drug that shrinks enlarged prostates and is awaiting Government approval.
It involves a remote Caribbean mountain village with a population of male pseudohermaphrodites and an obscure medical paper about them.
P.
Roy Vagelos, Merck's chairman, seems never to tire of telling the story, and anyone inquiring about Proscar's prospects as the company's next billion-dollar megadrug is sure to hear it from other Merck executives as well.
And no wonder, since the Proscar legend says a lot about survival in the bare-knuckles competitiveness of the drug industry these days, illustrating how basic research and unrelenting patience must be combined to bring a drug to market.
The story goes like this: In 1974, Dr.
Julianne Imperato-McGinley of Cornell Medical College in New York told a conference on birth defects about a group of hermaphroditic children in the Caribbean.
Appearing sexually ambiguous at birth, they were raised as girls.
But at puberty they grew external genitalia and developed deep voices and male musculature.
Her research group had found that a genetic trait caused a deficiency of an enzyme called 5-alpha reductase.
This suppressed levels of the male hormone dihydrotestosterone, causing alteration of the male children's sexual development.


CORRECTION
A report in the Postings column on Feb. 2 about a new ShopRite in Norwalk, Conn., misstated the number of the cooperative's supermarkets in Fairfield County.
There is also one in Brookfield.


Score Another Shutout For U.S. and LeBlanc
The draw keeps opening wide for the undefeated United States Olympic hockey team, the way it does sometimes for Jimmy Connors on a roll at the United States Open.
Poland was the fourth consecutive team to fall to the United States, which won tonight by 3-0 in a game that was supposed to be easy for the Americans but took considerable hard work.


Needed: Shared Vision On Longer School Year
The plan to study lengthening the school day and the school year in Englewood ("Englewood Considers a Longer School Year," Jan. 19) will be successful only if the voices of students and teachers are truly heard.
Milbrey W. McLaughlin, professor in the Stanford University School of Education and director of the federally financed Center for Research on the Context of Secondary School Teaching, wrote: "One of the most important lessons from more than two decades of reform efforts is that policy of any sort can't mandate what matters."
Professor McLaughlin said in a report, "Voices From the Field: 30 Expert Opinions on 'America 2000,' the Bush Administration Strategy to 'Reinvent' America's Schools":


CAMPUS LIFE: Arizona; Campus Police Attend Classes On Sensitivity
After two years of tense relations between the University of Arizona Police Department here and black students on campus, the university police officers are attending mandatory classes on cultural sensitivity.
After black students charged that the campus police either harassed them or rejected their requests for help, the students met with university administrators, who ordered the officers to attend workshops on understanding the black culture as it relates to the police, said Jesse J. Hargrove, the assistant dean for African-American student affairs.


Making Governments Operate Better
To the Editor:
One way for state and local governments to save money would be for chief executive officers to do as Gov.
William D. Schaefer of Maryland does -- he has ordered state cabinet officials to exchange job responsibilities for a month, and then the members of the cabinet have to write reports on their experiences, listing suggestions.


We Need a Real National Rebuilding Program; What Homebuyers Get
To the Editor:
President Bush proposes in his State of the Union Message (front page, Jan. 29) to give first-time homebuyers a tax credit of up to $5,000 and to allow withdrawal from an individual retirement account of $10,000 without the 10 percent penalty tax.
At first glance, taxpayers would believe they will have $15,000 cash for immediate use in making a deposit on a home purchase.


Wall Street; The Dividend-Yield Revisionists
It would be hard to imagine two investment advisers with less in common than Anthony E. Spare and Tom Cameron.
Tony Spare, a partner in the asset management firm of Spare, Tengler, Kaplan &amp; Bischell, works in the heart of San Francisco's financial district.
Tom Cameron's commute consists of taking his Labrador retriever to a harbor-view office on Johns Island, off the South Carolina coast.
Mr.
Spare is a value hunter, looking for unsung bargains while Mr.
Cameron is his philosophical opposite, a growth-stock investor.
And Mr.
Spare's clients are mostly large institutions, while Mr.
Cameron is one of the managers of the Sovereign Investors Fund, a mutual fund sold to the public through John Hancock Mutual Funds in Boston.


Take Me Out Rallies at Gulfstream
Take Me Out became the first horse to win two stakes races at this winter's Gulfstream Park meeting when he outran eight rivals today and won the $50,000 Deputy Minister Handicap.
The 4-year-old colt carried high weight of 118 pounds as he covered the seven furlongs in 1:223/5 with Jerry Bailey in the saddle.
He stayed within striking distance of Sunny Go Go, who led all the way until he tired in the deep homestretch and faded to fifth while Take Me Out moved in front of a pack of five other tightly bunched horses.


The 1992 CAMPAIGN; Bush Campaign Addresses the Competition


The Artist Vs. the Mogul
To the Editor,
The article on Steven Spielberg, "The Man Who Would Be Walt"  [ Jan. 26 ] , was disturbing because between the lines it suggested the dilemma facing young directors who make blockbusters in Hollywood.
Early mega-success for popular film makers like Mr.
Spielberg and his compatriots George Lucas and Francis Coppola led them to a difficult and perhaps unconscious choice: remain an artist or become a mogul.
Unfortunately, but maybe inevitably in a society that worships the almighty dollar, the latter path was the one adopted.
Amblin Entertainment, Lucasfilm and the failed Zoetrope Studios were the result.


Why Politics Is a Lot Like 'Star Search'
Whatever happens in New Hampshire on Tuesday, the television encounters of the Democratic hopefuls have already set the terms for the primary season.
After a shaky start, the debates -- the fourth of which can be seen tonight at 8 on CNN -- are proving to be the best such efforts the nation has enjoyed or endured.
In a welcome development, NBC, C-Span and PBS barred the audience claques and multimoderators that hobbled their 1988 efforts, and the questioning, especially from the PBS team of Robert MacNeil and Jim Lehrer on the economy, has been better focused.


A Legacy of Giving Enormous Amounts to Charities
More than anything else, the Rockefellers want to be remembered for their enormous philanthropic efforts.
Since the days of John D. Rockefeller, the patriarch who founded the dynasty, the family has been giving pieces of its fortune to charitable causes and public interest projects.
In 1991, family members and family trusts set up exclusively for philanthropic efforts, gave a total of more than $200 million to more than 1,300 organizations.
The family's main areas of interest are environmental protection, civil and human rights and world population growth.


Trying to Bag Trophy and Money
With the Rangers enjoying a successful season so far, three of their stars have a chance to combine for a hat trick of individual trophies.
While bonuses for such awards are commonplace in most contracts, one Ranger has a clause that could guarantee him a large raise for several years.
He is Mark Messier, the captain, who is a contender for the Hart trophy as most valuable player in the league.
The Rangers' other award candidates are Brian Leetch, contending for the Norris trophy as the N.H.L.'s best defenseman, and Tony Amonte, a candidate for the Calder trophy as rookie of the year.


Insanity Defense By Dahmer Fails
A Milwaukee jury found that the confessed serial killer Jeffrey L. Dahmer was sane at the time of each of the 15 slayings with which he was charged.


Borromini's Rome
To the Editor: We were puzzled why the excellent story on Borromini's Rome omitted any mention of the architect's church of San Andrea delle Fratte.
Situated at the top of Via della Mercede, just below Via Due Macelli and near the Spanish Steps, San Andrea delle Fratte has a pair of impressive Bernini angels flanking its main altar, among other baroque treasures.
These include a lovely cloister, an isle of peace amid the clatter of downtown Rome.


Corrections
Credit lines last Sunday on two political cartoons in the Views section were reversed.
The cartoon depicting President Bush as a pitchman for an election-year gadget was by Dan Wasserman.
The one about American students' low math and science test scores was by Mike Luckovich.


Blossoms Brighten the Wait for Spring
MANY people who long for some kind of flowers in bloom at this time of year turn to house plants.
Lucky indeed are those who have cool greenhouses or heated sundecks, because they can enjoy the bounty of camellias, gardenias and jades.
All these beautiful plants have abundant blossoms now, and they reward modest care if one criterion is met: cold growing conditions.
If this growing condition cannot be satisfied, the flowers are never seen.
Garden centers are well aware of the longing for some kind of flowering plant indoors now, and they offer bountiful sources of bloom.
One of the most delightful plants available is the dainty primrose, which is garden hardy, and those who are lucky enough to keep it going after the blossoms fade can plant it in the garden sometime in late March or early April, as soon as the weather settles.
The little primrose may not bloom this year, but if it is nurtured during the summer, it should do so next year at this time.


A Status Report on Loafers
Loafers are a dog's best friend.
The four-footed kind consider them a most satisfying chew, but those of us who walk on two legs have long appreciated the comfort quotient of these roomy, knockabout shoes.
Nowadays, loafers are no longer just something to salivate over, or to slip on with jeans.
They have become status symbols.
Although the classic loafer can travel anywhere, this spring's variations are certainly a step in a new direction.


Headliners; Broken System
There were plenty of warnings that all was not well with Yaakov Riegler.
There were the bruises and cuts that officials at his Brooklyn public school noticed on Yaakov, a retarded child, and that they reported at least three times to state child-abuse officials.
There was the admission in 1986 by his mother, Shulamis Riegler, that she had beaten unconscious one of Yaakov's older brothers.
In October 1990, Yaakov died after a beating so vicious that one of his thigh bones was cracked.
He was 8 years old.
He had assigned blame for a previous beating by telling a school counselor, "Mommy boo-boo." But in sentencing Mrs.
Riegler last week, Justice Francis X. Egitto of State Supreme Court saved his harshest comments for the system.
Just two days before Yaakov's fatal beating, an investigator saw signs of abuse but left the child at home because he was unable to find an Orthodox Jewish foster home.
"The warnings were there for three years," said Justice Egitto.
"This child should not have died in New York City in 1990."


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Cream Ridge 137,500
3326 Route 537
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 7-year-old ranch; fireplace, deck, w/w carpeting, c/a, 1-car garage; taxes $2,300.
Freehold 175,000
3 Longview Avenue
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; c/a, family room, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,459.
Howell 130,000
14 Canann Court
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; patio, deck, fenced yard, w/w carpeting; taxes $2,771.
Jackson 132,600
197-A Hope Chapel Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old contemporary; 2-car garage, pool, deck, h/w floors, family room; taxes $3,616.
Madison 222,000
12 Ardsleigh Drive
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old expanded ranch; fireplace, family room, laundry room; taxes $3,493.
Ramsey 214,000
28 Spruce Run
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old town-house condominium; deck, fireplace; monthly charges $183, taxes $4,729.
OTHER AREAS Essex, Conn. 305,000
33 Book Hill Woods Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; pool, walk-up attic, solarium, 1.1 acres; taxes $3,606.
New Rochelle, N.Y. 370,000
9 Aviemore Drive 4-bedroom, 3-bath, 64-year-old brick colonial; fireplace, screened porch, eat-in kitchen, center hall; taxes $5,594.
Seaford, L.I. 172,500
3838 Cordwood Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; basement, 1-car garage, aluminum siding; taxes $4,000.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
It sounds awfully utopian to say that we can have it both ways -- permit abortion but discourage it ("How to End the Abortion War" by Roger Rosenblatt, Jan. 19).
But my gut tells me that people just won't go for it, on either side.
I certainly don't see any indication of a collective will to sponsor the social programs necessary to implement Rosenblatt's vision in this age of reactionary social welfare reform and anti-tax fervor, or even a nascent coalition of people willing to compromise deeply held moral positions.
TOM LIGHTFOOT
Huntington Station, L.I.


Ms. Krueser To Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Krueser of West Caldwell, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Deborah Marie Krueser, to Mark McEldowney Whitney, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Whitney of Upper Saddle River, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Krueser, 26 years old, is an analyst on the less-developed countries trading desk at Salomon Brothers Inc., the Wall Street investment house.
She graduated from Lehigh University.
Her father is a special investigator with the Chubb Corporation, the insurance company, in Warren, N.J.


Miss Rockafellow Is to Marry Lieut. J. N. Jacobs
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Rockafellow of New Canaan, Conn., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Fell Rockafellow and Lieut.
John Norris Jacobs of the Navy, the son of Peter L. Jacobs of New York and the late Nancy J. Norris.
Miss Rockafellow, 29 years old and a graduate of Georgetown University, is a product manager for Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York.
Lieutenant Jacobs, 29, is a graduate of Pennsylvania State University.
He is a flight officer in San Diego.


Nancy Sachar, Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard S. Sachar of Scotch Plains, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Nancy Elizabeth Sachar to Herpaul Singh Sidhu, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Parmpal Singh Sidhu of Scotch Plains.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sachar, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and has a master's degree in psychology from the California School of Professional Psychology, where she is a doctoral candidate.
Her father is a State Superior Court judge in Elizabeth, N.J.
Her mother, Neva Sachar, is an information services consultant in Scotch Plains.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Feb.1  MANHATTAN  Gramercy Park Area 102,000
207 East 21st Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 475-sq.-ft. co-op in a revovated prewar building; remodeled kitchen and bath, private roof deck; maintenance $679, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Penthouse Properties)  Madison Square Area 335,000
5 East 22d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. condo in a 8-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, dining ell, health club, Madison Square Park view; common charge $473, taxes $2,964 (Broker: Newell &amp; Associates)  Greenwich Village 147,000
One Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 813-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, balcony, landmark building; maintenance $702, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman &amp; Associates)  Greenwich Village 720,000
88 Bedford Street  3-family, 4-story, brick town house; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, study in third and fourth floor duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath and 600-sq.-ft. studios on first and second floors; rear garden, 25- by 68-ft. lot; taxes $6,600 (Brokers: Eychner Associates/Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Upper East Side 900,000
900 Fifth Avenue (71st St.)  2-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,300-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, eat-in kitchen, 3 exposures, Central Park view; maintenance $2,172, 41% tax-deductible (Brokers: Stribling &amp; Associates/Corcoran Group)  BRONX City Island 220,000
604 City Island Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, detached, frame house built in 1835; dining area, original wide-plank floors, fireplace, 60- by 100-ft lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Kingsbridge Heights 130,000
7 Perot Street  2-family, attached, 99-year-old brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in both units; 16- by 98-ft. lot; taxes $875 (Broker: Tryax Realty)  BROOKLYN  Brooklyn Heights 165,000
47 Remsen Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining area, fireplace, renovated kitchen and bath; maintenance $607, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Aguayo &amp; Knox)  Kensington 115,000
229 Dahill Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, attached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $800 (Broker: Homes 'R' Beautiful)  Park Slope 367,500
123 Lincoln Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, 4-story brownstone; dining room, front and rear parlor, marble mantels, original moldings and details, rear garden, 16.4- by 141-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Susan N. Breen Realty)  QUEENS  Rego Park Crescents 370,000
63-19 Ellwell Crescents  2-family, detached, brick Tudor; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other, 1 bath, dining room in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  Richmond Hill 170,000
103-17 106th Street  2-family, semi-attached, frame house; 4 bedrooms in primary unit; 3 bedrooms in other, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each, 2-car garage, 27- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Kremer Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Annadale 405,000
432 Jansen Street  5-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, detached, contemporary; dining room, den, 2 fireplaces, Jacuzzi, 2-car garage, 60- by 110-ft. lot; 100% tax-abated (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)  West Brighton 112,000
166 Bement Court  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, full basement, 1-car garage, 30- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $940 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)


Someday Bridges May Have Feelings Too
Animals and people can feel pain and act to correct the problem.
Not so a concrete wall, which goes through life oblivious to its condition as it cracks and corrodes and perhaps one day suddenly collapses.
But engineers are now devising ways to give walls, bridges, airplane wings and other structures their own nervous systems, muscles and brains, allowing them to sense problems and correct them.
Imagine an airplane that warns the pilot that it is about to crack, rather than having the fuselage suddenly rip open as happened on an Aloha Airlines flight in 1988.
Or a bridge that would automatically seal its own cracks.


When the Bad Guy Is Seen as the One in the Green Hat
When he bought 56 acres in Commerce City, Colo., in the 1970's to make room for his expanding business, Kenneth S. Valis believed he was investing in the future of the Colorado Paint Company.
But in the 1980's, when a landfill that bordered on his property was found to be an abandoned toxic waste dump, Mr.
Valis's purchase suddenly turned into a nightmare caused not by pollutants, but by the Government's environmental protectors.
Under provisions of the 1980 Superfund law giving the Environmental Protection Agency broad powers to clean up toxic dumps, the agency put a lien on Mr.
Valis's property, erected a fence around it, dotted the landscape with monitoring wells, pumps and piping and then barred any other use of the ground while the dump was being cleaned up, a process that could last 30 years.


Blossoms Brighten the Wait for Spring
MANY people who long for some kind of flowers in bloom at this time of year turn to house plants.
Lucky indeed are those who have cool greenhouses or heated sundecks, because they can enjoy the bounty of camellias, gardenias and jades.
All these beautiful plants have abundant blossoms now, and they reward modest care if one criterion is met: cold growing conditions.
If this growing condition cannot be satisfied, the flowers are never seen.
Garden centers are well aware of the longing for some kind of flowering plant indoors now, and they offer bountiful sources of bloom.
One of the most delightful plants available is the dainty primrose, which is garden hardy, and those who are lucky enough to keep it going after the blossoms fade can plant it in the garden sometime in late March or early April, as soon as the weather settles.
The little primrose may not bloom this year, but if it is nurtured during the summer, it should do so next year at this time.


Argentina's President Turns Economics Into Poll Approval
A year ago, plagued by inflation, scandal and criticism for pardoning military officers accused of human rights violations, President Carlos Saul Menem seemed in political trouble.
His approval rating had plunged just below 20 percent, the lowest since his election in 1989.
Now, after leading the economy to its lowest rate of inflation in more than 20 years and managing to stay pretty much untainted by allegation of corruption against aides, Mr.
Menem is riding a wave of support seldom seen in this country.


Walter Sheerin, 83, An Ex-Firefighter And Union Leader
Walter J. Sheerin, a longtime state and local labor leader in New York and an advocate for laws improving pensions and other benefits, died on Jan. 30 at Winthrop University Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
He was 83 years old and was a resident of New Hyde Park, L.I.
He died of heart failure and complications of Parkinson's disease, his family said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hamsphire; DEMOCRATS OFFER EMOTIONAL DRAMA IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
The New Hampshire Democratic primary contest has produced a final weekend of emotional campaigning, with much of the drama coming from the personal appeals of two men: Gov.
Bill Clinton, battling to prove the endurance of a candidacy that began with great hopes, and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas, almost tearfully thanking his supporters for carrying him farther than he was ever expected to go.
Mr.
Clinton campaigned with passion and seeming abandon, hoping that his campaign had now bottomed out after the furor over his draft history and was on the upswing.


Abroad at Home; For Want of A Nail
It may have been the greatest failure of American political imagination since World War II, the costliest abdication of leadership: President Bush's failure to join promptly in helping to build new societies in what had been the Soviet Union.
So we must begin to think as we see what is happening in the former Soviet republics today.
There are devastating inflation and economic distress, social tension, political menace.
People are asking whether Boris Yeltsin can survive in Russia or may be overthrown by a new authoritarianism of the right.


Seedbeds of Jazz, Captured on Canvas
JOE OVERSTREET comes from Manhattan to Montclair State College here as something of a visiting fireman.
He has a reputation as a painter with many shows to his credit (among others, at the Studio Museum and the late Dorsky Gallery, both in Manhattan) and as the founder and artistic director of Kenkeleba House, an alternative space on the Lower East Side,
Kenkeleba was born in 1974, six years before galleries and gentrification hit the neighborhood, and it continues to flourish now that, like locusts, the galleries have moved on.
Apropos, a major show staged at Kenkeleba was "The Gathering of the Avant-Garde," which proved that artists (if not the gentry) had lived in the area since 1948 -- de Kooning and other names-to-be among them.


The 1992 Campaign: Republicans; SCHWARZENEGGER ASSAILS BUCHANAN
The Bush campaign finally got out the "B" word today, but it took a bigger man than the President to do it.
Appearing at President Bush's side in this suburb of Manchester, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Mr.
Bush's loyal heavy lifter, did what Mr.
Bush has been avoiding for weeks: He mentioned Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator who is challenging the President in the primary on Tuesday, by name.


Lyn Vernon Has Wedding
Carolyn Hitch Vernon, a pension administrator, and Sergio Augusto Coelho, a ballroom dance teacher, were married yesterday at Christ Church Christiana Hundred in Greenville, Del.
The Rev.
William B. Lane, an Episcopal priest, officiated.
Ms.
Vernon, 51 years old, is known as Lyn and is keeping her name.
She is the administrative assistant to the secretary of the Delaware State Pension Fund investment committee in Greenville.
She is a graduate of Briarcliff College and the University of Delaware, and is the daughter of Mrs.
Harcourt C. Vernon of Wilmington, Del., and the late Mr.
Vernon.
Her father retired as an associate director of engineering at the Du Pont Company.


James Saft to Wed Rebecca Moore
Mr. and Mrs.
Truman E. Moore of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Rebecca Elise Moore, to James Henry Saft, the son of Dr.
Virginia C. Saft of Chicago and the late James H. Saft.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Moore, 25 years old, is the assistant director of alumni relations at Friends Seminary, a Quaker preparatory school in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College, as did her fiance, and received a master's degree in fiction writing from Columbia University.
Her father is an advertising photographer in New York.
Her mother, Margaret Moore, is a co-founder of the Committee to Save the City Inc., a historic preservation group, and the author of "End of the Road for Ladies' Mile."


Deborah Jones and Joseph Gillotti 3d to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Emil Barran of Scranton, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Deborah Barran Jones to Joseph Peter Gillotti 3d, a son of Joseph P. Gillotti Jr. of Patterson, N.Y., and Pamela G. Hyman of Branford, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.


Woman Uses Wealth to Ease Maine's Bank Woes
After two banks in this state closed last year, a 61-year-old woman who has adopted Maine as her home decided to do something to help reverse that trend.
She opened a bank: the Maine Bank &amp; Trust Company.
With a fortune estimated at $100 million, most of it invested in a computer company, Elizabeth B. Noyce can afford to furnish the capital for a bank.
She invested almost $7 million to start Maine Bank &amp; Trust, which opened here on Nov. 20.


CAMPUS LIFE: Penn State; Black Columnist Sets Off a Furor With Call to Arms
A black columnist for the Pennsylvania State University's student newspaper has angered administrators, frightened parents and set off more than two weeks of campuswide debates by calling for black people to "bear arms" and "form a militia" against white "devils."
In the column, which ran on Jan. 28 in The Daily Collegian, the columnist, Chino Wilson, referred to "the vast majority," or "85 to 90 percent," of white people as "devout racists."


The Girl of His Dreams
WHORES FOR GLORIA
By William T. Vollmann. 138 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $19.


Results Plus TENNIS Washington Beats Connors MaliVai Washington moved within a step of his first professional title when he ended Jimmy Connors's run in the Federal Express International in Memphis with a 6-2, 7-5 semifinal victory. Washington, who is ranked 38th in the world and turned pro in 1989, was to play the winner of last night's match between No. 7 Wayne Ferreira and unseeded Amos Mansdorf. The 14th-seeded Washington, who reached his first career final earlier this year in New Zealand, broke service in the opening game when Conners lobbed long from the baseline and then went on to an easy first set. Connors, seeded 16th and ranked 46th, broke serve to tie the second second set at 5-5, but Washington broke back and served out the match. (AP)


Electrical Repairs Require Knowledge of Safety Codes
BEFORE undertaking any project involving wiring, ascertain from the building inspector the electrical and safety codes, but never begin electrical repairs without turning off the power.
Most household wiring consists of cable, several solid wires grouped together in flexible plastic or metal sheathing.
Plastic-sheathed cable is called nonmetallic sheathed cable or Romex, a brand name.
Metal-sheathed cable is called armored cable or BX, another brand.


Decision on Verbeek
It took an arbitrator more than two months to make up his mind, but in the end, he pretty much split the distance between the Whalers and left wing PAT VERBEEK, awarding Verbeek an $820,000 salary for this season and the next one.
That's $320,000 more than the $500,000 the Whalers had pressed for and $380,000 less than Verbeek had sought. (AP)


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Stamford May Ask Tax-Exempts for Help
NEXT May, Stamford will start asking owners of tax-exempt property -- hospitals, churches, private schools and other institutions -- to help pay for city services to reduce budget deficits.
The voluntary plan is based on one that has operated for 10 years in Portland, Me., where last year's collection totaled $575,000.
Boston's program, in place since 1977, took in $10 million in 1991.


The 1992 Campaign: Media; TV Viewers Get to See the Candidates, and See the Candidates
For anyone who still wants to get to know the Presidential candidates, these are happy days to be a television viewer.
The candidates are showing their inner selves.
They are looking haggard on the news.
They are turning mean in their advertising.
They are personally pre-empting entire programs.
At 9 o'clock Friday evening, for instance, viewers expecting the situation comedy "Baby Talk" were instead offered Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and a toll-free number for asking him questions.
Not being seasoned political journalists, most viewers did not realize that the only important question this election is Mr.
Clinton's 1969 draft deferment, so they got sidetracked on other issues, but there were valuable lessons nonetheless.


A Dictatorship That Grew Up
GLANCING SURREPTITIOUSLY over his shoulder at the crowded bar, Bo Yang lifts up a trouser leg.
He points, with a grin, to a knob that juts from the flesh on his right knee.
"There it is," he says.
"When the weather cools abruptly, it gets all sore and I can't walk."
Bo Yang is 71 years old, maybe 72 -- he doesn't know his birth date -- and his thick hair is speckled with gray.
He is also a social critic whose essays about Chinese culture have made him one of the most famous writers in the Chinese language.
He spent a decade in a Taiwan prison for supporting a more democratic society, and his knee was broken by police trying to get him to confess to being a Communist agent.
The injury is an apt symbol of Taiwan's past: an era when the regime imprisoned, tortured and even killed dissidents, when elections were meaningless and when -- or so Bo Yang came to believe during his incarceration -- there was no great moral difference between Nationalist Party rule on Taiwan and Communist rule in China.


Mutual Funds; The Hidden Risk of the Ginnie Mae
While homeowners applaud today's falling interest rates, investors in Ginnie Mae funds, which buy pools of mortgages, are moaning as their funds' yields slip.
And with mortgage rates near their lowest point in 18 years, the slide is not likely to stop soon.
Some investors have been furiously shoveling money into Ginnie Mae funds to get yields while they can.
At year-end 1991, Ginnie Mae funds yielded 7.2 percent, compared with 4.6 percent for money market funds and 6.3 percent for Government bond funds.
But this yield advantage may soon slip away.


N.A.A.C.P. Director to Step Down Amid Bitter Split on Internal Rules
Benjamin L. Hooks Jr. said yesterday that he would resign as executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and the leadership of the nation's oldest civil rights organization broke apart publicly in an angry debate over limiting the terms of its officers.
The 67-year-old Mr.
Hooks, who has led the N.A.A.C.P. since 1977, announced his resignation late yesterday afternoon in a closed session of the board near the end of a turbulent annual meeting in New York.


Networking; The Shrink-Wrapped LAN
The slowdown in sales of personal computers is causing companies that once paid attention only to selling individual units to look toward the growing market for the local area network (LAN).
The more nimble PC vendors, notably Northgate Computers of Eden Prairie, Minn., but also Dell, Compuadd and Gateway 2000, are starting to prepackage LAN's, often dubbed shrink-wrapped LAN's or LAN's-in-a-box.
They offer not only the network operating system software, network interface adapters and cables, but also the individual PC's that are then hooked together to form the network.
In the past, LAN companies sold the software, adapters and cables and PC vendors sold the computers.


Inquiries Unearth Pieces of Biegen's Secret Life
Pieces of a buried life are coming to light as investigators work to trace the stolen money that flowed through the bank accounts of a former trusted mayoral fund-raiser and admitted embezzler, Arnold I. Biegen.
Known to intimates at City Hall, the Governor's office and law firm boardrooms as a sedate, ingratiating, facile and sometimes dictatorial financial adviser, the 58-year-old lawyer is emerging in unfamiliar guises.


Salty Scene for Nantucket Mystery
"FATAL ATTRACTION," the mystery thriller by Bernard Slade at the Bayway Arts Center in East Islip, shares nothing in common with "Fatal Attraction," the movie, except a title and the idea of obsession.
In the play, a fading movie star's husband is murdered by an obsessed fan.
Because this action is in the first scene of this five-scene, two-act play, it is obvious that the murder is just the beginning of the story.


Data Bank/February 16, 1992
Data Bank/February 16, 1992
Mfg. Inventory-Sales Ratio
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Current dollars
1.53
1.50
1.50
Producer Price Index
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Finished goods, annual rate in percent
-0.3
-0.1
0.0
Industrial Production Index
Percent change
-0.9
-0.4
-0.3
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
0.6
0.1
0.0
Capcity Utilization
Output as percentage of capacity
78.0
78.8
79.3
Steel Production
Feb. 7
Jan. 31
Jan. 24
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,720
1,700
1,711
Auto Production
Feb. 14
Feb. 7
Jan. 31
In units, weekly total
111,301
106,632
108,280
Truck Production
In units, weekly total
71,276
69,025
81,227


Children and Video Games
To the Editor:
An ideal book review not only critically evaluates a book, but also conveys its content and purpose.
Marie Winn's review of my book "Video Kids: Making Sense of Nintendo" (Dec. 22) seriously distorts what I believe the book is about.


Corrections
A boxed excerpt from the play "Sight Unseen" on page 33 of the Arts and Leisure section today carries an erroneous credit line.
The copyright owner is the play's author, Donald Margulies.


Bridge
One of the many reasons players stay away from duplicate games is that a small number of regulars behave unpleasantly.
One aspect of this is frequent and aggressive questioning about the meaning of a bid, or a bidding sequence.
The laws of the game permit questions, but that right should be used sparingly: A question is often unnecessary, and may be discourteous or unethical.
A player is entitled to know only about his opponent's agreements, not about what he can infer from his hand or his knowledge of the game, so the alert procedure and the convention card are usually sufficient, combined with information volunteered by an opponent at the end of an auction.
When the bidding ends, a question in general form -- "Is there anything we should know about this?" -- will usually serve.
As a last resort, ask whether a bid was forcing, or how strong it is, but be prepared to accept the answer: "We have not discussed it." Remember that a bid late in the auction is likely not to be discussed.


Q and A
Gambling in South Dakota
Q.
I have heard about a casino
in South Dakota called Midnight Star.
Can you provide any information about it? -- Berri Blair, Bronxville, N.Y.


Filling That Potato-Shape Space Inside Everyone
OLD habits die hard.
When I was growing up, it was said that everyone had a potato-shape space inside them that no other vegetable could fill.
My Irish grandmother regularly piled our plates high with potatoes freshly dug from the garden, waxing indignant when we refused third or fourth helpings.
"Potatoes are 90 percent water!" she would say, slathering them with butter.
I still crave potatoes, especially with roasts, grilled meat and fish.
One of my favorite recipes is my English grandmother's roast potatoes, which have the added attraction of being surprisingly low in fat.
She used to make them during the war in London when rationing was in effect.
In those days she would have used lard, but I have substituted light olive oil (you can also use safflower or peanut oil).
The potatoes are not really roasted, although they taste as if they are.
First they are steamed, then they are sauteed with only a tablespoon of oil on top of the stove over a low heat.
As long as the heat is kept very low, the potatoes will turn golden brown and crisp without burning.


Chess
When you are in a slump, it seems that nothing good can come your way.
If you have worked out a killing strategy against an opponent's favorite defense, he chooses something else, or the tournament pairings give you the wrong color with which to confront him.
Or he gets sick or drops out of the event at the last minute, and is replaced by someone whose career score against you is 10 kills and 5 draws.
Even when you try to play conservatively, your luck does not change.
You pick out something solid, only to learn that your enemy of the day has discovered a powerful new weapon that calls your entire effort into question.
The only thing that cannot be argued is that you have just suffered another bad beating.


Venezuela's Policy for Brazil's Gold Miners: Bullets
Near the top of a 20-point manifesto issued by leaders of Venezuela's failed army uprising last week was a Portuguese word: "garimpeiro."
In a new kind of cross-border migration, thousands of impoverished Brazilian garimpeiros -- or gold miners -- have flooded into a recently created Yanomami Indian reserve in Venezuela's Amazon.
By some estimates, the Brazilians last year culled $500 million in gold and diamonds out of southern Venezuela.


Streetscapes: The Cashman Laundry; A Streamlined Relic Battered in the Bronx
EVEN for the Bronx, with miles of Art Deco on the Grand Concourse, it is a modern monument.
But the streamlined Cashman Laundry Building, at the northeast corner of Gerard Avenue and 140th Street, vacant and vandalized, is on a downhill slide from which it may never recover.
Sol and Simon Cashman arrived in the United States from Russia at the turn of the century and established a laundry in the Bronx in 1914.
From a storefront operation their business grew and in 1932 they were able to build an entirely new structure in the South Bronx.


Deals and Discounts
CANADA HOTELS Hilton International has set winter rates for 10 hotels in Canada and 7 in the United States, good through April 19.
Among the Canadian hotels, rates are $69 a night (about $63 in United States funds) at the St.
John Hilton in New Brunswick; $89 ($81) at the Quebec Hilton in Quebec City, $109 ($99) at the Toronto Hilton and $119 ($108) at the Montreal Bonaventure Hilton.
In the United States, the rates are $119 at the Marquette in Minneapolis, $129 at the Washington Vista and $149 at the Drake in Chicago.
Reservations are required; telephone (800) 445-8667.
AUSTRALIA FLIGHTS A company called Austravel, which specializes in trips to Australia and New Zealand, is offering round-trip flights from New York to Sydney for $850.
The fare is good for Monday departures through March; higher fares are available for travel on Wednesday and Friday.
The flights, on Northwest Airlines, stop in Osaka, Japan, with no change of planes; travel time is about 23 hours.
The fare must be booked seven days ahead, and there is a 50 percent cancellation fee.
Visitors must stay seven days.
Austravel also handles hotel packages and other arrangements.
Austravel can be reached at (212) 972-6880 or (800) 544-0212.


A Long Run Down Vietnam's Memory Lane
Andy Anderson, a blunt, almost cantankerous Vietnam veteran who uses a wheelchair because of a war injury, showed the radiance of a man returning home today as he spoke of once again seeing the city that used to be Saigon.
"I haven't been here since Dec. 23, 1973, and when I went out through the streets here this week, it was like I left last Friday and came back on Monday," said Anderson, who is from Long Beach, Calif., and who is here for the Ho Chi Minh City International Marathon, the first major sports event to be held in Vietnam since the fall of Saigon in 1975.


Dollar Gains In Jamaica
Shopping and dining in Jamaica are less expensive for Americans as a result of a decision by the Jamaican Government last fall to abolish the fixed rate of exchange for the Jamaican dollar.
The currency is now traded publicly and subject to market fluctuations.
One United States dollar, worth 7 Jamaican dollars under the old system, has recently been worth 20 Jamaican.
Tourists in Jamaica can pay for any goods in American dollars.
Tour companies say their prices have not gone down dramatically because hotel space was bought for the winter season months ago.
However, many resort hotels are offering discounts because their operating costs have been cut, according to Marcella Martinez of the Caribbean Tourism Organization.
Sandals, which runs six all-inclusive resorts in Jamaica, says couples booking six nights or longer are entitled to a discount of $305 in any room category at any time.


Late Night With Yanks (Minus a Top-10 List)
After his wife and two young children have been safely tucked away and the clock approaches midnight, Buck Showalter closes the door to his office and works diligently as Yankee manager.
The late night Yankee manager.
With his office light peeking out into another Pace, Fla., evening, Showalter doodles potential starting rotations and batting orders into the wee hours.
Who will bat leadoff?
Who is the closer?
Who will play third base?
The rookie manager has scribbled about 100 different combinations so far and will probably be scribbling all night, all season.


No Spills Or Thrills: Jansen Is Fourth
Dan Jansen didn't win.
He didn't even get a medal.
But he didn't fall, and when his chance for redemption had passed and he had finished in fourth place in the 500-meter speed-skating race in the Winter Olympics, he said he was not disappointed, just surprised and a bit relieved it was over.
His story has become lore, how in the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary his 27-year-old sister died of leukemia six hours before his first speed-skating race, how he fell in that race, returned to Milwaukee for her funeral, returned to Calgary and, four days after his first race, incredibly fell again in his second and last race.


In Steel, the Battle Is Not Over Snow Blowing
To the Editor:
The steel contracting-out battle lines are not drawn over such inconsequential matters as snow blowing and grass cutting ("When a Steel Job Isn't Just Steel," Managing, Jan. 19).


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
Rosenblatt's solution to the political problem of abortion, "permit but discourage," has in fact existed in this country for the past 15 years.
Every Federal and state restriction that has been found constitutional by the Supreme Court -- the refusal to allow Medicaid or state funds to pay for abortions, parental notification, waiting periods, mandatory lectures about alternatives -- can only be experienced by the woman going to a clinic or a doctor for help with an unwanted pregnacy as discouragement.
SONIA JAFFE ROBBINS
New York, N.Y.


Plan Readied for a Smaller Trump City
NOT as monumental as Donald J. Trump hoped it would be, nor as modest as many Upper West Siders believe it should be, a new plan for the Penn Yards site along the Hudson River is taking definitive form and may begin formal public review next month.
Much debate is likely to focus on the sheer size of the project that is to rise over a relocated West Side Highway, from 59th to 72d Street: 16 apartment complexes (four of them 40 stories or higher), with up to 5,700 units, and a commercial structure two blocks wide.


It's Not Only Portuguese, but Italian, Too
THE Navigator is an appropriate name for a Portuguese restaurant.
Prince Henry the Navigator, the 15th-century monarch, not only put Portugal on the map, but also spread its influence around the globe.
The year-old Navigator restaurant in North Massapequa offers both Portuguese and Italian food.
Combining two unrelated cuisines seems to be a small trend on Long Island.
Viva Loco, a new cafe in Bellmore, is an Italian-Mexican mix.
In both restaurants, Italian is the fail-safe, a familiar port for those not wanting to navigate the unknown.


Ms. Urdang Weds Irwin W. Messer
Alexandra Stefanie Urdang, a daughter of Irena Urdang de Tour of Deep River, Conn., and Laurence Urdang of Old Lyme, Conn., and Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, England, was married last evening to Irwin Wayne Messer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Solomon Messer of Mendham, N.J.
Rabbi Howard Handler officiated at the Explorers Club in New York.
Ms.
Urdang, 35 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the vice president for new markets at Warner Books in New York.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut.
Her mother is an art dealer.
Her father, a lexicographer, is the publisher of Verbatim: The Language Quarterly.


Problems Temper Puerto Ricans' Success
ARMANDO HERNANDEZ has lived in the Fair Haven section of New Haven since 1968.
After living for a year in Brooklyn, N.Y., he moved there with his wife, Maria, and their young daughter.
The family had come from Toa Baja, a small farming village in Puerto Rico.
Like many Puerto Ricans who moved to Connecticut during that era, Mr.
Hernandez said, he was lured by the prospects of opportunity.
New Haven was particularly attractive, he said, because of its tree-lined streets, solid three-family houses and factories where jobs were available.
Within a matter of weeks Mr.
Hernandez found a job at Interstate Container Company, making boxes for $1.35 an hour.
In his spare time he attended Bible school in Bridgeport.
Six years later he became a Pentecostal minister and began his own church, the Second Star of Jacob, starting with seven parishioners, mostly members of his family.
Today his church seats more than 700 people and is one of the largest Spanish Pentecostal churches in the state.


Television; Women in the Locker Room At 'Saturday Night Live'
"Women aren't funny," or so John Belushi often howled on the set of "Saturday Night Live" in the late 70's.
Back then, the show's male writers were fond of saying that possessing male genitalia made comedy writing easier.
The producers offered little consolation when the women complained that they received too many subordinate, straight roles.
Such raging sexism is well documented in " 'Saturday Night': A Backstage History," the 1986 book by Doug Hill and Jeff Weingrad, and the situation has not improved in the show's 17-year existence.
"It's always been hard for funny women to carve out the parts," said Lorne Michaels, the longtime executive producer of "Saturday Night Live." "The traditional comedy revue has five men and one woman." But now the program's gender imbalance may be beginning to shift.


Headliners; K.O.'d
He went from Brooklyn juvenile delinquent to world heavyweight boxing champion, but Mike Tyson lost his biggest fight last week in an Indianapolis courtroom, where he was convicted of raping an 18-year-old beauty contestant last July.
In her corner were credentials as an honor student and Sunday school teacher and apparently compelling evidence that sex was not on her agenda in accepting a date with Mr.
Tyson: she had invited one of her roommates to join them on an outing on the town.
Mr.
Tyson's defense team acknowledged his reputation where women are concerned, but failed to persuade jurors that he had graphically telegraphed his intentions when he met the woman and that she had consented.
The former champ is to be sentenced next month, and could receive as much as 20 years in prison on each of three counts of rape and criminal deviate conduct.
If an appeal by Mr.
Tyson, who is 25 years old, is unsuccessful, he can expect to spend behind bars what might have been his prime years as a fighter.


June Wedding for Maria A. Roglieri
Dr. and Mrs.
John L. Roglieri of Tenafly, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Maria Ann Roglieri, to Daniel Joseph Friedman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald E. Friedman of Silver Spring, Md.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Roglieri, 25 years old, graduated from Columbia University and has a master's degree in Romance languages and literature from Harvard University and is studying for a doctorate.
Her fiance, 27, graduated from Harvard, where he is also working on a doctorate in electrical engineering.


Style Makers; Mark Heskin, Doll Maker
Mark Heskin has always liked dolls, from Barbie to Johnny West.
During his childhood in North Dakota, he stifled that interest.
But now, at age 31, he makes dolls for a living.
Mr.
Heskin is a caricaturist of sorts.
He takes stockings worn by dancers in Broadway productions like "The Will Rogers Follies," stuffs them with everything from newspaper to fiberfill and turns them into exaggerated likenesses of his subjects.


Daniel Sotomayor, Cartoonist, 33
Daniel Sotomayor, whose cartoons about gay political issues were widely published in the homosexual press, died on Feb. 5 at the Illinois Masonic Medical Center in Chicago.
He was 33 years old and lived in Chicago.
A friend, Lori Cannon, said the cause of death was AIDS.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
To portray pro-choice activists as fanatical counterparts of their Operation Rescue opponents, as Rosenblatt does in his opening paragraphs, requires a leap into the absurd.
I was reminded of a Jules Feiffer cartoon that appeared during the 1950's school-desegregation conflict.
It showed President Eisenhower telling the Washington press corps: "I'm against the extremists on both sides; those who want to close the schools and those who want to keep them open."
If the abortion war was truly a confrontation between extremists, pro-choice advocates would be interfering with the reproductive rights of pro-life proponents.
C.
W.
GRIFFIN
Phoenix


Spending a Windfall on Transport
AFTER years of bureaucratic wrangling, a quiet stretch of Route 21 in Passaic County -- sometimes called "the road to nowhere" -- may soon become the road to nearly everywhere when it is finally connected to Route 46 in the north and Interstate 78 in the south.
And after years of being the center of seemingly interminable traffic tie-ups, the intersection of Routes 4 and 17 in Bergen County may be in line for a new exit ramp that could speed commuters and weekend shoppers around a jam-packed cloverleaf.


The Man Who Created Hester Prynne
SALEM IS MY DWELLING PLACE
A Life of Nathaniel Hawthorne.
By Edwin Haviland Miller.
Illustrated. 596 pp.
Iowa City: University of Iowa Press. $35.


Crime
Kiss is what some people do to you before they do you dirty.
KISS (Morrow, $17) is also the title of Ed McBain's new 87th Precinct police procedural, whose dark plot of romantic betrayal and legal injustice comes laced with the bitter gall of irony.
"People here just don't
give


Hasbrouck Heights Journal; At Diner, 'Law on How to Eat Eggs' Leaves a Bad Taste for Regulations
EVA DIAKAKIS says that in the diner business, there are certain things that one learns never to trifle with, like a customer's preference when it comes to a hearty breakfast.
A suggestion that a customer try something different, she says, has the same effect as an insult hurled at the customer's loved one.
"You try telling someone early in the morning before they've had their coffee that the breakfast they ordered, by law, I can't serve," said Mrs.
Diakakis, who with her husband, Tony, owns the Bendix Diner on Route 17 here.
"At first, when this passed, they just looked at you like this was some kind of joke. Lot of times, they just got up and walked out."


Public &amp; Private; Wounded in Battle
When he looks back on the Presidential campaign of 1992, which he may understandably be disinclined to do, Bill Clinton could well be amazed at how much he did for America while getting less than nothing in return.
Because of Governor Clinton we have had a national debate about the effect of private life on public matters, about the relationship between marriage vows and integrity.
We have plumbed our antipathy toward the press and the press's antipathy toward itself.
And we have wondered who decides someone is a front-runner, and whether that is second cousin to the kiss of death.


Churches and Schools Enliven the Concert Scene
A COMBINATION of church and school events this week provide Westchester residents with an unusual number of musical programs to choose from.
Tonight at 8 o'clock, for example, the Sarah Lawrence Orchestra presents the winners of the college's Concerto Competition: the flutists Franya Berkman and Laura Schiller, the violinist Esther Hamori and the pianist Melanie Nan.


Day for the Unsung To Be Heard
Silencing the supporters of the European favorites, at least for a day, Kerrin Lee-Gartner of Canada, right, and Hilary Lindh of Juneau, Alaska, streaked to the gold and silver medals in the women's downhill.


Ms. Murdock Has Wedding
Wendy Jean Murdock, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Murdock of West Vancouver, British Columbia, was married yesterday to John Peter Murrin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Murrin of Indian Head, Md.
The Rev.
John Macnab performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church in the City of New York.
Ms.
Murdock, 39 years old, is keeping her name.
She and her husband are both partners at McKinsey &amp; Company, management consultants in New York.
She graduated from McGill University in Montreal and received an M.B.A. from the University of Western Ontario.
Her father, who is retired, was president of Chemetics International, a chemical engineering company in Vancouver.


Quotation of the Day
"I haven't been here since Dec. 23, 1973, and when I went out through the streets here this week, it was like I left last Friday and came back on Monday." -- ANDY ANDERSON, a Vietnam veteran, at a marathon in Ho Chi Minh City.  [ 1:2. ]


The Final Product Says It All
To the Editor:
The comparison between Steven Spielberg and Walt Disney is right on.
Who else today could turn the story of a tortoiselike alien into the largest grossing movie of all time?
Like Disney, each of Mr.
Spielberg's efforts is an oasis in a desert of exploitation and excessively violent releases.
Mr.
Spielberg's critics should pay close attention to the unparalleled quality of the final product rather than to his harsh negotiation techniques.
It is this perfectionism that produces such imaginative and meaningful works of art in an industry ridden with commercialism and superficiality.


Europe Environment Plan Hits Snag: France
France, with its keen eye for seizing the spirit of the moment, has played host to more prestigious conferences and printed more glossy pamphlets on the plight of the environment than most rich nations.
Yet single-handedly, France is now holding up the birth of the long-awaited European Environment Agency, which is to set and enforce common policies for the region's crowded environment.
The countries that have signed the plans envision them as the most powerful international tools yet to tackle environmental problems.


Electrical Repairs Require Knowledge of Safety Codes
BEFORE undertaking any project involving wiring, ascertain from the building inspector the electrical and safety codes, but never begin electrical repairs without turning off the power.
Most household wiring consists of cable, several solid wires grouped together in flexible plastic or metal sheathing.
Plastic-sheathed cable is called nonmetallic sheathed cable or Romex, a brand name.
Metal-sheathed cable is called armored cable or BX, another brand.


Halcyon Hall
To the Editor:
Omitted in the excellent article on Halcyon Hall on Dec. 29 -- "Hope Dims for a Millbrook Mansion" -- was the name of its architect, James E. Ware (1846-1918) who deserves to be better known and appreciated.
Born and educated in New York City, Ware was best known for his innovative tenement designs such as the "dumbbell plan," which was a significant advancement in rational planning and in the introduction of more light and air into dark and overcrowded tenement buildings.
The American Architect in 1907 noted that Ware's tenement blocks were designed "with as much care as if they were palaces."


Rating the Field, In the Imitable Style of George H.W. Bush
One way to understand a political campaign is to put yourself in the place of a candidate.
Maureen Dowd, a Washington correspondent of The Times, last week asked several Bush advisers to say, as frankly as they could, what they are telling the President about the Democratic Presidential field in Tuesday's New Hampshire primary -- and what Mr.
Bush himself thinks of his would-be opponents.
Ms.
Dowd was inspired to submit the results in the style that has come to be known as Bushspeak.
Memo from George Bush Re: The Competition
Mother told me not to gloat.
Don't use the Big I. Still, got to gloat a little.
In secret.
Sure, I know things are looking b-a-a-a-d for the home team right now.
Approval ratings cratering.
Voters in New Hampshire very angry at me about the economy in the ditch and raising taxes and running around with my pals, Mikhail and Boris and Kiichi and Francois.
Pat Buchanan, tattling on me for being a moderate, says I'm like a 5-year-old and can't handle Congress.
Oh yeah?
Serves him right if John Sununu takes his place on "Crossfire."


Crash Course in Cold Hard Facts Of Winter Games for U.S. Press
When American newspaper reporters huddle together in the snow of the Winter Olympics, this is what they want to know:
How long is a penalty lap in the biathlon?


Giving a Hand From the Heart
THURSDAY -- Fashion designers, models, actresses, Elizabeth Taylor and Margaret Thatcher were among those who contributed handmade valentines that were auctioned for the benefit of Impact.
Impact is a nonprofit group that organizes volunteer community service programs for homeless children and their families.
The cocktail reception and auction was in the ballroom of the Puck Building.
WEDNESDAY -- Larry Rivers, Roy Lichtenstein, James Rosenquist and Red Grooms were a few of the many who donated their work to an auction party in the Great Hall of Cooper Union.
The event raised money for Bailey House, at Christopher and West Streets.
Run by the AIDS Resource Center, Bailey House gives homeless people with AIDS a place to live.


Guard Is Suspended
Who could blame West Virginia's star point guard, MARSALIS BASEY, for wanting to stay in bed the morning after an upset by Rutgers snapped the Mountaineers' home winning streak at 10 games?
Coach GAYLE CATLETT, for one.
Catlett suspended Basey indefinitely, and while the coach would say only that the suspension was for disciplinary reasons, Basey's father, LAWRENCE BASEY, told The Dominion Post in Morgantown that his son had given him a full account: He overslept and missed an 8:30 A.M. class.


How Capitalism Causes Earthquakes
STRONG MOTION
By Jonathan Franzen. 508 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


A New Attempt to Get Ireland Going Again
In his time, Prime Minister Charles J. Haughey was castigated for being an over-spending populist, and praised for streamlining Irish finances and nourishing the modest boom of the late 1980's.
Few leaders before him in this country's 70 years of independence had dominated Irish political and economic life as Mr.
Haughey, who was forced out last month from the post he had held for 8 of the last 12 years amid economic recession and allegations of corruption among his friends.
Stories of Mr.
Haughey's conviviality and wit are being retold now with fondness, and some sense of metaphor.
There is the time, some 20 years ago, he told his drinking chums, that he was stopped by a policeman while driving the wrong way on a one-way street.


Alicia Macri, Banker, Weds
Alicia Beth Macri, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore W. Macri of New York, was married yesterday to Douglas Alan Lindgren, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan C. Lindgren of Belmont, Calif.
The Rev.
Samuel B. Matarazzo, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Vincent Ferrer Church in New York.
Mrs.
Lindgren, 27 years old, is an assistant vice president in private banking at Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a vice president of the Carol Publishing Group in New York.
Her mother, Joan Macri, is the director of development at New York Downtown Hospital.


ALBANIA SEARCHES FOR STABLE FUTURE
Though the reservoirs are full, the water system in this capital city is turned on for only a few hours a day to avoid overtaxing the decrepit water mains.
Waves of power cuts leave many neighborhoods dark.
Shootings, robberies and thefts have become rampant in recent months, and residents now rush to get home before dusk.
Walls around some public buildings have disappeared because the bricks have been stolen.
Some people have taken to chopping down trees in the city's parks to get firewood.
Italian soldiers must escort trucks of food aid that supply nearly all of the country's basic needs.
On Friday, 700 armed looters made off with 30 tons of Western food and medical aid stockpiled in a warehouse in the city of Rogzhine, witnesses said.


Transvaal Vote Is a Test for de Klerk's Policies
This normally quiet Afrikaner town in the western Transvaal is bracing for an important test of white support for F. W. de Klerk since he was elected President in September 1989 and moved to dismantle the apartheid policies of strict racial segregation of his ruling National Party.
At the heart of the confrontation is an election campaign being fought to fill the parliamentary seat left by the death of Louis le Grange, the Speaker of the white House of Assembly in Parliament, in October.


Making a Difference; Chance of a Lifetime
Last year, Hoffmann-La Roche stunned the medical and scientific communities when it paid $300 million to acquire a technology -- known as the polymerase chain reaction, or PCR -- from the Cetus Corporation.
Last week, Roche formed a new business unit to make the technology broadly available to research institutions and diagnostic facilities through a licensing program.
The aim is "to insure that PCR technology reaches its full potential as rapidly as possible," said Kathy Ordonez, who left a position as president of Roche's diagnostics business to head the new unit, Roche Molecular Systems Inc.
Ms.
Ordonez said she expects about 100 diagnostic laboratories in the United States to license the technology, with licensing programs in Europe and Japan to follow.


English Garden Limits Visitors
The number of people allowed into Sissinghurst, the garden in England created by the writer Vita Sackville-West and her husband, Sir Harold Nicolson, will be limited this year to reduce the damage caused by crowds of visitors.
In the 25 years since the garden at Sissinghurst Castle, about an hour's drive south of London, came under the care of Britain's National Trust, the number of visitors has increased from 20,000 in 1967 to nearly 200,000 last year.
About 450 visitors will be allowed into the garden at one time and may stay as long as they wish.
On the busiest days, later arrivals will have to wait their turn until people in the garden leave.
Some may be asked to return another day.
A spokesman for the National Trust said the average time spent in the garden was about one and a half hours, though this depends on the weather.
Sundays are always busy; visitors are advised to call ahead to find out whether a wait is likely.
The Sissinghurst shop, restaurant and surrounding fields, woods and lake will be open to visitors.
Sissinghurst Castle Garden, near Cranbrook TN17 2AB, Kent, (580) 712850, opens from April 1 until Oct. 15, from 1 to 6:30 P.M.
Tuesday to Friday; 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Saturday, Sunday and Good Friday (April 17).
Admission is about $8.30 and $4.25 for children and the elderly, except Sunday when it is about $9.25 and $4.60.


3 County Banks Struggle to Bolster Resources
AS the three largest banks based in Westchester struggle to keep their doors open and comply with Federal regulatory standards, a single theme unites their hard-luck stories: commercial real estate ventures that seemed so promising during the 1980's are faring poorly in the current economy and many financial institutions, now holding bad loans, find themselves with severely depleted capital.
"In retrospect, we put too many eggs in one basket," said Joseph C. LaMagna, executive vice president and chief financial officer of the American Savings Bank in White Plains.
"I've been in the banking business for 21 years, and the last two or three have been the most challenging I've ever faced."


Roni Kipnis Plans To Marry in July
Roni Sue Kipnis, an assistant vice president at the Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York, and Bruce Henry Schwartz, a lawyer, have announced their engagement.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kipnis, 34 years old, graduated from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Shirley Kipnis of Woodmere, L.I., and the late Abe Kipnis.


Corrections
A picture caption on the Evening Hours page last Sunday misidentified a guest who appeared with Dovanna Pagowski at the awards dinner of the Council of Fashion Designers.
She was Saundra Smith.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
Will not this war be resolved once the abortion pill RU-486 is readily available in this country?
The privacy afforded by access to such a pill should help prevent the types of confrontations that have come to characterize this conflict.
JOHN WALSH
Belvidere, N.J.


Sports of The Times; The Olympics Don't Need Us vs. Them
IN their red uniforms with "CCCP" in white, the Soviet Union hockey players once were the scourge of the Winter Olympics, a team that all but melted the ice under their opponents.
In those years, the Soviets were the "enemy" that some Americans seemed to need in order to reduce international sports to a morality play.
In those years, the cold war of politics had created the gold war of the Olympics, Winter and Summer.


A Pianist With Harlem on His Mind
Was James P. Johnson the invisible composer, the musical counterpart to Ralph Ellison's Invisible Man?
Johnson, who died in 1955, holds the odd distinction of
not
being remembered as the composer of "The Charleston," the musical emblem of the roaring 20's.
Jazz aficionados know him as the father of Harlem stride piano and the composer of the famous "Carolina Shout." But Johnson also composed 16 musicals, more than 200 songs, a symphony, a piano concerto, two tone poems, even an opera.
Though these works parallel the achievement of his contemporary George Gershwin, they are virtually unknown.
Now listeners will have a chance to discover the full range of Johnson's music this week when Jazz at Lincoln Center presents two retrospective concerts.


When Small Is Beautiful
To the Editor:
As a middle-management employee of a giant corporation, I find it refreshing to see articles like "Take This Job and Love It."


The Age of Condoms
It isn't easy buying a condom.
At least not when you're 53, fresh from an unwanted divorce and have never used one before.
Back in the 1950's, when I and my friends were teen-agers, condoms were anathemas.
For one thing, we were too embarrassed to go into a drugstore and buy them.
But more important, being a Catholics, we had to face the religious issue.
By the time we reached the age when we needed them, it had been drilled into us that using condoms was sinful.
The mere thought of putting one on could prompt a cold sweat.


KURDS RETURNING TO RAZED VILLAGES
The tug of memory draws them through the snowy mountain passes, down the frozen, rutted roads to the piles of rubble they call home.
They live beneath jagged concrete slabs in sub-zero temperatures, with no running water, little food, no kerosene to heat with and, some would contend, no future.
All across northern Iraq, tens of thousands of Kurds, once herded like cattle into new Government-built towns as their villages were razed, have headed home.
Of the 4,000 villages and towns demolished by the Iraqi Government since 1976 in an effort to break the Kurdish rebel movement, 1,700 are being rebuilt.


Elizabeth Uhlmann to Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick G. Uhlmann of Highland Park, Ill., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Marjory Uhlmann to Michael Robert Schwaeber, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Schwaeber of Roslyn Harbor, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Uhlmann, 23 years old, is a publicity assistant at Summit Books, a division of Simon &amp; Schuster publishing in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University, from which her fiance graduated magna cum laude.


Jeffrey Stuhr to Wed Ann M. McMahon
Mrs.
Frank V. McMahon of Westport, Conn., has announced the engagement of her daughter Ann Marie McMahon to Jeffrey Raymond Stuhr, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George H. Stuhr Jr. of Rio Verde, Ariz.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss McMahon, 26 years old, graduated from Fairfield University.
She is a corporate software instructor for Learnsoft Corporate Training in Newport Beach, Calif.


Ukrainian Ship Bound for Tampa
A cruise ship owned by a former Soviet republic will set sail for the United States in April and begin a series of cruises from Tampa, Fla.
The Ukraine-owned Columbus Caravelle will be the first cruise ship from the former Soviet Union to call at an American port since access by Soviet ships was restricted by the Reagan Administration in 1981.
It will call Tampa Bay its home port for five weeks of two- and five-day cruises.
Starting April 12, the 330-passenger ship will cruise the Gulf of Mexico Sunday through Friday, calling at Cancun and Cozumel in Mexico and Key West, Fla.
There will also be two-day party cruises on Friday and Saturday .
After the final five- day trip on May 15, the Columbus Caravelle will leave on a 16-day repositioning cruise from Florida via Bermuda and the Bahamas to Germany.
It will then conduct cruises to the Russian Arctic.


Somali Refugees Find Little Relief at Kenya Camp
A cease-fire accord signed on Friday at the United Nations offers the first hope that the civil war in Somalia may be ending.
But even if the fighting ends soon, relief still seems far away at Liboi, a camp on the Kenyan border where more than 50,000 Somali refugees are living in dismal conditions.
Kenya, until recently a country with only a small refugee population, is now host to 145,000 refugees, more than half of whom have arrived since clan warfare broke out in the Somali capital of Mogadishu in November, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.


Magic Should Pay For His Mistakes
To the Sports Editor:
Magic Johnson in the Olympics?
Absolutely not!
Americans have always regarded our Olympic athletes as role models for our boys and girls, which Magic definitely is not.


Clarinet Crossover


Filling That Potato-Shape Space Inside Everyone
OLD habits die hard.
When I was growing up, it was said that everyone had a potato-shape space inside them that no other vegetable could fill.
My Irish grandmother regularly piled our plates high with potatoes freshly dug from the garden, waxing indignant when we refused third or fourth helpings.
"Potatoes are 90 percent water!" she would say, slathering them with butter.
I still crave potatoes, especially with roasts, grilled meat and fish.
One of my favorite recipes is my English grandmother's roast potatoes, which have the added attraction of being surprisingly low in fat.
She used to make them during the war in London when rationing was in effect.
In those days she would have used lard, but I have substituted light olive oil (you can also use safflower or peanut oil).
The potatoes are not really roasted, although they taste as if they are.
First they are steamed, then they are sauteed with only a tablespoon of oil on top of the stove over a low heat.
As long as the heat is kept very low, the potatoes will turn golden brown and crisp without burning.


Review/Theater; 'Antigone,' With Clowns
What could possibly connect Sophocles' "Antigone" with the art of clowning?
That question is explored in considerable depth by the Irondale Ensemble Project in its iconoclastic production of the Greek tragedy, which plays through Saturday.
It is also elaborated in program notes that quote from Bertolt Brecht and Joseph Campbell.
Brecht praises a show he saw in which a clown banged his head, sawed off the swollen bump and ate it, as wittier than anything in the entire contemporary theater.
Campbell, musing on the appeal of clowns, suggests that children see in them reflections of a primal innocence.
These ideas are rather hazily integrated into the Irondale Project's interpretation of the play, in which Creon is a circus ringmaster and Antigone a stubborn woman-child in clown whiteface.
In the company's tiny performing space on the Lower East Side, several of the performers enter by descending from ropes.
The seven-member Walter Thompson Orchestra plays a dissonant score that juxtaposes skewed circusy marches with a galumphing arrangement of "The Man on the Flying Trapeze."


William Schuman Is Dead at 81; Noted Composer Headed Juilliard
William Schuman, a composer whose distinctly American style won two Pulitzer Prizes and guided him as the founding president of Lincoln Center and the president of the Juilliard School, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.
He died after hip surgery, his family said.


Next It May Be Economy Up, Stocks Down
The stock market now seems to believe that the recession is almost over.
The question for investors, however, may be whether all the fun is gone even before the growth begins.
Notwithstanding all the bull market publicity, many investors have not found joy so far in 1992.
The Dow Jones industrial average did hit a record high of 3,276.83 on Wednesday, but 12 of the 30 Dow stocks have lost ground so far this year, among them such long-term favorites as Merck and Philip Morris.
The best of the Dow stocks is much-maligned General Motors.
And bonds, which everyone knew were sure to advance rapidly, have generally fallen in price.


Smooching With Their Pooches
To the Editor:
There are times when it is well-nigh impossible to repel the conviction that we live in an age of high-sounding twaddle.
John Berger's claim that the "look between animal and man . . . with which . . . all men had always lived until less than a century ago, has been extinguished" (Noted With Pleasure, Jan. 26) came close to pushing me over the edge.


We Need a Real National Rebuilding Program; Consumer Confidence
To the Editor:
In testimony before the Senate Budget Committee on Feb. 4, Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, expressed dismay that American consumers have not shown the confidence they showed in past recessions.
Until consumer confidence is restored, the economy will continue to wallow in recession.


3 Israeli Soldiers Killed by Raiders Near West Bank
Attackers described as Arab guerrillas slipped into a lightly guarded Israeli Army camp early today and hacked and stabbed three soldiers to death.
A fourth soldier was badly wounded in the raid, the deadliest assault on an Israeli military post since November 1987, when six soldiers were killed by a Palestinian from Lebanon who floated into northern Israel on a hang glider.


When Men Hit Women
His Saturday night shift has been excruciatingly dull for the police in Duluth, Minn., a brawny working-class city of 90,000 on the shoreline of Lake Superior.
The complaints trickle into the precinct, the callers almost embarrassed: black bear up a tree; kids throwing stuffed animals into traffic.
But it's 1 A.M. now, and the bars are closing.
People are heading home.
1:02 A.M.: Couple arguing loudly.
Probably just "verbal assault," the dispatcher tells the car patrols.


Social Events
At the Botanical Garden
Feb. 19 -- Orchids will form the background for a dinner and dance in the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
The benefit, for the garden's programs to preserve endangered plant species, starts with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 220-8775.


So What's To Like?
To the Editor:  An apologist for rap music -- why?
Some rappers mean to offend me, white devil that I am, and so I am offended.
Much inoffensive rap (Hammer, Vanilla Ice) is probably not considered very good rap.
Even I recognize it as banal and not worthy of attention.
But since most rap music is pretty pathetic stuff, Jon Pareles should have cited the best of rap and explained esthetically (not socially or politically) why one should appreciate it.
And anyone who believes that rap is distinguishable from other forms of music by being "foreground" music has never seen a teen-ager doing homework.
K.
J.
WALTERS Monroe, N. Y.


In Love With a Gym Teacher
TRAPS
By Sondra Spatt Olsen. 150 pp. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press. $22.95.


Ms. Glasberg to Wed D. L. Sussman
Steven M. Glasberg and Elise R. Sultanof, both of East Windsor, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Diana Lyn Glasberg to Daniel Leonard Sussman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Sussman of Edison, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Glasberg, 24 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher.
She graduated from Duke University and the University of Pennsylvania Law School.
Her father is the executive vice president of Air Brook Limousine Inc. in Morristown, N.J.
Her mother is a personnel manager at Madamoiselle Personnel Agency Inc. in New York.


Merton Y. Koplin, 71, a Producer And Figure in Quiz Scandal, Dies
Merton Y. Koplin, the award-winning producer of some of television's most popular and critically acclaimed programs and a central figure in the scandal over rigged quiz shows, died on Saturday at University Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 71 years old and a resident of Manhattan.
His family said he died of natural causes, but would not specify the illness.


Krone Goes South and Things Heat Up
Julie Krone, the 4-foot-10-inch, 100-pound leading lady of New York racing, has moved the act to Florida this winter for the first time and is winning races and converts in bunches.
As the season settled into its second month at Gulfstream Park, she was averaging one winner a day and was leading all other jockeys at the track.
And, despite a rare 0-for-18 slump earlier this month, she was captivating the customers and trainers with the same pep and personality that shot her career into the big leagues last summer.


Critic's Notebook; Dr. Freud, Can Tea Really Just Be Tea?
At a recent seminar on Schubert at the 92d Street Y, a professor at the University of Minnesota, Susan McClary, examined the composer's "Unfinished" Symphony as possibly reflecting his personal, social and even sensual thoughts.
In doing so, she expressed sympathy for a theory by Maynard Solomon that Schubert might have been gay.
Here are two excerpts from her paper:


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
How long should Alan Greenspan wait to see whether cuts in interest rates can lift the economy?
With millions of households hit by unemployment, and the White House and Congress both worried about re-election, a lot of people inside and outside Washington say the Federal Reserve should not wait much longer.
Since it usually takes around six months for the stimulative effects of interest rate cuts to show up in the economy, the stimulus of the Fed's aggressive December cut of the discount rate should be noticeable by June.
But this downturn is not acting the way economists' models say recessions should behave.
And that, some analysts say, is why the economy remains dead in the water some 18 months after the Fed began its long series of easings.  [ Page D1. ]


Raiders' Items Remain a Hot Ticket
The Giants were in and the Jets remained out -- way out -- when it came to National Football League merchandise sales last year.
The Los Angeles Raiders continued as the most popular team by far according to N.F.L.
Properties, the arm of the league that licenses team names and logos for merchandise like caps, jackets and sweaters.
The Raiders accounted for 26.6 percent of the revenue accumulated from royalties.


Strength Over Style Adds Up for Petrenko
By morning today, when the world's best female figure skaters had replaced the men in practice at the Olympic oval and the adjacent practice rink, the air was still filled with conversation about the night before.
In a curious competition for the gold medal in men's singles, none of the leading skaters performed with the kind of blind, hellbent relentlessness of pure emotion and energy that four years earlier brought Brian Boitano the championship.


Review/Pop; An All-Night Dance Party Imported From Britain
People who didn't live through the 1960's may be destined to reinvent them.
The latest band to turn up here as an emissary of Britain's raves, or all-night dance parties, is Primal Scream, from Glasgow.
With a simple message -- "Gonna dance to the music all night long, getting high, getting happy, getting gone" -- the group took over the Ritz on Friday night to play about an hour of live music amid six hours of rave-style dance music and video that looked like reprocessed light shows.
Primal Scream has set out to update both psychedelic rock and the psychedelic impulse, which only partly overlap.
Some of Primal Scream's songs are secondhand gospel and secondhand soul, played with sloppy exuberance, just as in 1960's rock.
Other songs follow the inclusive psychedelic impulse and embrace later developments, from drum-machine rhythms to disco wah-wah guitar to hip-hop sampling.
Vocals are shared by a woman who belts out exhortations like a gospel-trained disco singer and an adenoidal man who provides a bit of earnestness.
At the Ritz, Primal Scream also lifted whole verses from older songs, as in a medley that included Led Zeppelin's "Whole Lotta Love" and John Coltrane's "Love Supreme."


Sheik a Hero to Shiites, a Symbol of Terrorism to West
The Party of God eulogized its secretary general, Sheik Abbas Musawi, as a martyr today, saying he died "in a vicious Zionist raid targeting his convoy." The party promised to escalate its holy war against Israel.
Sheik Musawi, 39 years old, died in an Israeli ambush as he returned from a rally in memory of a fellow party leader who was killed by Israeli commandos eight years ago.


Even in Victory, 'Ring Rust' Takes Its Toll on Ruddock
He was soft around the middle and occasionally looked amateurish throwing his go-for-broke punches against Greg Page.
But eventually Saturday night, Donovan (Razor) Ruddock -- a fighter with a puncher's reputation -- zeroed in on the 33-year-old Page and, with four left hooks in the eighth round, left him so woozy that at the bell Page appeared to need help to get to his corner.


News Summary
International A2-9  ISRAEL KILLS SHIITE MILITANT
Israeli forces killed the leader of the pro-Iranian Party of God, Sheik Abbas Musawi, in a helicopter raid on his motorcade in southern Lebanon.
Sheik Musawi's wife, son and at least four bodyguards were also killed in the attack, which seems likely to cast a pall over the Middle East peace talks.
A1  The Party of God eulogizes its leader as a martyr.
A9  PENTAGON DRAFTS WAR SCENARIOS
In its post-cold-war planning, the Pentagon envisions seven scenarios that could draw American forces into combat over the next 10 years, military documents show.
Robust defense spending would be needed to maintain forces capable of winning one or more of the conflicts.
A1  COLLECTIVE PAIN AND POETRY
Peace is only snow-deep in Koltsovo, a village near Moscow that is going through the pains of withdrawal from centralized economics.
A1  UZBEK RIVALS COURT BAKER
Secretary of State Baker got a lesson in the complexities of Central Asian politics on a visit to Uzbekistan.
President Karimov assured Mr.
Baker that he had become a democrat; opposition leaders told him the President was a dictator.
A7  A MUSLIM ECONOMIC CLUB
Officials of Iran, Pakistan and Turkey met in Teheran with representatives of the six former Soviet republics of Central Asia to revive a moribund economic organization.
A9  TROOPS OPEN FIRE IN ZAIRE
Zairian troops fired on protesters led by priests in the capital, killing 13 people.
The protesters were calling on President Mobutu to allow the resumption of a national democracy conference.
A3  NEW PITCH FROM NEW WORLD
With an economic boom coming after a brain drain, several South American countries are turning to the economic rubble of Eastern Europe to find skilled workers.
A5  A Serbian enclave votes to oust its hard-line leader.
A7  Algeria outlined an economic program after weeks of violence.
A2  A memorial in Hungary to the sufferings of gypsies under fascism.
A4  National A10-14  QUIET SUCCESS FOR JOB CORPS
With nearly three decades of turning uneducated young people into skilled workers, Jobs Corps is being lauded as a Federal project that actually works.
But plans to expand the program are being threatened by budget cuts.
A1  FINAL NEW HAMPSHIRE DEBATE
The main Democratic Presidential candidates met in a debate that focused on their common opposition to President Bush, rather than the differences among their own prescriptions for the economy.
A1  BUSH ON DEFENSIVE
Despite weeks of trying to sell his ideas for ending the recession and addressing middle-class concerns, President Bush's re-election campaign still faces questions about the economy.
Not to mention Patrick J. Buchanan.
A1  BROWN AS POLITICAL SAVIOR
Despite what naysayers argue, the former California Governor is pushing his anti-big politics message with the fervor of an evangelist.
A13.
Voters have a lower threshold for sugar-coated promises.
A12  DAHMER JURORS REACT
After weeks of graphic accounts of horrifying acts in the trial of Jeffrey L. Dahmer, jurors met with psychiatrists to give them an outlet to talk, cry or vent rage.
A11  CAN HE MAKE GOVERNMENT WORK?
A little-known political consultant is finding a wider audience for his ideas of injecting principals of business management into government operations.
A10  MUST JURY REFLECT POPULACE?
News Analysis: The notion of a jury of peers has been around for hundreds of years but has never been written into the law in the United States.
Should it be?
A11  HEALING A SCHISM
In Scranton, Pa., an emissary brought a healing message from Pope John Paul II to a breakaway Polish Catholic denomination.
A10  COMMON GROUND ON ABORTION
Advocates on both sides of America's bitter abortion debate find they do share some concerns and goals.
A10  Prince Georges County, Md., is furloughing school employees.
A11  Canadians defended their health-care criticism.
A14  TEEN-AGERS WITH GUNS
Throughout New York City, youths are carrying guns that have been flooding in on the currents of violence in the nation's biggest drug market.
Many teen-agers have been caught up in a circle of packing weapons to protect themselves.
A1  Business Digest D1  Sports C1-11  Baseball: Cone and Mets go to arbitration.
C2  Basketball: Best of the beginners.
C4  Bulls want piece of history.
C8  Lakers retire Magic's number.
C8  Columns: George Vecsey on Richard Petty.
C3  Dave Anderson on Herschel Walker.
C7  Hockey: Devils beat Rangers.
C4  Olympics: The amazing, amusing American hockey team.
C1  No medal for Americans in bobsled.
C1  East Germany's past resurfaces.
C5  Norwegian wins super giant slalom.
C7  Tennis: Navratilova makes history.
C2  Track and Field: Scotsman wins Vietnam marathon.
C4  Obituaries D7  Marton Y. Koplin, television producer  Melvin L. Sokolow, literary agent  Robert F. Kelly, former state Assemblyman  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Museums stretching hours.
C13  Reading music closely (maybe a bit too closely).C13  Theater: "Grandchild of Kings." C13  Music: Kronos Quartet.
C13  Ellen Greene remembers.
C15  Tribute to Jan DeGaetani C16  Primal Scream at the Ritz.
C16  Word and Image: "Outerbridge Reach," a novel.
C18  "Till Death Us Do Part," NBC.
C18  Assimilating the Indians, on "The American Experience." C18  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials A16  Reinventing the debate.
California medical model.
Presidents' words.
Poor judgment.
Letters A16  Leslie H. Gelb: Godzilla vs.
King Kong.
A17  William Safire: The plumbers' return.
A17  Walter A. McDougall: What we do for our country.
A17  John May: World-class destruction.
A17  Simon Strong: Peru is losing more than the drug war.
A17


Foreign Affairs; Godzilla Vs. King Kong
Croatians, Outer Mongolians and British soccer fans need look no further than campaign '92 in the United States as they struggle to master the techniques of democracy.
Democratic Consultant: Let's get away from the smears and back to issues confronting the middle class.


Indoor Lacrosse Gaining Fan Support
The Major Indoor Lacrosse League, founded in 1987, has established itself at last on Long Island.
The New York Saints, who play at Nassau Coliseum, have had a 40 percent rise in attendance for their two home games this season and attracted a record crowd, 13,466 fans, for the contest against the Detroit Turbos.
The Saints, who will next play the Baltimore Thunder, at Nassau Coliseum on Friday night, are made up mostly of former college stars from Long Island.
An example would be SAL LoCASCIO, the league's leading goalie.
He is from Lindenhurst and is a University of Massachusetts alumnus.


U.S. Sled Is Seventh As Walker Is Blamed
Held back by poor starts that at least one team member attributed to brakeman Herschel Walker's inexperience, the embattled United States two-man bobsled team still came in seventh in the Winter Games today, .69 seconds behind the gold medal duo of Gustav Weder and Donat Acklin of Switzerland.
The United States might have won a medal if Walker, the Minnesota Vikings running back, had had the opportunity to spend more time practicing with the sled, Jim Hickey, the United States coach, indicated.


Benefits of Bank Mergers Are Disputed in 2 Studies
Although bankers and investors expect great savings from recently announced bank mergers, two new studies confirm earlier findings that bank combinations do not tend to lower costs or raise profits.
Economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta concluded in a study published last week that "we have not found any evidence that mergers significantly lower expenses."


Canadians Defend Care System Against Criticism.
In announcing his plan for tax credits to try to make quality medical care available for all Americans, President Bush hit one of Canada's sacred cows.
He labeled Canada's universal health insurance program "a cure worse than the disease."
Admittedly feeling national pride in their 26-year-old Medicare system, many Canadians insist that in rejecting it as a model for the United States, the President also misrepresented it.


Pentagon Imagines New Enemies To Fight in Post-Cold-War Era
In its first detailed military planning for the post-cold-war era, the Pentagon envisions seven scenarios for potential foreign conflicts that could draw United States forces into combat over the next 10 years, according to internal Pentagon documents.
Maintaining forces capable of fighting and winning one or more of the seven scenarios outlined in the documents would require a robust level of military spending into the next century.
The documents suggest levels of manpower and weapons that would appear to stall, if not reverse, the downward trend in military spending by the mid-1990's.


Where Thrive and Thrive Equals 10
They have played half a season now and they have made an impact on college basketball despite their newcomer status and the fact that most of them are still just 18 or 19 years old.
Chris Wallace of Buckhannon, W. Va., has followed their progress carefully as editor of the prestigious "Blue Ribbon College Basketball Yearbook" and as a former part-time scout for four National Basketball Association teams.
Here are the 10 best first-year college basketball players to date according to Wallace, listed alphabetically, with his comments:


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Journal; Democrats' Last New Hampshire Debate Becomes a Poise and Pose Contest
Tonight's debate among the Democrats was confusing and frustrating, but also revealing.
It did not give viewers much sense of what policies the candidates stood for, but it provided a nice glimpse of how they reacted to adversity, of how they answered strange questions in the midst of chaos.
It began with a series of unnecessary videotaped pieces about the candidates and proceeded into a section that resembled two-against-one tennis: two questioners sending question after unrelated question against one candidate.
Then the candidates took turns rambling on about whatever was on their minds, after which they delivered one-minute closing statements in the pious, rehearsed tones of schoolchildren in an American Legion essay contest.


No. 32 Is Lifted to the Rafters As Magic Johnson Is Honored
Magic Johnson's brilliant National Basketball Association career -- which he says might not be over -- was recognized today as the Los Angeles Lakers retired his jersey at halftime of their game against Boston, which they lost, 114-107.
"I'm looking forward to playing in the Olympics," Johnson said at the conclusion of the emotional 45-minute ceremony.
"I hope if I do decide to come back, you won't be upset if we do this all over again,"


Learning the Trade Game Early


Paula R. O. Schwartz, Social-Services Official
Paula Ruth Oboler Schwartz, a psychotherapist, social worker and civil rights advocate, died on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
Her family would not give her age.
She died of cancer, her family said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; ECONOMY SHADOWS BUSH'S CAMPAIGN
President Bush today wound up a weekend of campaigning intended to supercharge his re-election bid with a show of Presidential strength.
Instead, he confronted skeptical voters and lingering doubts about his economic plan and went home still on the defensive against Patrick J. Buchanan, his conservative challenger.
Much of the extra campaign time that his staff scheduled to give voters a closer look at their President was spent explaining why he had not yet delivered on a promise he made in the State of the Union Message to press for a new tax break.
Upbeat Despite Small Crowds
Despite weeks of trying to sell his ideas for ending the recession and addressing middle-class concerns, Mr.
Bush continued to hear questions about unemployment, a sluggish economy and the growing costs of health care.


Vandals Damage Tombstone Warehouse
Vandals broke into a Brooklyn warehouse full of tombstones over the weekend and spray-painted the walls and several monuments with swastikas and graffiti, in what the police have deemed a bias incident.
The vandals broke into the building, Klein Monuments, at 153 Sheffield Avenue in East New York, by cutting a hole in a cinder-block wall, the police said.


INSIDE
Juries and Their Peer
For all its ringing language, the Bill of Rights says nothing about "a jury of one's peers." And just what is that, anyway?
News analysis, page A11.
Emptying Crowded Cells
Officials facing overflowing prisons, tight budgets and a sense that locking up more criminals has not cut crime, are seeking alternatives.
Page B5.


Bobsledder Publicly Apologizes for Spying on Teammates
Two German sports officials today left open the possibility that more athletes on the German Olympic team would be identified as former collaborators with the Stasi, East Germany's secret police.
But in the interest of holding the Olympic team together, the officials have chosen to wait until after the Winter Games in Albertville to decide whether to pursue an inquiry.


Brook Adams, Student, Weds
Mary Holbrook Adams, a graduate student in Los Angeles, and Anthony Edward Goldsmith, a lawyer in Camarillo, Calif., were married yesterday in Los Angeles.
Judge James Albracht of State Superior Court in Santa Monica, Calif., officiated at the Hotel Bel-Air.
Mrs.
Goldsmith, who is 30 years old and is known as Brook, is studying psychology at Pepperdine University.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
She is a daughter of Mimi Findlay of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Peter R. Adams, and a stepdaughter of David B. Findlay Jr.
Her stepfather is the president of an art gallery bearing his name, and her mother owns an antiques business bearing her name, both in New York.


Man Shot to Death in Hotel
A man was found shot to death early yesterday at a single room occupancy hotel in lower Manhattan, the police said.
Sgt.
Peter Sweeney, a police spokesman, identified the man as Louis Daggett and said he was in his 30's.
Mr.
Daggett's body was found at 2:30 A.M. in his fourth-floor room at the Terminal Hotel at 184 11th Avenue.


2 Magazines Are Started Amid Slump
A number of magazines have died in the last year, including Connoisseur, New York Woman and American Film.
Some of those magazines had well-heeled media companies behind them, but even they felt the odds of reaching profitability were too poor in the current recession.
That may explain some of the attention being given to the start-ups of two magazines -- Worth, from the mutual-fund giant Fidelity Investments, and Smart Money, a joint venture of the Hearst Corporation and Dow Jones &amp; Company.
Indeed, since these publications have such prominent parents, and millions of dollars behind them, they are drawing quite a bit of attention.


Like a Bird in the Sky


Prosecutor Reviews Dinkins Stock Sale
United States Attorney Andrew J. Maloney is looking into what Arnold I. Biegen, who resigned last month as Mayor David N. Dinkins's campaign finance chief, knew about a stock transaction involving Mr.
Dinkins and his son, David Jr., law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
It is unclear what new information, if any, Mr.
Biegen might be able to provide, and whether it could lead to a re-opening of the stock transfer issue.


You Can Too Buy the American Car You Want; Who Can Afford It?
To the Editor:
I was sitting at my kitchen table when I read "I Tried to Buy a U.S. Car (Sigh)" (Op-Ed, Jan. 24) by Verne W. Newton.
It strikes me that Mr.
Newton has hit upon the problem in the auto industry.
Not in his experience in trying to buy American and not in the indifferent way he was received by the dealers.


Dahmer Jurors Tell of Emotional Impact
After being bombarded for three weeks with graphic, relentless accounts of horrifying acts in the trial of the serial killer Jeffrey L. Dahmer, one of the jurors said the emotional toll finally became too much.
"I dealt with it by leaving the room and crying," said Elba Duggins, who served on the jury that found on Saturday that Mr.
Dahmer was sane when he killed and dismembered 15 men and boys.


Knick Loss to Bulls Is Not a Lost Cause
The Knicks did not earn a victory in Chicago on Saturday night.
But they did earn more respect from the Bulls.
Had Gerald Wilkins made his 23-foot jumper at the buzzer, New York would have become only the third team to beat the Bulls at Chicago Stadium this season.
But Wilkins's buzzer-beater was a tad too long, and the Knicks dropped a scintillating 99-98 decision.


Sweden Pursues Weapons Exports
The first models of the JAS-39 Gripen will roll off the assembly line here next year, a lightweight single-engine fighter aircraft that Sweden hopes will become a hot new export.
With the cold war over, and most European military budgets shrinking, the Swedish Government and some of the nation's biggest industries are taking a calculated gamble.
Despite rising production costs, they are pushing full speed ahead with plans for the Gripen, a project begun nearly a decade ago, and are aggressively looking for markets for other high-technology military projects, from radar and torpedoes to submarines.


ISRAELIS KILL CHIEF OF PRO-IRAN SHIITES IN SOUTH LEBANON
Israeli forces killed the leader of the pro-Iranian Party of God in Lebanon today in a lightning strike by helicopter gunships that reportedly also left his wife, his son and at least four bodyguards dead.
The dramatic afternoon raid on a motorcade carrying the Shiite Muslim leader, Sheik Abbas Musawi, outside Jibchit in southern Lebanon kept this part of the Middle East locked in a new cycle of violence that was likely to cast a pall on United States-brokered peace talks scheduled to resume in Washington next week.


All the Right Moves
Like Michael Jordan during one of his majestic midair moves, the Chicago Bulls have risen above the rest of the National Basketball Association.
Do the Bulls have enough hang time to win another championship?
That depends on whom you ask.
Some N.B.A. people believe Chicago's winning a second consecutive league title is almost as inevitable as death and taxes.


An Indoor Plague in Albany
It might have been a swarm of infinitesimal bugs, or it might have been tiny shards of plastic -- no one knows for sure -- but whatever caused the mysterious skin rashes in State Building Eight two years ago was only the beginning.
Since October, one small disaster after another has befallen the aging Department of Taxation and Finance building in the middle of the state office campus here: an overheated elevator that choked the building with smoke; rotted refrigerator coils that released sulfur dioxide into the air; a leaking steam pipe that sent a deadly anti-corrosive substance surging through the building via an ancient ventilation system.
Odors Galore
With each problem, more people got sick, and the rest of the workers began to feel a bit as if this was ancient Egypt and they were the withstanding the series of Biblical plagues.
On Feb. 7, as investigators were trying to finish up a report on the building's earlier troubles, dozens more employees inexplicably fell ill with new symptoms, growing dizzy, retching and passing out as their horrified colleagues gathered in the cold to watch them carried away to the hospital on stretchers.


There's a Law Against Feeding Those Filthy, Greedy Pigeons
To the Editor:
A four-column photograph Jan. 22 of a man feeding birdseed to pigeons in Central Park is likely to inspire more well-intentioned people to cause unnecessary damage and depreciation in our city.
New York's pigeons, although they gather in large flocks to gobble up quantities of food wherever it is scattered, are far from famished.
There are ample food scraps everywhere to sustain and nourish these birds and keep them all too productive -- of more pigeons!


Boat Owners Plan to Fight for Rights
Recreational boat owners who say they're choking from increasing state and Federal regulations as well as rising taxes are ready to strike back.
The third annual National Water Rights Conference will be in Stuart, Fla., this weekend and the title of the most vital panel discussion is, "Whose Water Is This Anyway?"


Democrats Join in Assailing Bush In Final New Hampshire Debate
The five main Democratic Presidential candidates met tonight in a bland and largely anticlimactic debate that focused on their common opposition to President Bush, rather than the differences among their own prescriptions for the national economy.
Although it took place less than 48 hours before the New Hampshire primary, the first in the nation, and had thus been considered a potentially pivotal event, the encounter produced little fresh enlightenment for the voters of this state, tens of thousands of whom say they remain uncommitted.


Essay; The Plumbers' Return
Having embarrassed itself and the nation in its conduct of the Clarence Thomas hearings, the U.S.
Senate is now bungling its investigation into the source of character-assassinating leaks.
As I wrote at the time, I suspect that a trio of hotly partisan aides on the staffs of Senators Metzenbaum, Kennedy and Simon induced Prof.
Anita Hill to submit allegations of sexual harassment against the nominee.


Review/Cabaret; Ellen Greene Remembers Lost Friend
Ellen Greene has dedicated her new cabaret act to the late Howard Ashman, the lyricist, librettist and director who cast her as Audrey in the original Off Broadway production of "Little Shop of Horrors." And at Tuesday's opening night performance at Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, her first New York club engagement since 1984, she reminisced emotionally about her friend, who died of AIDS last March.
"He taught me a great deal about living through dying," she said and recalled a trip to Paris in which he introduced her to Champagne, caviar and the music of Edith Piaf.
The singer and actress sang two numbers from "Little Shop of Horrors" in the character of Audrey.
They were the most focused performances in a hysterically undisciplined show that also included songs by Rodgers and Hart ("Ten Cents a Dance," "Where or When"), Peter Allen ("Six-Thirty Sunday Morning," "All the Lives of Me") and Billy Barnes ("Something Cool"), among others.


Review/Music; World Folk Styles, Transformed
The music presented by the Kronos Quartet on Saturday night in Alice Tully Hall seemed, at first, to have little to do with the changing purple, green and yellow lights shining on the pipe organ onstage, or the amplification of the string instruments, or the performers' punkish outfits.
In fact, far from being high-tech, the program was mostly built around transformations of folk musics by non-Western composers.
All of the works were written for the Kronos players -- David Harrington and John Sherba, violinists, Hank Dutt, violist, and Joan Jeanrenaud, cellist.
Hamza el-Din, for example, a Sudanese virtuoso on the oud (an African lute) was commissioned by Lincoln Center to compose "Escalay" (1989).
The string players imitated drones and vocal lines reminiscent of North African and Arabic music, and Mr.
Din provided rhythmic accompaniment on the tar, a hand-held drum.


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Stock prices surged in Tokyo today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues recovered from morning losses to close 441.12 points higher, or 2.11 percent, to 21,324.98.


Cone and Mets to Make Their Pitches in Arbitration
As drama, it won't rate with recent courtroom spectacles, there being no crime alleged or sordid details to contest.
There will, however, be lawyers present, arguments made, exhibits offered and more than a fistful of dollars at stake when David Cone's arbitration case with the Mets unfolds today in Manhattan.
"Obviously, it'll be contentious," Steve Fehr, Cone's agent, said of the proceedings.
"People feel strongly. People argue hard. It can get hot. But I don't see anything wrong with that."


U.S. Flounders in 1,500 With Flaim's Fish Story
One of the United States' strongest hopes for a medal at the 1992 Winter Olympics ended today when Eric Flaim, a silver medalist at the 1988 Calgary Games, tied for 24th in the men's 1,500-meter speed-skating event.
The failure of Flaim and three other Americans to win a medal in the race, won by Johann Olav Koss of Norway, underscored the growing difficulties the United States is having at these Games in speed skating, the sport in which Americans have won most of their Olympic winter medals.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY A CITY'S YOUNG ARM THEMSELVES
They are deadly hand-me-downs, the powerful guns that began to proliferate in New York City during the crack explosion of the mid-80's.
Now teen-agers control much of the city's vast arsenal of illegal guns.
Some are dealers or muggers.
But many more are packing weapons as part of a vicious circle: with more guns on the streets, they take to arming themselves to prove their toughness -- or to protect themselves.
"You get it because you fear what is happening out there," one teen-ager said.
"Once you have it you feel like a god. You feel invincible." A1.


Dr. Dorfman Has Wedding
Dr.
Sally Faith Dorfman, the Health Commissioner of Orange County, N.Y., and Steven Glenn Sirota, a special-education teacher in Cornwall, N.Y., were married yesterday.
Rabbi Hirshel L. Jaffe officiated at the United States Military Academy at West Point.
Dr.
Dorfman graduated cum laude from Radcliffe College and received her M.D. degree from Stanford University.
She is also a gynecologist in New York.
She is a daughter of Dr.
David L. Dorfman and Dolce Stern Dorfman of Cornwall, N.Y.
Her father is a retired dentist.
Her mother retired as a buyer for Macy's.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States will be closed today in observance of Washington's Birthday.
Government offices, most banks and many businesses will also be closed.


Melvin L. Sokolow, Agent, TV Producer And an Athlete, 58
Melvin L. Sokolow, a literary agent, television producer and national amateur squash champion, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 58 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


For Gotti in Latest Trial, Confidence and Caution
The hundreds of reels of tape piled high on the prosecutors' desk in the trial of John Gotti amount to a puzzling question.
Why, given that he was under constant, highly sophisticated electronic surveillance, did Mr.
Gotti persist in speaking freely inside the Ravenite social club at 247 Mulberry Street?
Why not open a new club in a location less familiar to F.B.I. agents -- or go to a hotel?
Michael G. Cherkasky, head of the Manhattan District Attorney's Investigation Division, sees a simple answer: "It's stupid, unbelievably stupid. He didn't get where he is by being smart; he got there with muscle and ruthlessness."


Energy Industry Takes Some Radical Paths
Almost no one foresaw the oil shocks of 1973 and 1979 and the price collapse of 1986.
Engineers in the 1950's were stunned by the idea that nuclear power meant cheap, limitless energy and stunned again in the 70's that it did not.
New inventions, regulations and political developments rush onward, sometimes offering vast changes, but often doing no more than offering.
What is next on the horizon?


To Some Amusement, Americans Amaze
On the late-night shuttle buses that meander between the Olympic ice rink and a hotel in La Tania, the young men in red-white-and-blue jackets have become a regular amusement for their fellow passengers.
In broken French, and sometimes in pidgin English, the United States hockey players try to explain themselves to the non-adoring French masses.


Rep. Molinari's Brooklyn Office Hit by Gunfire
A gunman fired seven bullets early yesterday morning into the unoccupied Brooklyn office of Representative Susan Molinari, the police said.
The police said they had not identified a suspect or motive in the shooting, which occurred about 4:30 A.M. at the Republican Congresswoman's district office at 1305 73d Street in Bay Ridge.


You Can Too Buy the American Car You Want; Air Bags Save Lives
To the Editor:
Verne Newton's vain search for an American car (Op-Ed, Jan. 24) began with no apparent independent research and only spiraled downward under the weight of disinformation about the safety value of air bags from a questionably motivated broker.
That's too bad for both of us.
Chrysler Corporation has been the United States leader in introducing air bags as standard equipment.


Plan for Cutting Town Taxes: Eliminate the Town Itself
William N. Cassella Jr. has studied the crazy-quilt of local governments in Westchester County and come to this conclusion: "The mind of man could not conceive a more confusing and complicated plan."
Dr. Cassella, a public management expert, is not alone in that view.


Nancy Krieg Weds George Goldner
Nancy M. Krieg, a paintings restorer in New York, and George R. Goldner, the curator of paintings and drawings at the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., were married yesterday in New York.
Justice Jerome W. Marks, who is retired from the New York State Supreme Court, officiated at the couple's home.
Ms.
Krieg, 40 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Rutgers University and has a master's degree in historic preservation from Columbia University and a diploma in conservation from the New York University Institute of Fine Arts.
She is the daughter of Martha Kreig of Linden, N.J., and the late Edward Kreig.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


Making the Most Out of a Warm Winter's Day


You Can Too Buy the American Car You Want
To the Editor:
In answer to "I Tried to Buy a U.S. Car (Sigh)" by Verne W. Newton (Op-Ed, Jan. 24), I would have to say that he didn't try very hard or go about it very sensibly.


Assemblyman Robert Kelly, 74, Head of New York Cable Panel
Robert F. Kelly, a former state Assemblyman from Brooklyn who became the first head of the New York State Commission on Cable Television, died on Saturday at Lutheran Medical Center in Brooklyn.
He was 74 years old and had residences in both Bay Ridge, Brooklyn and Breezy Point, Queens.
He died of cancer, said his daughter, Barbara.


A 2d Gold Medal For Young Finn
Toni Nieminen, the 16-year-old Finnish ski jumper, continued to display his new pre-eminence in the sport by winning the gold medal in the 120-meter event.
Nieminen finished his first Olympics with two gold medals and a bronze.


Bridge
When the opponents are heading for slam, it may make sense to double a cue-bid to direct a lead.
But doubling without a clear motive can easily backfire, and did on the diagramed deal.
It was played in a high-stakes rubber-bridge game in Montreal, and the declarer was Joe Silver, who has long been one of Canada's most talented card players.
He arrived in six hearts after East had doubled three clubs to suggest a lead, and West had subsequently doubled four spades for no very good reason.
Most declarers would maneuver to take an early diamond finesse, but Silver rejected this idea: he knew that West was an expert defender, and would play the king or queen to disrupt a vital line of communication.


Guard Held Hostage by Auburn Inmate Is Freed
A corrections officer at the Auburn Correctional Facility near Syracuse was rescued yesterday after being held hostage for more than six hours by an inmate, armed and incoherent, who was later placed in the prison psychiatric unit, a state corrections official said.
The standoff, in the inmate's small cell, ended after a guard grabbed the 30-year-old prisoner, Andrew Tenney, and another guard sprayed him with tear gas, officials said.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Goulet Nets 500th Goal  Michel Goulet scored his 500th goal, the 17th National Hockey League player to reach the mark, and helped the host Chicago Blackhawks tie the Calgary Flames, 5-5, last night.
Goulet scored on a breakaway with 37 seconds left in the first period, beating goaltender Jeff Reese.
Goulet has 500 goals in 951 career N.H.L. games.
He also scored 28 goals with Birmingham of the World Hockey Association in 1978-79, although those do not count in his overall total.
Goulet scored 456 goals in 813 games with Quebec.(AP)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Challenger; For Buchanan's Campaign, Improvising Is the Strategy
Two days before voters go to the polls on Tuesday, the campaign of Patrick J. Buchanan in New Hampshire remains what it always has been: a nimble, often slapdash affair that is constantly thinking on its feet, and at times tripping over them.
At breakfast today, Mr.
Buchanan and some of his aides realized that the day's schedule had no events that would get the candidate on the early evening news or that would occur in time to make the early Monday editions of many newspapers.
The candidate's staff immediately scheduled a news conference and brought in dozens of young supporters to provide their own cheering section to the challenger's answers to reporters' questions.


Philippine Volcano Subsides but Evacuations Continue


Kerrey 'Angry' At His Adviser
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska said today that he had suspended his longtime poll taker, Harrison Hickman, who had sent reporters a memorandum raising new questions about Gov.
Bill Clinton's account of his draft status.
Copies of the memorandum were sent late last week to The Boston Globe and CBS News.


You Can Too Buy the American Car You Want; 'Husband With You?'
To the Editor:
Phyllis Sinrich (letter, Jan. 19) was more fortunate than I in searching for an American-made car.
At least she found a Pontiac dealer who permitted her to test-drive a General Motors vehicle.


Allison Avoids Pileup, Masters Daytona
After following in his father's tire tracks here four years ago, Davey Allison followed in his footsteps today to win the Daytona 500, stock-car racing's biggest event.
Allison, driving a Ford Thunderbird, beat Morgan Shepherd, in another Ford, by two car lengths to collect $244,050 and win the race that his father, Bobby, won in 1978, 1982 and 1988.
In the last victory -- one that the elder Allison says he no longer remembers as a result of head injuries he suffered in 1988 -- Davey Allison finished a close second.


Cuomo and Write-Ins: Will Votes Be Wasted?
FED up with the hundreds of wrong numbers that have cost him time and money, Randall Wells finally changed the message on his telephone answering machine.
The phone number of Mr.
Wells's R.G.W.
Brush Company in Epping, N.H., is 1-800-922-6866.
Since last month it has been flooded with calls from people who evince an interest in supporting Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo for President but who cannot spell Mr.
Cuomo's name.
By dialing 1-800-92-COUMO, they mistakenly reach Mr.
Wells instead.
Bristling over the mix-up, Mr.
Wells recorded a new greeting.
It advises errant callers: "Mario Cuomo is a waste of time."


Roni Weinblatt Wed to Y. A. Blinder
Roni Cheryl Weinblatt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee S. Weinblatt of Teaneck, N.J., was married yesterday to Yehuda Aryeh Blinder, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman I. Blinder of Lawrence, L.I.
Rabbi Ralph Pelcovitz officiated at the Sheraton Meadowlands Hotel in East Rutherford, N.J.
Mrs.
Blinder, 21 years old, graduated from Queens College and is studying for a master's degree in media ecology at New York University.
Her father is the chairman and founder of the Pretesting Company, a market research firm in Tenafly, N.J.


Bronx Woman Held In Killing of Friend
A Bronx woman arguing with her boyfriend grabbed a kitchen knife and plunged it into his back yesterday, killing him, the police said.
The woman, Angela Scott, 20 years old, of 445 West 153d Street, was being questioned by the police, said Sgt.
Peter Sweeney, a police spokesman.


Ms. Cresci Wed To T. J. McEvoy
Elisa Cresci, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence Cresci of New York, was married yesterday to Timothy J. McEvoy, a son of James McEvoy of Cheshire, Conn., and the late Alice McEvoy.
The Rev.
Philip Carr-Harris, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Church of the Holy Trinity in New York.
Mrs.
McEvoy, 26 years old, graduated from Tufts University and has a master's degree in broadcast journalism from Emerson College.
Her father owns the Manhattan Cafe in New York.


Latin America Offers 'New World' to East Europe Emigrants
With an economic boom coming after a brain drain, several South American countries are turning to the economic rubble of Russia and Eastern Europe to find skilled workers.
Recalling earlier waves of European immigration to South America, governments are dusting off a recruiting pitch that was successful in the past: warm weather, economic opportunity and a fresh start in the New World.


The World of Chance Beats a Path to a Man's Winning System
STRIDING into the showroom, Tommy Wahlgren brushed past the six-valved "Multipick" and made only a passing glance at the three-chambered "Paragon" to stand and marvel before the state-of-the-art "Criterion."
"I'll take it," Mr. Wahlgren said moments later after taking the Criterion for a spin.


East Germany's Tense Past Meets the Present
By now, just two years after the Berlin Wall came down, it seems as if that symbol of East-West hostility never existed.
Judging by Katarina Witt, anyway.
The Olympic figure-skating champion of the 1984 and 1988 Winter Games has made the change from Socialist Darling to Capitalist Celebrity with all the difficulty of walking across the street.
As communism's star fell in the sweep of democracy across Eastern Europe, Witt's rose, in a swell of ice shows, film projects, commercials, and now television work.
She is attending the 1992 Winter Olympics here as a reporter for CBS Sports.


You Can Too Buy the American Car You Want; Auto Retirement Board
To the Editor:
In "Factors That Drive Up Detroit's Costs" (letter, Jan. 24), Ronald A. Glantz notes that Chrysler spent $685 a car for pensions, health insurance and life insurance in 1990.
He notes that the Big Three auto makers -- General Motors, Ford, Chrysler -- have substantially greater costs per car than foreign cars manufactured in American plants and imports because they have an older work force.
He recommends a tariff on imported cars and parts.


Hope and Envy After Norway's Success
If Norway could dominate an Olympic men's Alpine ski race, then there must be hope for the United States.
At least that's what the American men, who not too long ago viewed the Norwegians as partners in the large set of Olympic also-rans, took from this morning's super giant slalom.
With only slalom and giant slalom remaining, Super G was the last Alpine event of the Games in which the medal-less American men had even an outside chance.
The best finish of the four Americans entered was Jeff Olson's 13th.
A.
J.
Kitt, who entered these Games last week as an American cover boy and gold-medal hopeful in downhill, departed today in 23d and in no mood to discuss it with reporters.


Presidents of Precious Few Words
On Presidents' Day especially, the world remembers George Washington's Farewell Address for his admonitions -- to restrain partisanship, confine the branches of government within their respective constitutional spheres, cherish public credit and steer clear of permanent alliances.
But who remembers that this
address
was published, not delivered in person?
Abraham Lincoln's tribute to the living and dead at Gettysburg has likewise been long remembered.
But few people recognize that the Gettysburg Address was one of only 78 speeches that Mr.
Lincoln delivered while he was President.
At that, he gave three times as many speeches as Washington did, Jeffrey Tulis recounts in his book, "The Rhetorical Presidency."


Teen-Age Gunslinging Rises, Seeking Protection and Profit
On a shadowy corner in Brooklyn, a gangly teen-ager slowly opened his jacket to give a peek at the 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol jammed in the waistband of his jeans.
"When you've got it," he said, glancing at the weapon, "you've got the power. It doesn't matter whether you're big or small. You've got the power."


Gambling on Honesty on the Homeless
By documenting that crack use is widespread among the homeless in New York City, a mayoral commission is betting that leveling with the public about just how bad the problem is will pay off in support for new programs to treat the addicted and to train unskilled young people who have turned to drugs.
The commission's report, which is to be released later this week, is a blistering indictment of the way the city has spent $2 billion over the last decade to shelter the homeless without confronting the deeper social problems that enmesh them.


California's Medical Model
As the medical insurance crisis deepens, Americans look for remedies from Washington.
It may well be, to judge by sparkling news from California, the wrong place to look.
The states, always meant to be laboratories, can show the way -- and the reform plan just proposed by California's Insurance Commissioner, John Garamendi, offers a model for every state.
Health insurance costs are soaring -- even as the present system leaves one of every seven citizens uncovered.
The Garamendi plan would tackle both problems, in ways likely to work well in New York and other populous states.


Quote of the Day
"Guns and kids are probably the most dangerous combination there is. A 13- or 14-year-old holding an Uzi submachine gun has no understanding of his own mortality, let alone your mortality." -- PETER REINHARZ, the head of the Family Court Division of New York City's Corporation Counsel.  [ B6:1. ]


Island Nations Fear a Rise in the Sea
Representatives of 37 island nations that fear they may disappear beneath the waves if the world grows any warmer are voicing their concern at the slow pace toward an agreement on stabilizing the global climate.
These nations, including Cyprus and Malta in the Mediterranean, the Caribbean islands and archipelagos around the Pacific, say their existence is threatened by the rise of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere that contribute to the melting of the polar ice caps, which raises the ocean's level.


In the Hunt: Terreri Leads the Tallyho
The Devils talked about "dodging the bullet" and the Rangers talked about their captain, Mark Messier, getting "handcuffed" on a crucial play.
Trailing by one goal this afternoon, the Rangers pulled goalie John Vanbiesbrouck for an extra skater with 70 seconds left and attacked Chris Terreri's goal relentlessly.
They had chance after chance against Terreri, but none bigger than one with 24 seconds left.


Foster Mother Faces Charges Of Killing Girl
A 36-year-old foster mother in the Bronx was charged yesterday with murder for beating her 6-year-old niece, immersing her in a tub of cold water and then taping her mouth shut, according to court records.
The woman, Mary Ann Ayala, was also charged with two counts of attempted second-degree murder for choking the dead girl's 4-year-old sister and putting her in a cold tub.


In Bitter Abortion Debate, Opponents Learn to Reach for Common Ground
Two years ago the director of the largest abortion clinic here telephoned the leading anti-abortion lawyer in the state with a revolutionary proposal.
B.
J.
Isaacson-Jones, the director of Reproductive Health Services, invited Andrew Puzder, the lawyer, to come talk to her at the clinic in the hope of finding common ground to help women and children.


CHRONICLE
One thing that will remain unchanged when Harry N. Abrams re-issues its 1989 authorized biography, "David Lean," by STEPHEN M. SILVERMAN, is the book's introduction by Sir David's closest friend, herself a best-selling author, KATHARINE HEPBURN.
What is new is updated material covering the late director's six marriages and his death at age 83 last April.
Now, Mr.
Silverman is writing a book to be published next year by Alfred A. Knopf about another notable director, STANLEY DONEN.
And who's writing the intro?
Not Kate, but AUDREY HEPBURN, who starred in three Donen favorites, "Funny Face," "Charade" and "Two for the Road." The more fashion-conscious Miss Hepburn agreed to write the introduction earlier this month when she was in New York to present a lifetime achievement award to RALPH LAUREN at the Council of Fashion Designers of America.


Dance in Review
'Fiorello'  Fiorello H. La Guardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts
Youth and a respect for the art of dance triumphed in a program presented on Friday afternoon by dance teachers and students of what was once known more simply as the High School of Performing Arts and celebrated in the movie "Fame." A sort of senior graduating performance, "Fiorello" offered a well-conceived sampling of ballet and modern dance in a smoothly produced showcase at the school's theater.


East Timor Needs Elections and End to Terror
To the Editor:
In "Indonesia Acts on East Timor Killings" (letter, Feb. 5), the writer complains of an "erroneous impression" in "The Tiananmen in East Timor," your excellent editorial of Jan. 21.
What is misleading is the Indonesian Government's damage-control campaign following the Nov. 12 massacre of unarmed mourners and demonstrators in East Timor.


A Shivering Reflection of the Iditarod
RICK SWENSON has had almost a year to think about the storm he went through in winning the Iditarod, Alaska's annual 1,163-mile sled-dog race from Anchorage to Nome.
On the final day the temperature dipped to 20 degrees below zero and the wind rose to 40 miles an hour.
Swenson pressed on to win the Iditarod for a fifth time, a record.


Times Paper In Moscow
Discussions are under way between Moscow News, a weekly paper, and The New York Times about the publication of a 24-page Russian-language newspaper that would consist of news articles, features and analyses from The Times.
Moscow News hopes to begin publication this spring of The New York Times News in Review.
Reports about the publication that were carried by the Russian news agency Itar-Tass and The Associated Press were confirmed yesterday by Nancy Nielsen, a spokeswoman for The Times.
She said that many details, including the publication's price, remained to be worked out and that no contracts had yet been signed.


Many in Colombia Resisting Use Of a Strong Herbicide on Poppies
A recent Government decision to allow chemical spraying of the poppy plants used in heroin production is drawing fire from health and environmental officials, and worrying the Indians who earn their living harvesting the crop.
On Jan. 31, the Colombian National Drug Council, made up of senior Government and police officials, approved the use of the herbicide glyphosate to destroy poppies that are not growing close to waterways and villages.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet New York State Theater
George Balanchine created two very different classics in "Apollo" and "La Valse," both presented by the New York City Ballet on Wednesday night.
The first ballet, with a score and scenario by Stravinsky, is an ode to a highly moral god variously associated with the sun, the arts, healing, youth and beauty.
Most of these are evoked in the ballet, a small, spare portrait of the god as he awakens to life in rarefied empty space and air and cool sunlight.


Wendy Zeligson Is Wed in Tulsa
Wendy Sue Zeligson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen J. Zeligson of Tulsa, Okla., was married there yesterday to Robert Craig Adler, a son of Mrs.
Leonard J. Adler of Pomona, N.Y. and the late Mr.
Adler.
Rabbi Arthur D. Kahn performed the ceremony at B'nai Emunah Synagogue.
Mrs.
Adler, 30 years old, is a freelance journalist.
She graduated from Northwestern University, where she also received a master's degree in journalism, and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a real-estate developer in Tulsa.


7 Hypothetical Conflicts Foreseen by the Pentagon
Last August, the Pentagon's Under Secretary for Policy, Paul D. Wolfowitz, asked the Joint Chiefs of Staff to assist the Pentagon's civilian leaders in developing "detailed scenarios" for potential foreign conflicts that would assist in planning defense budgets from 1994 to 1999.
A working group drawn from the Joint Staff, the Defense Intelligence Agency, and analysts from the policy and analytical offices under Defense Secretary Dick Cheney developed the seven hypothetical scenarios to guide defense planning under what the group called a "regionally focused national military strategy." The Pentagon considers the scenarios "illustrative" of potential threats, "not predictive." Persian Gulf
The Pentagon's vision of a rekindled military threat from Iraq assumes that by the mid-1990's, the international support for trade sanctions and embargo against Baghdad will "slacken " and be rendered "largely ineffective by 1995."


Museums Adding More Evening Hours To Attract Visitors
Citing reasons from budget constraints to marketing studies, New York City art museums are abandoning their traditional bankers' hours, cutting back their daytime schedules and steadily adding evening hours.
Beginning March 3, the Whitney Museum of American Art, on Madison Avenue at 75th Street, which has been closed on Mondays, will be closed Tuesdays as well but will remain open an extra hour on Wednesday, Friday and Saturday evenings.
When the newly renovated Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum reopens in June, it will have the most ambitious evening schedule of any New York City museum, remaining open six nights a week until 8.
The Guggenheim's new branch at 575 Broadway in SoHo, at Prince Street, which will make its debut when the original Guggenheim by Frank Lloyd Wright reopens, will stay open even later three nights a week: it will close at 10 on Thursday, Friday and Saturday evenings.


World Economies


Jim Pepper, 50, Dies; A Tenor Saxophonist
Jim Pepper, a tenor saxophonist who was best known for writing the song "Witchi-Tai-To," died last Monday at home in Portland, Ore.
He was 50 years old.
He died of lymphoma, said his mother, Floy Pepper.


Reviews/Television; Turning the Indians Into Imitation WASP's
For a poignant example from American history of best intentions' going awry, tune into tonight's offering from "The American Experience," at 9 on Channels 13 and 49.
"In the White Man's Image" looks back at the nation's effort to transform the American Indian into a white, Anglo-Saxon Protestant American.
Richard Pratt, a Civil War veteran and Indian scout, showed untypical compassion for the Plains warriors who were being driven back by white settlers.
Unlike the Westerners who held that the Cheyenne and the Sioux and the other peoples they encountered were irredeemable savages, that the only good Indian was a dead one, Pratt set out to assimilate Indian youths the way immigrants from Europe were presumably being assimilated in the late 19th century.


Idea of Jury of Peers Is Questioned: Must a Jury Reflect the Population?
The Constitution and the Bill of Rights are full of lofty assurances of justice.
But contrary to the prevailing mythology, neither says anything about "a jury of one's peers."
Just what is a representative jury?
In recent weeks, three widely publicized criminal cases have raised the same perplexing question.
As is so often true in the tortured saga of American law, all three revolve around race.


Round-Robin Logic: Canada Wins, 4-5
Canada held on to a one-goal loss tonight against the Unified Team, a result that was good enough for first place in the permutation-polluted world of Olympic ice hockey.
"Hey, we're hockey players," Canadian right wing Kent Manderville said after his team lost, 5-4.
"But we can figure some things out."


ALBERTVILLE: Sports of The Times; Walker Stirs a Bobsled Fondue
UP at the top of the Olympic bobsled run, near a mountainside grove of fir trees frosted silver by snow, the voice on the public-address system announced, "Getting ready, United States I." And near the bottom of the icy chute, the voice of a small American boy yelled, "Yay, Herschel."
At least somebody was rooting for Herschel Walker besides his wife, Cindy, who was seen wearing a T-shirt proclaiming: "Bo Don't Know Diddley, but Herschel Knows Snow."


Without the Money to Supply Prison Beds, Officials Consider Reducing Demand
The Orleans Correctional Facility was built here in the vast fields of western New York just seven years ago, part of the state's grand scheme to deal with the seemingly endless supply of inmates that the war on drugs sent pouring into its prison system.
But now Orleans and many other medium-security prisons around New York are themselves filled beyond capacity.
And the state is struggling to confront a serious overcrowding problem that, if left unmanaged, will leave it with 6,000 more prisoners than beds by the end of the next fiscal year, March 31, 1993.


Reinventing the Debate Wheel
Last night's fourth Democratic Presidential debate fell short in its most special characteristic.
The event, broadcast by the Cable News Network, was plenty Democratic and plenty Presidential; all five contenders assailed George Bush with relish.
There was plenty of debate as they repeatedly challenged one another.
The missing dimension turned on the word
fourth.
CNN added some appealing further innovations to the debate format, building on those of the three previous debates in the last two months.
Variety was created by using different formats.
In the first segment, for instance, the interviewers focused on one candidate at a time.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Brown, Seeing His Role as Savior, Runs to 'Take Back America'
Edmund G. Brown Jr. sees himself as a savior, his cause summed up in the title of the half-hour documentary-style political commercial that he is presenting to New Hampshire voters on cable television: "Take Back America."
So despite what naysayers argue or what public opinion polls show, Mr.
Brown, the former Governor of California, is out on the hustings, pushing his anti-money, anti-big politics messages with the fervor of a plaid-shirted evangelist.


Poor Judgment at the Housing Agency
Laura Blackburne, chairwoman of New York City's Housing Authority, has engaged in such questionable financial maneuvers that her suitability for office is in doubt.
In the most damaging case, she created a nonprofit foundation with $9,000 in agency money, and then spent $3,100 of it to finance her trip to South Africa with Mayor David Dinkins, instead of using her own funds.
The $9,000 came from the authority's general fund.
Ms.
Blackburne says she also raised $11,000 for the foundation, "Friends of Public Housing," from private sources.


Remnant of the War on Poverty, Job Corps Is Still a Quiet Success
After Alisa Campbell quit school in the ninth grade, she hung out at home with her grandmother, mother and sister, watched soap operas all day and lived off a welfare check.
After Thomas Helton dropped out of school, at about the same age, he flipped hamburgers at Burger King, quit because it was clear that only chumps worked for a living, and devoted himself to getting high, picking fights and trying to stay out of jail.


Girardelli Finds a Silver Lining on the Slopes
In what amounted to about a two-hour break between blizzards, the Olympic sun finally shined today on this snowy Savoy outpost and Marc Girardelli, Luxembourg's one-man ski team.
A four-time World Cup champion but never an Olympic medalist, the 28-year-old Girardelli stayed on his feet for an entire race for the first time in these Games and won a silver medal in the super giant slalom.


Navratilova Victory Is One for the Record Book
A legend already, but far from an anachronism, Martina Navratilova, who says the real reason she's playing tennis at the not-so-tender age of 35 is "because I still can and not be embarrassed," proved herself today to be the most prolific champion in the history of her sport.
She created her own drama, survived the trauma of two match points, and ultimately set the sort of record that won't soon, if ever, be broken.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Memo; Voters Want Candidates To Take a Reality Check
For many years now, Americans have turned away from root-canal politics.
They did not want to be told to eat their peas, tighten their belts or pull up their socks.
Jimmy Carter's malaise, Walter F. Mondale's tax increase proposals and Michael S. Dukakis's austere and sanctimonious style all sent voters fleeing.
They much preferred Ronald Reagan's sanguine message of "morning in America" and the blithe spirit of George Bush, whose press entourage in 1988 adopted the song "Don't Worry, Be Happy" as a campaign anthem.


Review/Music; An Artist's Legacy: The Song Recital
The rich, when they die, find material ways to leave themselves behind: foundations, scholarships, enduring gifts serving the future in their name.
In her artistic will, Jan DeGaetani identified a particularly needy legatee: the song recital in this country.
The inheritance it stands to receive will be not money but example.
Recital audiences of all kinds keep shrinking; venerable series are under threat or folding altogether.
Of pianists, violinists, string quartets and the like, singers are the notoriously difficult ticket to sell.
Were it not for the partial service that recordings perform, a great literature would be erased from the consciousness of an entire generation.


Miss Legality Wins in Upset
Julie Krone steered Miss Legality to an upset victory over the favored November Snow today as eight of the fancy 3-year-old fillies of the season competed in the Davona Dale Stakes at Gulfstream Park.
Miss Legality, who has won three of her last four starts, all of them stakes races, moved from second place into first as the field entered the homestretch and held off a late charge by November Snow to win by half a length.
November Snow, trying to win for the fourth time in a row, finished two lengths in front of Spectacular Sue.
The winner covered the mile and 70 yards in 1:42, paid $12.40 for $2 to win and brought home $30,000 to her owner, Norton Waltuch.


Fear Deep as Russia's Snow, but Poetry, Too
So far, the radical changes in Moscow have brought little more than added confusion and debt to the Suvorov Collective Farm.
But the frozen soil has not exhausted its powers: in one hut, a villager celebrates the first publication of his verse.
It is the heart of winter, and from the road Koltsovo looks at rest.
Wisps of wood smoke curl from log houses haphazardly scattered on the white hillsides, calves bellow from a warm and pungent barn, and even the rusting equipment seems less desolate now, half-buried in the snow.


Militant Jewish Group Seeks New Recruits in Crown Heights


The Fed's Rate Cut Prospects
In public addresses that are as hard to decipher as hieroglyphics, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, has repeatedly said the central bank would make deeper interest-rate cuts if they were needed to lift the economy out of its torpor.
But in his carefully crafted speeches, Mr.
Greenspan has also said the Federal Reserve's recent series of interest rate cuts should suffice.


James Murphy and Ms. Hahn Marry
Alexandra Marie Hahn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert R. Hahn of New York, was married last evening to James Timmerman Murphy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Murphy of West Rockport, Me.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony at the Harvard Club in New York.
Ms.
Hahn, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is a vice president of Bankers Trust in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College.
Her father is the director of communications for the United States Council for International Business in New York.
Her mother, Ethelee Hahn, is chairwoman of the foreign language department at the Convent of the Sacred Heart in New York.


Washington's Birthday
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and city closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Option to close.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION: No street cleaning, pickup or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Saturday schedule, Long Island Rail Road on holiday schedule, Metro-North on weekend schedule.
NEW JERSEY GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal and state closed, local option to close.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit rail service on Saturday schedule, N.J.
Transit bus schedules vary, with most on Saturday schedule.
CONNECTICUT GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and municipal closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: New Haven line on weekend schedule.


Churches Reach Across Long Divide
The last time a papal announcement was read in St.
Stanislaus Cathedral, it was set aflame and hurled into the brook across the street.
The pastor said he hoped the ashes would flow back to Rome, taking the harsh words with them.
That was on Sept. 29, 1898, when the Roman Catholic Church officially excommunicated St.
Stanislaus' fiery young pastor, the Rev.
Francis Hodur, for activities that would later lead to the establishment of the Polish National Catholic Church in America.


Scotsman Survives the Heat to Win in Vietnam
Hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese here watched with curiosity and delight today as their first international marathon was won by a Scottish lawyer, followed by a young Vietnamese gym teacher.
Organizers said 243 runners competed in the marathon, and while Americans made up one of the largest contingents in the race, none was among the top 10 finishers.
The first American to finish was Don Kardong of Spokane, Wash., who was 11th.


2d Korean Car Maker To Enter U.S. Market
Just about everybody believes that too many car brands are crowding the market, and some Americans are particularly vexed about Asian imports.
Nevertheless, Kia Motors of South Korea is coming to America, bearing new models and a strategy intended to lure entry-level buyers.
Another Korean auto maker, Hyundai, has already tried such a strategy.
Fairly or not, Kia's arrival will remind Americans of Hyundai, which drove onto the scene in 1986 with a low-price subcompact, the Excel.


Dividend Meetings


AUTO RACING: Sports of The Times; King Richard Races Last Daytona
SHAKESPEARE and the history books are full of monarchs who took a dagger between the shoulder blades while occupying their thrones, but one ruler in the world today intends to complete his reign in good health.
His full name is Richard Petty, and he has won the Daytona 500 seven times, which is why, in this southernmost outpost of North Carolina, he is known as King Richard.
He is hardly pompous, but you call him "Dick" about as quickly as you call Queen Elizabeth "Liz." Just ain't done, buddy.


Reviews/Television; Bright Young Lawyer Just Can't Lose
Another sweeps period is upon broadcasters, and strenuous efforts are again being made to raise the ratings that will determine what advertisers will pay in the months ahead.
Not everyone can have the Olympic Games, so the others are left with the business-as-usual spate of television movies about sociopaths.
Tonight's, on NBC at 9, is "Till Death Us Do Part." It's better than most.
The production represents a stretch in more ways than one.
In terms of physical appearance and tone, the story unfolds as if it happened yesterday.
In fact, it happened 25 years ago.
Phil Rosenberg's teleplay is based on a book Vincent Bugliosi wrote with Ken Hurwitz.
Here Mr.
Bugliosi, played by Arliss Howard, is a young prosecutor with the Los Angeles District Attorney's office.
Just three years out of law school, he already has a reputation for never losing a case.
Later, of course, he will leap to national fame as the prosecutor in the Charles Manson case.


Exponent of Government-as-Business Is Gaining Bigger Audience
In Florida, Gov.
Lawton Chiles followed the advice of a little-known political consultant and freed some of his largest state agencies from their cumbersome rules, quickly raising productivity.
In Massachusetts, Gov.
William F. Weld listened to the same consultant and made money-saving changes in the state's Medicaid program.


Books of The Times; More Than Just a Tale of the Sea
Outerbridge Reach  By Robert Stone  409 pages. Ticknor &amp; Fields. $21.95.
"To the destructive element submit yourself," the character Stein advises Jim in Joseph Conrad's "Lord Jim." And that is what Owen Browne does in Robert Stone's powerfully Conradian new novel, "Outerbridge Reach."


School Workers in Maryland Are Forced to Take Furlough
With a $15 million deficit in its school budget, Prince Georges County, Md., has begun furloughing employees and shutting down its entire school system.
"We're cutting corners in every possible direction, but even after doing all that, we still needed to cut another $6 million," said Bonnie S. Jenkins, spokeswoman for public schools in the county abutting the District of Columbia.
"We have no fat to cut."


Review/Theater; Evoking the Youth of Sean O'Casey in Dublin
When "Nicholas Nickleby" opened on Broadway a decade ago, the New York theater world was so consumed by Anglophilia that hardly anyone noticed that the Royal Shakespeare Company epic owed a debt to one of Broadway's own innovators, the director Harold Prince.
The environmental staging, the use of a roving ensemble to conjure up the atmosphere of Victorian England and the relish in exposed stage machinery all echoed Mr.
Prince's landmark productions of the 1970's: the arena-format revival of "Candide" and the original, proscenium-framed "Sweeney Todd."
So if Mr.
Prince's new Off Broadway project, an evocation of the playwright Sean O'Casey's Dublin youth titled "Grandchild of Kings," rekindles a few memories of "Nicholas Nickleby," from a mimed coach ride to a farcical play-within-the-play, the director is well within his rights.
And however short he may fall of realizing his full intentions, he is certainly on top of his talent as a master of stage pictures.
Though the Playbill indicates that Mr.
Prince's time has lately been devoted to at least 11 productions of Andrew Lloyd Webber's "Phantom of the Opera" around the world, his continued replication of a single production has in no way dulled his instinct for orchestrating performers, movement, sights and sounds into a vibrant theatrical landscape far removed from the opulence of West End and Broadway musical spectaculars.


Ms. Gordon, Student, Weds
Deborah Stephanie Gordon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Gordon of New York, was married yesterday to Jonathan Gary Offenkrantz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald J. Offenkrantz of Brooklyn.
The bridegroom's brother, Cantor Paul Offenkrantz, performed the ceremony at the Palm House at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, assisted by the bridegroom's sister-in-law, Cantor Karen Braunstein.
Ms.
Gordon, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Williams College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a student at the New York University Law School.
Her father is a history teacher at Edgemont High School in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Her mother, Gail Gordon, is a social worker at the Little Sisters of the Assumption Family Health Service in New York.


Time to Reorganize Bloated Academia
To the Editor:
The budgetary problems of colleges and universities are, unfortunately, a consequence of a long overexpansion and reallocation of resources to "higher education," which began with the assumption that a college degree was the capstone of a complete education, to be made achievable for everybody.


Spring Training Via the Daytona 500
BOB OJEDA and ROGER McDOWELL concede that they no longer feel awe for their fellow major league ball players, but they laughed at themselves feeling like awestruck fans at the Daytona 500 yesterday.
"We saw RICHARD PETTY arrive," Ojeda said, with respect in his voice.


Muslim Regional Group Welcomes Ex-Soviet Central Asians
Iran, Pakistan and Turkey welcomed leaders of the six formerly Soviet republics of Central Asia today at a regional economic summit meeting here.
At the opening of the two-day gathering, the Presidents of Iran and Turkey presented contrasting but equally ambitious guidelines for economic development and trade cooperation.
Three of the former Soviet republics -- Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Azerbaijan -- today were formally recognized as full members of the long-dormant Economic Cooperation Organization, which was founded in 1963 by Iran, Turkey and Pakistan.


CHRONICLE
As preparations get under way worldwide for the Earth Summit to be held in Brazil in June, the Philippines Earth Savers Movement has come forth with a DREAM, which is the acronym for a lofty project entitled Development Rehabilitation of the Environment through Arts and Media.
"What DREAM is really about is getting young people involved in the Earth Summit through their arts -- because, after all, they are the ones who will inherit the earth and need an agenda," CECILE GUIDOTE-ALVAREZ, a Filipino actress, producer and environmental advocate, said the other day.
Mrs.
Guidote-Alvarez, whose husband, Senator HEHERSON T. ALVAREZ, founded the Earth Savers, was in New York to work out the realization of the DREAM project with its co-sponsors, DAVID POINDEXTER, president of Population Communications International, and ELLEN STEWART, founder of LaMama and a director of the International Theater Institute, and with United Nations supporting organizations.


Dance in Review
'Dancing Wor(l)ds'  Bessie Schonberg Theater
Kenneth King was a parrot one moment, a snail the next and Tallulah Bankhead still later in "Dancing Wor(l)ds," the endearingly eccentric program of solos he presented on Thursday night.


An Ex-Chemist's Formula for Dow Corning
The Dow Corning Corporation still insists that the breast implants it has provided for 600,000 women pose no unreasonable health risk.
It says the silicone in the implants, which some scientists and women blame for crippling illnesses, is about as harmless as anything that can be sewn into the body.
But in the last few days, the company has taken a new attitude on scientific questions and public opinion.


Uzbek Says Yes to Democracy, of Course
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d got a lesson in the complexities of Central Asian politics today when Uzbekistan's President told Mr.
Baker that he was now a real democrat ready for relations with Washington, and opposition leaders told Mr.
Baker that their President was a dictator.
Mr.
Baker closed his tour of the Caucasus and Central Asia by meeting with President Islam Karimov and the opposition leaders in the Uzbek capital, Tashkent, before flying with Mr.
Karimov in his personal jet to visit the ancient Silk Route city of Samarkand.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; The Final Phase: Getting the Faithful to the Polls
The New Hampshire primary campaign today entered its final and most critical phase: the battle over turning a preference for a candidate into an actual vote.
After all the commercials, all the rallies, all the house parties, it is all but too late for the Presidential candidates to win significant new support.
The object now is for the candidates to persuade their faithful, and more importantly, those who may be wavering, to vote Tuesday.


3 Are Killed In House Fire In Rockaway
A fire started by an arsonist engulfed an illegally divided two-story house in Far Rockaway, Queens, early yesterday morning, killing a woman and her two young sons who lived on the upper floor, the fire department said.
The woman, Donna DeJesus, 27 years old, and her sons Nemesio, 6, and Michael, 2, were asleep about 3 A.M. when a blaze that began in the first-floor vestibule of 1847 Gateway Boulevard rose almost instantly to the roof, trapping them inside, a fire department spokesman, Tom Kelly, said.
The police said last night that they expected to classify the crime as a triple homicide.


Chess
There was such a rash of draws at the 54th running of the Hoogoven International Tournament in Wijk-aan-Zee, the Netherlands, from Jan. 9 to 25, that the winners needed to win only a few games to outdistance the pack.
The Russian grandmasters Valery Salov of St.
Petersburg and Boris Gelfand of Minsk each won four games while drawing nine to share first prize.
It was neither laziness nor pacifism that turned the second oldest tournament series (after Hastings in England) into a genteel debate over theory but rather iron-clad defensive play by Black, which was appropriate, considering that the sponsor is the giant Hoogoven steel mills.
*5*FINAL STANDINGS
Player
W.
L.
D.
Pts.
Gelfand
4
0
9
8 1/2
Salov
4
0
9
8 1/2
Hubner
2
0
11
7 1/2
Korchnoi
2
0
11
7 1/2
Yepishin
4
4
5
6 1/2
Nikolic
1
1
11
6 1/2
Piket
2
2
9
6 1/2
Seirawan
2
2
9
6 1/2
Sax
0
1
12
6
Van Wely
3
4
6
6
Van der Wiel
2
3
8
6
Brenninkmeijer
3
5
5
5 1/2
Nunn
2
4
7
5 1/2
Romero Holmes
0
5
8
4
In the ninth round, the Spanish international master Alonso Romero Holmes made an enterprising attempt to win against Salov's Sicilian Defense by accepting a sacrifice of rook for bishop, but the positional advantage the Russian got proved too tough for him to control.
In the main line of the Lasker-Pelikan variation, 10 Bf6 does not allow 10 . . .
Qf6 because 11 Nd5 Qd8 12 c4 is strong for White.
Thus, 12 . . . b4?! 13 Qa4 Bd7 14 Nb5! ab 15 Qa8 Qa8 16 Nc7 Kd8 17 Na8 Nd4 18 Rc1 yields White a rook for a knight.
After 10 . . . gf 11 Nd5 f5, Black will be able to rid himself of the doubled f pawns, but the basic confrontation remains White's knight outpost at d5 against Black's bishop-pair.
Also White's other knight at a3 is displaced.
Trying to hold on to the gambit pawn with 13 . . .
Bf5 is wrong because 14 f3!
Bg7 (14 . . . ef 15 Qf3 Nd4 16 Nf6! Qf6 17 Qa8 Ke7 18 O-O puts White well on top) 15 fe Be6 16 O-O O-O 17 c3 denies Black sufficient counterplay.
In an S. Solomon-V.
Spasov game in the Novi Sad, Yugoslavia, Olympiad 1990, White went for the exchange with 15 Nf6 Bf6 16 Bc6 Ke7 17 Ba8 Qa8, but Black's powerful bishops carried the day for him.
Romero Holmes played positionally for a while, but he just could not resist going after rook for knight with 21 Nd3 (21 Na6? Bh6!  [ 21 . . . Qa6? 22 Qc5! ]  22 Rd6 Qd6 23 Qc5 Qd2 24 Kf1 Bh3 25 Bg2 Qd1 mate) Rc6 22 Bc6 Qc6.
It was not long before Salov's attack got going against the king with 25 . . . h4.
Salov pinched in the white king with 27 . . . h3, maneuvered to control the center with 30 . . .
Bb6 and put pressure on the enemy queenside with 31 . . . b4.
Romero Holmes could not defend by 32 Qe1? because of 32 . . .
Bg4! 33 fg?
Nc3 followed by mate.
Desperate to obtain some play, Romero Holmes sacrificed a piece with 32 Ncd4 ed 33 Nd4 Bd4 34 Rd4.
But after 34 . . . bc 35 bc Ke7, he should have tried to keep the lid on Salov's maneuverability with 36 Rfd1.
But now in time-pressure, the Spaniard blundered with 36 g5? and the Russian crushed him with 36 . . .
Ne3! 37 Rf2 Nf5.
After 38 Qf4 Rh4, Black had to come out a piece ahead, so Romero Holmes gave up.
*3*SICILIAN DEFENSE
White
Black
R. Hms.
Salov
1
e4
c5
2
Nf3
Nc6
3
Nc3
e6
4
d4
cd
5
Nd4
Nf6
6
Ndb5
d6
7
Bf4
e5
8
Bg5
a6
9
Na3
b5
10
Bf6
gf
11
Nd5
f5
12
g3
fe
13
Bg2
Be6
14
Be4
Bg7
15
Qh5
Rc8
16
c3
Ne7
17
Rd1
Rc5
18
Nb4
Qb6
19
Qg5
Kf8
20
Qe3
h5
21
Nd3
Rc6
22
Bc6
Qc6
23
f3
Bh6
24
Qf2
a5
25
O-O
h4
26
g4
Nd5
27
Nc2
h3
28
Nc1
Bg5
29
Ne2
Bd8
30
Kh1
Bb6
31
Qg3
b4
32
Ncd4
ed
33
Nd4
Bd4
34
Rd4
bc
35
bc
Ke7
36
g5
Ne3
37
Rf2
Nf5
38
Qf4
Rh4
39
Resigns


Girl, 14, Raped and Pregnant, Is Caught in Web of Irish Law
The case of a 14-year-old Irish rape victim barred from traveling to England to obtain an abortion has provoked a debate over how far judges and officials in Ireland can go in enforcing the nation's explicit prohibition against abortion.
Today, an Irish High Court judge in Dublin affirmed an earlier court order and issued a permanent injunction forbidding the young woman to obtain an abortion in England, where the procedure is legal.
Members of the Irish Parliament who are sympathetic to the girl's plight say they expect her family to appeal the case to the Supreme Court.


Business and Health; Software Controls On Health Costs
HEALTH insurers are adopting increasingly sophisticated computer programs in their struggle with doctors over procedures and fees.
The newer programs create records called physician profiles, which insurers and health maintenance organizations cite to influence, reward or dismiss doctors in their discount networks.
The profiles are based on a physician's behavior in a series of cases -- what X-rays and diagnostic tests were ordered and whether the treatment was in line with the insurer's rules.
The insurers use the results in selecting doctors whose work is considered cost effective and high in quality.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  SHADOW WARS DRAW SKEPTICISM
The "threat of the unknown" that may form the basis for post-cold-war Pentagon spending is likely to inspire conflict in Congress.
A1  HELP IN DISMANTLING NUCLEAR PAST
Secretary of State Baker, visiting Moscow, offers aid in the form of rail cars to transport nuclear weapons and a program to find jobs for nuclear scientists.
A1
Russia-bound boxcars are retired but seemingly impenetrable.
A6  COURT BARS RAPE VICTIM'S TRAVEL
The case of a 14-year-old Irish rape victim barred from traveling to England for an abortion has stirred on debate over how far Ireland can go in prohibiting abortion.
A1  TRADE SKIRMISH WITH CANADA
Beer, lumber and cars are the issues in a new round of confrontations as Washington and Ottawa trade accusations of protectionist ways despite a free-trade agreement.
A1  AFTERMATH OF AN ASSASSINATION
Israeli forces and Muslim militiamen traded fire in southern Lebanon after Israel's assassination of a Lebanese Shiite leader, Sheik Abbas Musawi.
A8  U.N.'S YUGOSLAVIA AGENDA
The U.N.
Secretary General wants assurances that peacekeepers that may be sent to Yugoslavia are prepared to stay until a political settlement is reached.
A3  A DIET OF HUNGER AND ANGER
North Koreans are living on little more than rice and in private are indulging in anger at their Communist leaders, visitors who cross the border from China are saying.
A9  ETHIOPIA'S MYSTERY UNRAVELS
The remains of Emperor Haile Selassie were found beneath the office of the man who overthrew him, but the cause of death has not been determined.
A13  VISIT FROM A ZAMBIAN LEADER
Frederick Chiluba, Zambia's President for barely 100 days, brings to the U.S. his enthusiasm and requests for help with the nation's debt and democratic institutions.
A3  Arcadia Journal: Two villages, one withering, one prospering.
A4  Japan's new Ambassador to the U.S. sees a period of adjustment.
A7
Putting the brakes on the ruble's freefall.  A7
Two ex-Prime Ministers compete to lead Israel's Labor Party.  A8
The U.S. and the Vatican reportedly cooperated to aid Solidarity.
A5  National A14-20, D10  MOMENT OF DECISION
As the New Hampshire primary contest rolled into its final, frantic hours, the five Democratic candidates stormed the state and President Bush fought against embarrassment at the hands of Patrick Buchanan.
A1  PUSHING THEM TO THE POLLS
In a state where a few thousand votes can be crucial, the candidates sought to press, even to hound, their supporters to the polls.
A17  EXPOSING THE FAULT LINES
Patrick Buchanan's challenge exposed President Bush's political vulnerability, and the results of the New Hampshire primary will show the extent of the problem.
A17  MY MAN WON.
REALLY.
Spin, the blatant art of bending the truth, reached new intensities after the Democratic debate Sunday.
A16  WRITING IN A NONCANDIDATE
Ralph Nader said he doesn't want to be President, but he has asked voters to write in his name as a vote for "none of the above." A17  HARKIN'S CALM HOMETOWN
Cumming Journal: Though Senator Harkin counts a quarter of this Iowa town's residents as relatives, most people weren't too excited yet about his Presidential bid.
A14  HIGH RISK TO HISPANIC WORKERS
Endangered by inexperience, ignorance of English and predatory employers, Hispanic factory workers get hurt on the job more often and more seriously than non-Hispanic Americans, researchers and officials said.
A1  NO PAROLE FOR DAHMER
A judge sentenced Jeffrey Dahmer to 15 consecutive life terms in prison, making him eligible for parole only after 900 years.
A14  A TENTATIVE DREXEL DEAL
Michael R. Milken has agreed to pay an additional $500 million and his former colleagues at Drexel Burnham Lambert, the Wall Street firm, have agreed to pay $300 million to settle lawsuits.
A1  MINNESOTA TACKLES HEALTH CARE
Minnesota legislators said they were determined to create a universal health-care plan that would subsidize the working poor, force insurers to cover people in high-risk groups and require greater cost efficiency.
A14  KEEPING DANGERS A SECRET
Court orders sealing evidence in liability, malpractice and other suits are proliferating wildly, to the dismay of some lawyers, judges and government agencies.
D10
A Federal panel will gather for new hearings on breast implants.
D10  CHIEF DISMISSED IN HOUSTON
The only woman to head a police force in a major American city was removed from office a little more than two years after she took over the Houston department.
A20  Neighbors of Arlo Guthrie said he misled them.
A20  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1 Science Times C1-11  U.S. may be on the verge of changing its stance on climate change.
C1  Heavyweight astronomy on a featherweight budget in Georgia.
C1  Male dolphins team up to get what they want in mating.
C1  The Doctor's World: Bush's physician gets lots of advice.
C3  Sports B9-17  Olympics: U.S. and Sweden tie in hockey.
B9  Ice-dance pair from Unified Team wins.
B9  U.S. might look to courts for ski jumpers.
B10  Basketball: Knicks barely get past Heat.
B14  Seton Hall defeats Pitt.
B13  Michigan's lively freshmen.
B13  Hockey: Rangers tie Canucks in last second of regulation.
B9  Islanders beat Jets, 5-4.
B17  Obituaries D12  Les Trautmann, editor of the Staten Island Advance.
Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Berlin Film Festival.
C13  Hollywood self-portrait: ugly.
C13  Music: De La Soul.
C13  Classical Music in Review.
C14  Word and Image: Stories in the first person.
C17  Fashion Page B8  Skirts that swing.
Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials A18  Global snub on warming.
Re-inventing debate wheel.
Tuesday night live.
Shrinking on garbage reform.
Letters A18  A. M. Rosenthal: Running from the world.
A19  Peter Jenkins: New Hampshire -- does Europe care?
A19  Pat Oliphant: The day before the morning after.
A19  Joseph Nocera: Shut up and vote.
A19


Review/Fashion; Fall Skirts Come Out Swinging
Forget for the moment about hem lengths.
The big news for next fall is skirts that swing.
At Valentino, flat box pleats whip into motion when the wearer moves.
Emanuel Ungaro favors delicate crystal pleats all around that flutter gently beneath fitted body lines.
And Yves Saint Laurent likes a modest flare to the skirt beneath his curving waistlines.


A Petition for Tyson
A group of ministers in Indianapolis said yesterday it had gathered 10,000 signatures in a petition drive seeking a suspended sentence for boxer MIKE TYSON on his conviction of raping an 18-year-old beauty pageant contestant.
The Missionary Baptist Ministers Alliance said it wants to gather 100,000 signatures to present to Marion Superior Court Judge PATRICIA J. GIFFORD before Tyson's sentencing next month.


Russian Pair Wins Ice-Dancing Gold Medal


By Design; Clump, Clump, Clump
When platform shoes came clumping down the runways at the Paris couture spring collections they seemed like far-out, faraway fashion.
Yet only three weeks later, a few of Manhattan's fast-stepping stores have all sorts of versions.
Whatever your predilection, there is a shoe that fits.
There are pumps with high heels, or not so; mules and sandals with sling backs or T straps.
There are even some neo-hippie sandals that are all wide straps and too much sole.
Suede is the favored material, and black the prevalent color.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire; CANDIDATES TAKE THEIR LAST SHOTS IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
The New Hampshire primary contest rolled into its final, frantic hours today with candidates in both parties hanging on the whims, anxieties and passions of perhaps 265,000 voters.
President Bush fought to stave off an embarrassingly strong showing by his conservative challenger, Patrick J. Buchanan.
"Don't worry about trying to send some message," Mr.
Bush said in an interview from the White House on WMUR-TV in Manchester tonight, reflecting the underlying concern of his campaign about this recession-racked state.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CUOMO AND D'AMATO VIE FOR MICROPHONE
Governor Cuomo and Senator D'Amato went head to head in a spontaneous debate that was more like a verbal prizefight than the usual political discourse.
Officials at the annual meeting of the Association of Towns of the State of New York cheered and jeered as the two politicians clashed over government spending policies.
B2.


Heart Devices on Planes
The Australian airline Qantas is installing defribrillators on its jets in hopes of reducing in-flight deaths from heart failure.
Defibrillators administer electric shocks when the heart stops beating.
Qantas's aviation medical director, Eric Donaldson, and Prof.
Michael Rourke of St.
Vincent's Hospital in Sydney, said the machines should be on all the airline's planes by April.
They said crew members would be trained to use the devices.
"We hope that the availability of early defibrillation may prevent some of the dozen unexpected deaths which occur on Qantas aircraft each year," they said.


Game-Tying Shot in Last Second Gives Turcotte Goal Medal
The Rangers had the manpower but they didn't have much time.
Nevertheless, with two extra skaters on the ice, they got a goal from Darren Turcotte with just half a second left in regulation yesterday to salvage a 3-3 tie with the Vancouver Canucks at Madison Square Garden.
Defenseman Gerald Diduck of the Canucks had been given a five-minute major for checking Kris King from behind with 3 minutes 8 seconds left in the third period.
But the Rangers were doing little with the man advantage when Coach Roger Neilson called for a timeout with 50 seconds left.


Miscellany
*
Grey Advertising Inc., New York, has reported a net loss for the fourth quarter of 1991 and sharply lower net income for the full year, because of charges in connection with the closing of its subsidiary Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver.
For the quarter, Grey lost $5.7 million on commissions and fees of $161.5 million, compared with net income of $3.9 million, or $2.99 a share, on commissions and fees of $143.8 million in the fourth quarter of 1990.
For the year, net income was $4.3 million, or $3.51 a share, on commissions and fees of $531.3 million, compared with net income of $14.6 million, or $10.97 a share, on commissions and fees of $481.3 million for 1990. *
Three national advertising trade associations have filed a brief with the United States Supreme Court, asking it to uphold a permanent injunction prohibiting the Texas Attorney General from initiating actions against airline fare advertising.
Filing the brief in the case, which involves Trans World Airlines, were the American Association of Advertising Agencies, the National Association of Broadcasters and the American Advertising Federation.
The case is considered significant for the issue of whether states can impose regulations that differ from Federal regulations.


CHRONICLE
Many newly arrived refugee and immigrant women are "isolated, illiterate and victims of domestic violence, but they are expected to bring up children in the American system," says LE LIEU BROWNE, founder of the Refugee Women Council in Manhattan.
To address these women's needs, the council is holding a conference today on "Refugee and Immigrant Women's Right to Know" at Hunter College's School of Social Work.
SIMA WALI, a keynote speaker, said she would call for training that helps refugee women become leaders.
Speaking from personal experience, Ms.
Wali will talk about "the constant marginalization" of women in the traditional Islamic, male-dominated society of Afghan refugees.
After working with the Peace Corps in Kabul, Ms.
Wali fled the war in 1979 and is now executive director of a Washington-based organization, Refugee Women in Development, and a member of the Refugee Trauma Center at Harvard University.


Sports of The Times; Open Letter To the Planet Of the Goons
JOHN ZIEGLER, PRESIDENT  NATIONAL HOCKEY LEAGUE  PLANET OF THE GOONS  DEAR JOHN:
JUST thought I'd write to say hello again from the Winter Olympics, where hockey is played the way it's meant to be played.
Apparently you never received the letter I wrote to you on this same subject from Calgary four years ago.
But maybe I mailed it to the N.H.L. office.
I'm told you're mostly at the above address.


Daihatsu Move
Kresser/Craig is losing its automotive account after a decision last week by Daihatsu America in Los Alamitos, Calif., to withdraw its Japanese-built cars from the American market.
Despite the loss of the $10 million account, Bob Kresser, chairman and chief executive in Santa Monica, Calif., said there would be no layoffs at the agency.


For Hispanic Immigrants, a Higher Job-Injury Risk
Hispanic factory and industrial workers in the United States get hurt on the job more often and more seriously than non-Hispanic white and black workers in similar jobs, according to state health officials, private research groups and the doctors who treat them.
Most of the workers are immigrants and like immigrants historically, they take the hazardous, low-paying jobs that other Americans spurn.
But studies in Illinois, California and New Jersey show that Hispanic workers, both legal and illegal immigrants, also have injury and illness rates that are two or three times higher than non-Hispanic white Americans who take the same jobs.
Black workers suffer higher rates than whites, too, but lower rates than Hispanic workers.


In Minnesota, Pressure Builds for a Health-Care Insurance Plan
As politicians in Washington jockey for advantage in the debate over access to health care, Minnesota is working toward its own solution, a universal health-care plan that would subsidize the working poor, force insurers to cover people in high-risk groups and require greater cost efficiency.
For weeks, Democrats and Republicans here in the Minnesota capital have been negotiating a compromise measure to introduce during the legislative session that opens Tuesday.


It Was an Explosive Debate, Even Though It Was Not in New Hampshire


The Bronx Accentuates the Positive
Although Marlene Reynolds shares a condition common to 1.2 million people, she'd just as soon keep it to herself.
"I don't want people to know I'm from the Bronx," she protested with a laugh as she leaned over the counter of the Bagel Cafe where she works in Co-Op City.
"Everybody who is not from the Bronx thinks it's like that movie, 'Fort Apache.' "


Building Jobs Underpaid, Officials Say
Taking advantage of hard economic times, when many people will work for less pay, a growing number of New York City contractors are slashing their bids to win public works contracts and then paying illegally low wages on public works projects.
The contractors, who are competing for scarce work in a depressed region, avoid losing money on their bids by paying wages that are drastically below prevailing rates, city officials said.


Houston Mayor Removes Female Police Chief
Chief Elizabeth M. Watson, the only woman to head a police force in one of the nation's big cities, was removed from office today a little more than two years after she took over the Houston department.
Mayor Bob Lanier, who was elected in December on pledges to toughen law enforcement, named as her replacement Samuel M. Nuchia, an Assistant United States Attorney since 1987 and a 21-year veteran of the Houston Police Department before that.
The City Council must approve his nomination.


Surrounded by Memories of the Big Store
To the Editor:
I was touched by "The Big Store," your Jan. 30 editorial following the filing for bankruptcy of the parent company of Macy's.
May I join the three loyal customers you describe with my own recollections?
I remember lunchtime rushes in the late 1920's, when the little leather-bound Modern Library classics went for 10 cents a copy, while across 34th Street, Gimbel's tried to rival this at 9 cents.
I still have a copy of Norman Douglas's "South Wind" from that sale, when I rushed crosstown during my lunch hour to try my luck.


Sweden and U.S. End in a Tie and Fit to Be Tied
Within 20 minutes after the United States Olympic hockey team earned first place in its round-robin group by tying the defending world champions tonight, Dave Peterson managed to insult Sweden's coaching staff, scream an obscenity at the referee and charge a former Lady Byng Trophy winner with purposely incapacitating one of the American players.
It was all in a very long night's work for the American head coach, who clearly was no longer going to be anybody's Mr.
Nice Guy.
A dramatic 3-3 tie assured the United States of a soft quarterfinal match Tuesday night against France as the single-elimination medal round begins, but turned back the clock four years to Calgary on the Olympic diplomacy front.


In China, as in Its Neighbors, Repression Pays; Human Rights Excuse
To the Editor:
The American people deserve more consistency from our Government, especially in foreign policy.
Otherwise, we must accept at face value the statements of China's Prime Minister Li Peng at the United Nations, where he decried "interference in the internal affairs . . . using the human rights issue as an excuse."
Although all borders must be respected, human rights must be as well.
But who is to be the judge?
We reject China, North Korea, Cuba and Iraq, for example, because of alleged human rights violations.
But do blacks have human rights in South Africa?
Palestinians in Israel and the occupied territories?
Protestants in Northern Ireland?
Algerians in France?
Indians in Britain?
Mosquito Coast Indians in Nicaragua?
Or any and many political dissidents in Brazil?
Chile?
South Korea?
East Timor?
El Salvador?
Haiti?


Smetanina's 10th Medal Sets Mark
Twelve days before her 40th birthday, Raisa Smetanina of the Unified Team, earned a 10th Olympic medal today, a record, when she skied the second lap of the women's 20-kilometer cross-country relay race.
It was Smetanina's fourth Olympic gold medal of her career.
She has also won five silvers and a bronze, coming 16 years apart.


A True-Crime Adventure With a City Hall Backdrop; Beyond Campaign Embezzling Case, Uncertainties Cloud Inquiries Into Stock and Other Deals
A trusted mayoral adviser is unmasked as an embezzler and begins talking to the District Attorney.
The story has a thousand endings, but the elements are familiar -- a whiff of scandal scattered by political winds, rival scoops, tight-lipped lawmen and a public braced for growing revelations.
In the month since Arnold I. Biegen was caught writing himself $158,000 in checks out of the campaign treasury he was collecting for Mayor David N. Dinkins, the plot of this true-crime adventure has taken several intriguing turns.
The 58-year-old lawyer and friend of the Mayor and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo quickly pleaded guilty, to stealing not only the campaign funds but also about $850,000 from the elderly widow of a former law partner whose estate he was managing.


Tomba Trades in the Flash, but Keeps the Flair
Alberto Tomba hit the Olympics as only La Bomba can.
Arriving here by helicopter Sunday night for Tuesday's giant slalom, the Italian champion promptly announced that he was changing his playboy life style in deference to the pursuit of Olympic gold.


Deafness Gene
Scientists say they have identified a gene that can cause deafness in children, a step that may help in diagnosis and in finding a treatment.
Two independent teams of scientists have reported finding the gene that when defective causes a disorder called Waardenburg's syndrome.
The inherited syndrome is responsible for 3 percent of childhood deafness, said Dr.
Aubrey Milunsky, an author of one of the reports.
People with the syndrome often have a distinctive appearance that can include a shock of white hair, wide spacing of the eyes or one eye a different color from the other.
Only about 20 percent of patients have total hearing loss, Dr.
Milunsky said.
But anybody with the defective gene has a 50 percent chance of transmitting it to his or her child, in whom it may produce deafness, he said.
Dr.
David Edelstein of the Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital, who was not connected with the study, said the finding might aid in diagnosis and point the way to a treatment.
The finding of the gene is reported in the current issue of the journal Nature.
Researchers studied families with a history of the disease, and found that mutations in the gene were associated with appearance of the syndrome.
One team included Dr.
Milunsky and colleagues at the Boston University School of Medicine and Elias da Silva at the Federal University of Puernambuco in Brazil.
The other team included researchers in Britain and Germany.


Cone-Mets Arbitration Goes Into Extra Innings
David Cone and the Mets played what amounted to a doubleheader yesterday, debating their salary differences for approximately six hours before an arbitrator.
They will have to wait until at least today to learn if the arbitrator, Nicholas Zumas, awards Cone $4.25 million or $3 million.
With Steve Fehr arguing Cone's case and General Manager Al Harazin leading the Mets' arbitration contingent, the hearing at the Player Relations Committee office in New York plodded to an unusual length.
When all of the statistics had been presented and the salaries of comparable players set forth, Zumas was left with the choice of giving Cone a raise of $650,000 or $1.9 million.


A Ballet Goes On, Music or Not
It did not occur to Eliot Feld to worry about music rights when he began work in April on "Endsong," a dance that is the culmination of 30 years of listening to Richard Strauss's "Four Last Songs." For one thing, Mr.
Feld says, he is never sure he can pull off a new ballet.
"And if I had been burned before, I would've checked," he said.
But the new ballet will be danced in silence during the Feld Ballets/ NY season at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street), which opens tonight, because Mr.
Feld failed to get permission from the Strauss estate.


BAKER AND YELTSIN AGREE ON U.S. HELP IN SCRAPPING ARMS
Russia today accepted a broad range of United States assistance for dismantling its nuclear arsenal, including 25 specially fitted American railroad boxcars to transport its nuclear warheads to storage sites and $25 million to set up an institute employing former Soviet nuclear-bomb designers in projects with peaceful uses.
The Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, also announced after three hours of talks in the Kremlin with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d that he and President Bush would hold a summit meeting in the United States in July, although the precise date has not yet been determined.


Blind Judge Doesn't Bear Burden of Proof
To the Editor:
"A Blind Judge?" (editorial, Feb. 6), on Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's recommendation of Richard Casey for Federal judge in the Southern District of New York, states: "To his burden of blindness must be added the burden of proving he is so experienced and able that he can beat a large handicap. If he can meet that test, he will have earned the job."
Wrong!
It is not the burden of the potential employee to show his disability will not impede his job performance.
Under the Americans With Disabilities Act, the employer must show that it bases a decision not to employ an otherwise qualified person on criteria that are "job related" and "consistent with business necessity."


Pirelli Chief Plans To Relinquish Control
Leopoldo Pirelli, a baron of Italian business, has announced his decision to relinquish day-to-day control of his Milan-based cable and rubber company after the expensive failure last year of his attempt to merge the company with its European rival, Continental A.G.
Pirelli S.p.A. unexpectedly announced over the weeked that Mr.
Pirelli, who is 67 years old, would remain as chairman but would yieled operational control to his 44-year-old son-in-law, Marco Tronchetti Provera, who becomes executive deputy chairman and managing director.


It's Not Capitalism Yet, but the Ruble Is Healthier
The Russian Government's determination to strengthen the battered ruble reportedly began to yield some qualified success today in the currency markets here, with the often-criticized Central Bank finally being accorded some political credit as a steadying influence.
The stemming of the ruble's tumble lately is hardly a harbinger of ultimate success in Russia's 46-day-old search for the free market.


Books of The Times
The Quick By Agnes Rossi  156 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company. $17.95.
Not the End of the World  By Rebecca Stowe 151 pages.
Pantheon Books. $18.


War in 1990's: New Doubts; Pentagon Plans Evoke Skepticism in Congress
By spelling out potential foreign conflicts that might draw United States forces into combat, the Bush Administration is headed for confrontation with a skeptical Congress over national security assumptions at the end of the cold war, analysts and Congressional aides said today.
In recent months, Congressional leaders like Representative Les Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat who is chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, have pressed the Pentagon to provide its analysis of specific threats to American security in coming years, but the Pentagon leadership has declined. 'The Real Threat'
When Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen.
Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, sent their 1993 fiscal year budget request to Congress last month, General Powell said in an accompanying "national military strategy" document that "the real threat we now face is the threat of the unknown, the uncertain."


Weise to Retire
The St.
Bonaventure athletic director, LAWRENCE WEISE, a former player and coach with the university's basketball team, said yesterday he would retire this year.


Jury Hears Gotti Discuss Organization on Tapes
A jury began hearing tapes yesterday of John Gotti discussing his plans for the leadership of his organization with his closest associates, including Salvatore (Sammy Bull) Gravano, who later turned informer against him.
One taped discussion focused on the bond between the two men and provided a measure of Mr.
Gravano's betrayal of Mr.
Gotti, who is charged with being the boss of the Gambino crime family.


President of Royal Dutch Announces His Retirement
The Royal Dutch Petroleum Company has announced that Lo van Wachem, its president, will relinquish his position on June 30, having reached the retirement age of 60.
He will also give up his post as chairman of the joint committee of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Companies.
The company's board is expected to propose his appointment to the Royal Dutch supervisory board, effective July 1, at which time he would become board chairman.
Mr. van Wachem, who is Dutch, will be succeeded as Royal Dutch Petroleum's president by Cornelius Herkstroter, 55, who has been a managing director of the company since July 1989.
Sir Peter Holmes, a Briton who has been chairman of the Shell Transport and Trading Company P.L.C. since 1985, will succeed Mr. van Wachem as chairman of the Joint Committee of the service companies of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group, known as the committee of managing directors


New Plans For S.&amp; L.'s And Banks
Federal regulators are preparing a new strategy of investing in some failing banks and savings and loans rather than taking them over and closing or selling them.
The regulators, whose goal is to find a less expensive way to deal with ailing institutions, are being prodded by a law passed by Congress last year that requires the authorities to step in earlier when lending institutions are troubled.


Faux Pas by McDonald's in Europe
Since McDonald's opened its first restaurant in France in 1979, an uneasy truce has held between this country's fine chefs and promoters of "le fast food." Now a McDonald's poster that appears to mock one of the greatest French chefs of all, Paul Bocuse, has led to open hostilities.
Mr.
Bocuse has filed suit, seeking $2.7 million in damages from the McDonald's Corporation.


It's His Baby: Publisher Thrives on Family Fun
With advertising pages plunging, magazines closing, and the birth rate declining for the first time in four years, guess what Jake Winebaum did last year.
He started a magazine for parents.


Accounts
*
Dollar Systems Inc., Los Angeles, to FKQ Advertising Inc., Tampa, Fla., for the car rental company's consumer advertising.
Billings were estimated at $4 million to $5 million.
The account was previously handled by Cochrane Chase, Livingston &amp; Co., Irvine, Calif., which closed in November.
FKQ has handled Dollar's trade advertising for the last year.


Klimova-Ponomarenko Dance to Gold
All the cheering, clapping and stomping in the world, as well as the benevolence of a French judge, could not help Isabelle and Paul Duchesnay achieve the dream of a lifetime tonight, winning a gold medal before a home-country in the Albertville Winter Olympics.
What the audience and Armelle Van Eybergen could not provide them with was a free dance program that compared well enough in style and intricacy to that skated by Marina Klimova and Sergei Ponomarenko, Muscovites of the Unified Team.


People
*
Charles Hively, president and creative director of the Hively Agency in Houston, has been named chief executive, and David Kuhlmann, executive vice president, has been named chief operating officer. *
Bobbie Halfin, executive vice president and publisher of Sassy magazine in New York, has been named to head a new division of its parent, Lang Communications, handling licensing and related activities.
Succeeding Ms.
Halfin is Linda Cohen, who had been Sassy's associate publisher.


Hunger and Other Hardships Are Said to Deepen North Korean Discontent
North Korea is facing a growing economic crisis and worsening food shortages, with some people scrounging on the hillsides for edible plants to alleviate hunger, according to ethnic Koreans who have visited relatives in North Korea.
Discontent is mounting along with the shortages, the ethnic Koreans said in interviews in Chinese border towns like this one.
They added that in private, North Koreans are sometimes contemptuous of President Kim Il Sung, the "Great Leader" whose badge everyone must wear.


A Child Dies, an Aunt Is Accused And Haunting Questions Remain
The father of 6-year-old Millison Ayala said yesterday that he could not imagine the explosion of violence in a Bronx apartment on Saturday that left Millison dead and her younger sister seriously injured.
The police have charged his sister, 36-year-old Mary Ann Ayala, Millison's foster mother, with beating her to death and trying to kill her 4-year-old sister, Stephanie.


Shirley Berman, 55; Sued Over Child's Birth
Shirley Berman, whose daughter, born with Down Syndrome, inspired her to wage a battle for a New Jersey law requiring doctors to inform parents if their unborn child is retarded, died on Feb. 8 at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
She was 55 years old and lived in Upper Saddle River, N.J.
She died of cancer, a family spokesman said.


Careers; Providing Extra Help For Workers
WITH the needs of employees becoming increasingly complex, more companies are hiring so-called work-family managers to help workers cope with their problems, according to a recent study.
The job generally involves helping with the growing diversity of workers' needs.
For example, assistance might be provided for mothers who need child care; for workers who have elderly parents at home who need care; fathers who want paternity leave to raise children; those who want shorter workweeks, or those who want to share jobs, dividing their workweek in half.


Lord Fieldhouse; Falkland Fleet Commander, 63
Lord Fieldhouse, commander of the British battle fleet that sailed to retake the Falkland Islands from Argentine forces, died in a hospital today at the age of 63, the Defense Ministry said.
As Adm.
Sir John Fieldhouse, he was commander in chief of the battle fleet during the 1982 Falkland war.


Big Bout at Byrne
In what will be the first world title match in the Byrne Meadowlands Arena in nine years, REGGIE JOHNSON and STEVE COLLINS will fight for the vacant World Boxing Association middleweight championship on Wednesday, April 22.
The last title fight in the arena was on Feb. 16, 1983, when S. T. GORDON retained the World Boxing Council cruiserweight title with an eighth-round knockout of JESSE BURNETT.


The Talk of Hollywood; Hollywood Captivated By an Altman Film About How Awful It Is
It is the most searing film about Hollywood in years, a funny, nasty, insider's look at an icy, Armani-suited studio executive who glides like a lizard through power lunches, chats on cordless phones, makes glib judgments about movies and gets away with murder, quite literally.
And Hollywood, which enjoys self-laceration as much as mean gossip, has, curiously, embraced the Robert Altman film, "The Player."
Although the film is not scheduled to be released in New York and Los Angeles until April 24, advance screenings in the last few weeks have stirred an extraordinary amount of attention.
Extra folding chairs were hauled into a screening the other night to accommodate the directors and producers who showed up, just like the characters in "The Player," in their new Mercedeses and BMW's.
And they applauded at the finale.


U.N. Chief Wants Troops in Yugoslavia Until Accord
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Ghali, wants the Security Council to be prepared to keep the peacekeeping force it is considering sending to Yugoslavia in that country until a political settlement is reached, even if the separatist republic of Croatia asks it to withdraw.
The proposal, included in a report to the Council on the projected Yugoslav peacekeeping operation, reflects fears that ethnic extremists in Croatia may try to wreck the United Nations peace plan for the region by ordering the peacekeeping force out of Croatia and then extending Croatian sovereignty over the Serbian minority enclaves that the force is meant to protect.
Urges Shift From Policy
The plan underscores the risk in the Yugoslav operation, saying that the Security Council should abandon its normal practice of deploying peacekeeping forces only with the consent of all the parties to a dispute.


Bridge
One of the reasons for overcalling is that it may make it harder for the opponents to bid accurately.
But one of the reasons for not bidding is that it may make it easier for them to play accurately.
The diagramed deal, played at Adath Israel in Riverdale, the Bronx, left East to realize that silence would have been golden.
When North opened one diamond, East had the vulnerability in his favor and chose to overcall one heart.
South bid one no-trump and showed the club suit on the next round.
North's jump to six clubs was a surprise, but the contract was entirely reasonable.


A Delay Is Nothing New For U.S.'s Twardokens
One day is not too long a delay because what is 24 hours when you've been counting by years?
Eva Twardokens has been waiting for her Olympics to begin since 1984.
During the first week of the 1992 Winter Games, a reporter sent a message to Twardokens through the Olympics' computerized mail.
Which events, the reporter wanted to know, would she be racing in when the women's Alpine events began?


Jackson, Predicting Heroics, Comes Through for Knicks
With just 10.9 seconds left in the game against the Heat tonight and with the score tied at 102-102, Knicks guard Mark Jackson sidled up to teammate Kiki Vandeweghe during the timeout.
"I just had a vision," Jackson said, after his leaning 16-foot jump shot with 1.9 seconds left allowed the Knicks to repel Miami, 104-102.
"I told Kiki that if I get the ball, I would make something happen."


Israelis and Foes Trade Fire Near Border
Israeli forces and Muslim militiamen supported by the Lebanese Army traded rocket and artillery fire in southern Lebanon Monday and early today as Middle East violence spread after Israel's assassination Sunday of the Lebanese Shiite leader, Sheik Abbas Musawi.
Hundreds of rounds were exchanged and dozens of rockets fired, including some that landed in northern Israel, where residents are used to such attacks but had not experienced one in a long time.
Most of the fire against the Israelis and their allies came from Muslim militias, but the Lebanese Army was also reported to have fired some rounds.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; After Debate, the Masters of 'Spin' Take the Floor
For the voters of New Hampshire, the Democratic debate on Sunday offered a final chance to watch five solemn men engage in an intellectual Olympiad, a dense burst of meaning in the waning moments of the primary contest here.
But for the principal architects of campaigns -- the political henchmen, the minders and puppeteers who make their living by calling the Titanic the Love Boat -- the evening offered something better: an opportunity to hype, twist, contort, convulse and, if talent failed, bludgeon a punch-drunk press corps into understanding how only their candidate could possibly have been the winner.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury will hold its regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today.
The auction was not held yesterday on the usual schedule because of the observance of Washington's Birthday.
The following fixed-income issues are also scheduled for this week: TAXABLE  WEDNESDAY
Alabama Power Co., $200 million of first mortgage bonds, either 30- or 40-year maturity.
Competitive bid.
ONE DAY DURING THE WEEK
General Host Corp., $70 million of senior notes, due 2002, and $60 million convertible subordinated notes, due 2002.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
Republic New York Corp., four million shares of $25 cumulative fixed-rate perpetual preferred.
Lehman Brothers.
Utilicorp United, one million shares of $25 preference stock.
Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
TAX EXEMPT  ONE DAY DURING THE WEEK
Arizona Board of Regents, $105 million, revenue refunding bonds for the University of Arizona Systems.
John Nuveen &amp; Co.
City of Boston, $70 million in general obligation bonds. Lazard Freres &amp; Co.
Columbus, Ohio, $130 million in sewer revenue refunding bonds.
A.
G.
Edwards &amp; Sons Inc.
County of Allegheny, Pa., $178 million airport revenue bonds, series 1992, for Greater Pittsburgh International Airport.
Smith Barney.
Dallas/Fort Worth Regional Airport, $312.6 million of bonds, series 1992 B. First Boston Corp.
Grand Strand Water and Sewer Authority, S.C., $66 million of waterworks and sewer system refunding bonds, series 1992.
Merrill Lynch.
Harris County, Tex., $400 million revenue refunding bonds, series 1992 A and B, and $66.3 million of toll road unlimited tax and subordinate lien revenue refunding bonds, series 1992.
Smith Barney.
Indiana Transportation Finance Authority, $74 million of highway revenue bonds, series 1992.
First Boston.
Montana Higher Education Student Assistance Corp., $156.2 million of student loan revenue bonds, series 1992 A and B. Smith Barney.
State of Wisconsin, $445 million of general obligation refunding bonds.
Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Texas Municipal Power Agency $450 million revenue refunding bonds, series 1992A.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, $75 million serial and term bonds.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc..


Corson Reinstated
SHAYNE CORSON's suspension was lifted yesterday after he made an agreement with Montreal Canadiens Coach PAT BURNS to stay out of bars for the rest of the season.
Corson, 25, was suspended indefinitely by General Manager SERGE SAVARD last Friday after getting into a late-night fight at a downtown bar two nights earlier.
The wing missed Saturday's 4-4 tie with the Quebec Nordiques but was back in the lineup for last night's game against the Minnesota North Stars.


Saudis Are Close to Deal for Big Part of Fina
A group of private Saudi investors is close to an agreement to buy half of the refining and marketing system of Fina Inc., including 2 Texas refineries and 500 gasoline stations, for more than $500 million.
The refineries are in Port Arthur and Big Spring, with a capacity of more than 200,000 barrels a day.
The gas stations, about 200 of them owned and the rest franchised, are in Texas and Minnesota.


Network News On the Primary
Special news reports on the New Hampshire primary election will be shown on five television networks today beginning at 6:30 P.M.
Eastern standard time.
In addition, ABC will have a news special at 11:30 P.M. with Peter Jennings and David Brinkley.


It's Al vs. Mario, and Truce Is Off for a Day
Vying over one microphone, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato went head to head yesterday in a spontaneous debate that was more like a verbal prizefight than the usual political discourse.
A surprised audience at the annual meeting of the Association of Towns of the State of New York joined the fray, hooting, hollering and jeering, as "Al" and Mario" -- as they oh-so-sarcastically called each other -- clashed over government spending policies.


Secrecy Orders in Lawsuits Prompt States' Efforts to Restrict Their Use
John Sparco won a bitter victory last year in his medical malpractice case.
He had sued two doctors who, he said, botched his brain surgery.
In September, eight years after he filed suit, the doctors agreed to settle the case.
But there was one condition.
Their names would have to be kept secret.
Only their hospital, Johns Hopkins University Hospital in Baltimore, would be mentioned in the public record.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Rout for Canadiens  Patrick Roy recorded his fifth shutout of the season as the Canadiens beat Minnesota, 8-0, in Montreal last night even though the North Stars had more shots on goal, 25-23.
Brent Gilchrist scored three goals. (AP) Red Wings 5, Blues 3: Paul Ysebaert intercepted a clearing past and then scored his second goal of the game with 1 minute 22 seconds to play, breaking a 3-3 tie in Detroit. (AP) Kings 6, Bruins 3: Luc Robitaille celebrated his 26th birthday with two goals and two assists as Los Angeles took over second place in the Smythe Division by beating Boston in Inglewood, Calif. (AP)


Milken to Pay $500 Million More In $1.3 Billion Drexel Settlement
Michael R. Milken has agreed to pay an additional $500 million and a number of his former colleagues at Drexel Burnham Lambert have agreed to pay $300 million to settle many of the civil lawsuits arising from the failure of the brokerage firm.
Drexel's insurers have agreed to pay $100 million to settle the claims.
With the $400 million that Mr.
Milken previously put in a fund to compensate victims of his securities frauds, the total settlement is $1.3 billion.


Review/Television; A Jazz Star, Often Heard But Rarely Recognized
A major figure in American jazz, Benny Carter has for the most part been denied his due share of popular recognition, the sort given to Louis Armstrong or Duke Ellington.
The oversight calls for correction.
That much is clear after watching "Benny Carter: Symphony in Riffs," an hourlong documentary on the Arts &amp; Entertainment cable channel at 10 tonight and then repeated at 2 A.M.
The profile, produced and directed in 1989 by Harrison Engle, is a bit lumpy, especially in its obvious plugs for certain airlines and cruise liners.
But with Burt Lancaster as the smooth narrator, Mr.
Carter comes through, in his customary style, as elegant and utterly dignified.
Assorted figures in music, from Andre Previn and Quincy Jones to Ella Fitzgerald and Stanley Jordan, offer testimonials to the man's talent and style.
But the basic biographical facts speak for themselves.


Quotation of the Day
"I know society will never be able to forgive me. I know the families of the victims will never be able to forgive me for what I have done." -- JEFFREY DAHMER, sentenced to 15 consecutive life terms.  [ A14:1. ]


Les Trautmann, 73, Top Editor For The Staten Island Advance
Les Trautmann, who was the editor of The Staten Island Advance for 27 years, died yesterday at his home on Staten Island.
He was 73 years old.
Mr.
Trautmann, who was the daily newspaper's editor until his death, suffered a heart attack, said Brian J. Laline, associate editor of the paper.


Seton Hall Goes Click, Pittsburgh Goes Clang
There were slicing drives by Terry Dehere, pinpoint passes by Bryan Caver and a typically gutsy performance by Jerry Walker.
There was even an extraordinary 0-for-22 dry spell by Pittsburgh in the first half during which Seton Hall ran off 15 uncontested points while the visitors clanged the rim for more than 11 minutes.
But the moment that confirmed the fact that Seton Hall might be on a permanent upswing came with 5 minutes 26 seconds to play in tonight's 82-63 victory by the Pirates.


Q&amp;A
Life on Man
Q. How many other living things live on human beings?
A.
Discounting harmful parasites, like tapeworms, ticks or fleas, and disease-causing microorganisms, there are an untold number of creatures living in and on a healthy person that cause no trouble and that may be beneficial or even necessary.


Volcanoes on Triton
Enhanced versions of the pictures taken from the Voyager 2 spacecraft reveal what look like three gigantic, ice-gushing volcanoes on Neptune's frozen moon Triton, scientists report.
If the flat, nearly circular features are volcanic, they are the fourth kind of ice volcano seen on Triton and a type never before seen in the solar system, Pascal Lee, a Cornell planetary scientist, said last week.
The smallest circle is 175 miles wide and the largest measures 580 miles across -- more than one-third of the moon's diameter -- so researchers believe they are seeing icy volcanism on a global scale although it is not known if the volcanoes are active, Mr.
Lee said.
The discovery was reported in the current issue of the journal Science by Mr.
Lee and colleagues at Cornell, Paul Helfenstein, Joseph Veverka, Derek McCarthy and John Hillier.
The idea of icy volcanism may seem strange because Earth's volcanoes produce hot molten rock.
But if the ice inside Triton is warmer than the surface, the volcanoes can produce eruptions, scientists say.
Triton is the coldest object ever measured in the solar system, with a surface temperature of 391 degrees below zero Fahrenheit.


On My Mind; Running From the World
Can you believe it?
Some reporter, not even an American, had the gall to stand up in New Hampshire and ask the candidate a question about foreign affairs.
The fellow wanted assurances that America would continue to have a role in the world.
Well, of course, the candidate was ready for a character like that and with pleasure let him have it.


U.S. Bobsledders Third in Practice
The United States four-man bobsled team, which its coach, Jim Hickey, has predicted will win the competition, finished third on the first day of training today.
The two-day competition begins Friday, with Herschel Walker, who had been the brakeman on the two-man sled that finished seventh, in the same position.


American Air Package Plan
American Airlines said today that it had begun a next-morning delivery service for small packages that guarantees delivery by 8:30 A.M.
The airline, a unit of the AMR Corporation, said the service was available immediately from the Dallas-Fort Worth Airport to about 10,000 communities in the United States.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Almanac; New Hampshire's Voters


At 100 Below Zero, Scientists Seek Evidence of Radiation From Space
THE South Pole, goal of heroic treks in the early years of the century, is emerging as the site for a multitude of scientific observations.
For the 20 or so researchers who winter over at the pole, conditions are harsh, especially during the long winter night.
Temperatures can drop to more than 100 degrees below zero Fahrenheit and the sun never rises above the horizon.
But the rewards are rich, for the work done there cannot be done anywhere else on earth.


Israel's Longtime Rivals in Labor Party Face Off in First U.S.-Style Primary
Both men are former Prime Ministers now looking their 70th birthdays square in the eye.
Both are widely regarded as blessed with considerable talents, and marred by equally notable flaws.
And each has an abiding dislike for the other acquired over two decades of political punchouts.
In the view of many Israelis, both are also close to wearing out their welcome and perhaps ought to yield to a new generation of politicians.
But that is not about to happen, at least not now.


Ethiopia Finds Remains of Emperor
The remains of Emperor Haile Selassie, who died mysteriously after a Marxist revolution toppled him in 1974, were found Sunday in a secret grave, Government officials said.
Official reports said the Emperor's remains were found on the grounds of the Imperial Palace, beneath the office of the man who overthrew him, Lieut.
Col.
Mengistu Haile Mariam.
[ "The reason why Mengistu chose this site was to see that the body did not rise from the dead," the state radio said, according to The Associated Press. ]


Cumming Journal; A Harkin on Almost Every Corner
For weeks now, talk in this tiny rural town in central Iowa has been Harkin-talk.
Frank Harkin just bought a new Ford.
Mary King-Harkin's grandson finally left for boot camp.
Jim Harkin has been down at the Cumming Tap playing cards.
And Senator Tom, the one born and reared in the little tan house there, well, he's running for President.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Access Health Marketing Inc., 2 million shares.  Alex. Brown &amp; Sons.


Partial Settlement in Miniscribe Suit
A partial settlement has been reached in a lawsuit in which a Texas jury had awarded more than $550 million in damages to investors in the Miniscribe Corporation, a defunct disk drive manufacturer that was accused of falsifying its financial statements.
As part of the settlement yesterday, Judge Roy Engelke of state district court in Galveston, voided the jury's verdict against Coopers &amp; Lybrand, which had been Miniscribe's accounting firm and had been assessed punitive damages of $200 million.
Terms of the settlement were not announced.


Ashland-Unocal Deal
Ashland Oil Inc. said yesterday that its chemical subsidiary had agreed to buy most of the Unocal Corporation's chemical distribution business for $90 million.
Unocal distributes a wide range of chemicals and solvents, according to Ashland, which is itself a leading producer of such products along with plastics and other materials.
The deal is scheduled to be completed on Feb. 28.


Woman Thrown From Subway, Police Say
A 23-year-old woman who had been struggling to overcome drug addiction was killed early yesterday morning when a man threw her from a subway train they had been riding together in Manhattan, the transit police said.
The woman, identified by the police as Sonya Smalls, lived with her grandmother, Clodeaner Smalls, at 3329 Bouck Avenue in the Williamsbridge section of the Bronx.
Her grandmother said that the woman had been in drug therapy at the Walter Hoving Home in Garrison, N.Y., and that she had not heard from her in a week.


Review/Rap; De La Soul's New Image: Toughness
The daisy age is over.
At the Ritz on Sunday night, De La Soul, once the leaders of the hippie-hop school of rap, put on a show that strove so hard to entertain, most positive messages were lost.
Three female dancers stood on "Wonderama"-style podiums, kicking and pumping and holding up signs emblazoned with key words from the group's songs.
There were strobe lights, floodlights, flashlights and laser lights that projected multicolored images of stars, bars and dots onto a background screen.
During one song, "A Roller Skating Jam Named 'Saturdays,' " from De La Soul's second album, "De La Soul Is Dead" (Tommy Boy), a dancer came out on roller skates and zoomed aimlessly back and forth across the stage.
Posdnuos and Trugoy, the front two-thirds of the group, exhorted the crowd to clap hands and make some noise.
Under any circumstances, De La Soul's music would be difficult to translate into a live situation: unlike much rap, it relies more on intricate sampling snippets than on mega-beats and beefy bass lines.
De La Soul's 1989 debut album, "Three Feet High and Rising," was the ultimate suburbanization of rap: bawdy and whimsical, its references were trash-culture game shows and Saturday morning educational rhymes, schoolyard gossip and third-grade humor.
Samples cut from sources like Johnny Cash, Bad Company and Steely Dan seemed hilariously out of context.
Posdnuos, Trugoy and the D.J., Mase, preached peace, love and daisies with the innocent sincerity of Deadheads; even the serious tracks like "Ghetto Thang" and "Say No Go" were told in a way that was good-naturedly descriptive and nonconfrontational.


For Docter, Straight and Narrow Can't Conquer Oval
Women's speed skating came to a conclusion today in the XVI Olympic Winter Games, with the Germans sweeping the day's three medals.
American Mary Docter finished 17th, which disappointed her, but she said that while she would have liked to have won a medal, she left the ice with her sobriety intact, and that sobriety was more important.
Docter is the speed skater from Madison, Wis., who is competing in her fourth and final Olympics.
She turned 31 years old last Tuesday.
Two months ago, she disclosed a frightening story of a decade of addiction to cocaine, marijuana and alcohol.
She said she had raced under the influence of drugs.


Jose Ferrer Was Proud Of Puerto Rican Roots
To the Editor:
The Jan. 27 obituary of Jose Ferrer, the actor, writer, producer and director, who was also successful as an opera singer and a musician, correctly states that he was born in Santurce, Puerto Rico.
But you err in asserting that his parents were from Spain.
Mr.
Ferrer came from a family with deep roots in Puerto Rico.
His father, Rafael Ferrer, a writer and lawyer, was from San Juan; and his mother, Maria Providencia Cintron, from Yabucoa.
The family is known in Puerto Rico for its professional, political and cultural contributions.


Dr. Hacib Aoun, 36; Championed Rights Of Health Workers
Dr.
Hacib Aoun, a doctor who championed the rights of health-care workers after becoming infected with H.I.V. on the job, died Sunday at his home in Glen Arm, Md.
He was 36 years old.
Dr. Aoun died of complications from AIDS, said a friend, Lee Koromvokis.


Market Place; A Study Shakes Confidence In the Volatile-Stock Theory
One of the most enduring ideas of modern finance is facing its most serious challenge.
Two scholars of finance say they have disproved the theory, common among investors, that stocks more volatile than the market as a whole are the best performers.
Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French, business professors at the University of Chicago, traced the performance of thousands of stocks over 50 years but found no link between relative volatility and long-term returns.
The many investors who try to beat the market by buying widely swinging issues are misguided, they say.


Review/Television; 'People Meter' Tracks a Sitcom's Fall
Tonight's edition of "Nova" demystifies the how and why of television ratings.
"Can You Believe TV Ratings?," at 8 on Channels 13 and 49 and at 9 on Channel 21, describes with admirable clarity the way Nielsen Media Research and lesser practitioners go about measuring what people are watching, for stakes that can be measured in the billions of dollars spent on commercials.
The comments of various players whose fortunes depend on Nielsen's numbers add zest to the hour.
Nielsen used to require viewers in its national sample to keep a diary of what they watched, which may have placed too much trust in respondents' conscientiousness, memory and honesty.
So a few years ago came the people meter, a little box into which each member of each selected household is supposed to punch everything he or she watches.
That seems to be causing "button fatigue"; viewers, who may move about a lot while the television keeps playing, don't always bother to check in or check out.
So now "passive" people meters are being developed that keep the computer's eye on who is watching what.
It is Big Brother reduced to selling soaps and cereals.


The Trouble With New Discount-Ticket Plan
To the Editor:
While the proposal to sell discount tickets for Broadway and some Off Broadway theaters at Bloomingdale's (On Stage, and Off column, Jan. 31) may seem useful for potential theatergoers, it is not in the best interests of the theater or its public.
Through the Theater Development Fund and the League of American Theaters, New York has for years offered half-price tickets to Broadway, Off Broadway and Off Off Broadway productions under the TKTS banner in Times Square, lower Manhattan and downtown Brooklyn.
At these sites, the public may find every discount offer in the city.
The proposed Bloomingdale's outlet will handle only productions of the Nederlander Organization, creating a splinter operation that will weaken the TKTS service by removing tickets from its base and forcing the public to go to more than one place to find what discount tickets are available.
Aside from inconvenience, this will also weaken the Theater Development Fund, one of the most helpful (if often unsung) support groups for the theater in the city.


INSIDE
New Plan for Ailing Banks
Federal regulators are preparing a new strategy: investing in some failing banks and savings and loans rather than seizing them.
Page D1.
Bleak Life in North Korea
Ethnic Koreans who cross the border from China say their neighbors are subsisting on rice and scraps, but discontent is abundant.
Page A9.
When Courts Keep Secrets
Court orders blocking the public's knowledge about malpractice and other suits with health implications are proliferating wildly.
Page D10.
A Less Restless Population
Residents of the New York region have a deeper sense of roots and are less inclined to move, according to a poll.
Page B1.
Serial Killer Sentenced
A judge sentenced the serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer to 15 consecutive life terms in prison.
Page A14.
U.S.
Reviews Climate Stance
The Administration is reviewing its opposition to emission caps for carbon dioxide.
Science Times, page C1.


CHRONICLE
It looked like the makings of a shadow cabinet as GEORGE ARZT became the sixth former Koch Administration official to join Capalino, LoCicero, Marino &amp; Tan, Inc., a New York-based government affairs and public relations group, established in January 1990.
Mr.
Arzt, press secretary under Mayor EDWARD I. KOCH and lately executive editor of Fox Network's news programs, joins the firm as senior vice president for media relations services and communications.


Piquet to Enter Indianapolis 500
Saying "I've always wanted to try Indy," NELSON PIQUET of Brazil, a three-time Formula One champion, agreed yesterday to drive a 1992 Lola-Buick for Team Menard in the Indianapolis 500 on May 24.
Piquet, the Formula One champion in 1981, 1982 and 1984, has 24 Grand Prix victories.
"I have always liked fast circuits," he said, "and I look forward to learning the tactics of driving fast at Indianapolis."


Shut Up and Vote
Has there been any more unpleasant sound this primary season than the gnashing of New Hampshire teeth?
For weeks, the nation has been forced to listen to New Hampshirites complain about how tough they've got it.
Endlessly, we've had to endure their whining about how little the Federal Government has done to get them back up on their feet.
Nightly, we've had to watch the candidates grovel before them, each attempting to "out-care" the other.
What I haven't heard anyone saying out loud is what some of us non-New Hampshirites are thinking: Enough, already.


Ski Jumpers? U.S. to Recruit on Basketball Courts
Herschel Walker's controversial leap from the football field to the Alps symbolizes a new sort of athlete: the dilettante Olympian.
The Puerto Rican bobsled team includes an optometrist from New Jersey who used to throw the javelin; Monaco has Prince Albert driving a sled.
And it's not stopping there.
If the United States ski team has its way, next will be someone like Spud Webb on the ski jumps.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; Turf Wars Becoming More Fierce
ALL over the nation, newspaper executives have been gathering at winter meetings of their state press associations to fret, worry and try to figure new ways to outflank competitors.
But as never before, a sizable part of the competition is probably in the same room with them.
Though direct mailers, broadcasters and yellow pages still top the newspaper enemies lists, papers are increasingly going outside their traditional markets to compete with rivals farther away from their hometowns.


Despite Pact, 2 Yale Unions Go On Strike
Classes were canceled, library hours curtailed and dining halls closed today after two unions and a group representing 1,300 graduate students at Yale University went on strike to force the university to bargain with the graduate students.
It was an odd alliance, since the unions had reached a settlement with the university on new contracts at 7 A.M. today, and the graduate-student organization is not a recognized union.


Agios Nikolaos Journal; Children of Arcadia Are Straying From the Fold
Even on a winter day, Arcadia still resembles the land that forever linked its name to the simple life of pastoral bliss -- shepherds milling behind their flock, terraced hillsides producing food, birds soaring high above olive and apricot trees.
Listening to the young people here, this region of southern Greece sounds quite different.
They see Arcadia as a place of boring mountain villages, far from movie theaters, well-paying jobs or new faces.
And they dream of going to Sparta, Athens or even nearby Tripolis.


In China, as in Its Neighbors, Repression Pays
To the Editor:
"Helping Hand, Heavy Foot: Both Are the Real China" (The Week in Review, Jan. 26) puzzles over the paradox of rapid growth amid political repression in China -- China's failure to "fit into a mold." You contrast China with other Communist countries, which "simultaneously repressed and impoverished their citizens." In addition to the Soviet Union, you compare China with Iraq under Saddam Hussein and with India.
Almost the only countries you fail to mention are the rapidly growing Confucian societies in East Asia.
To a student of these societies -- Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore -- there is nothing unprecedented about the combination of rapid economic growth and a political mailed fist.
On a population-adjusted basis, more lives were sacrificed by far on the altar of political stability in Korea's 1971 Kwangju massacre than 18 years later in Beijing.
On Feb. 28, 1974, the Taiwan government, transplanted from the mainland, crushed an uprising at a cost of at least 10,000 deaths; the Taiwan population has since been docile.
Political repression in Hong Kong and Singapore has been less bloody, but no less effective.


NEW JAPAN ENVOY SEES CRISIS IN U.S.
Japan's newly appointed Ambassador to the United States described the relationship between the two countries today as teetering at "a rather crucial period of mutual adjustment," as the United States only slowly gets used to the idea of sharing power with an economically resurgent Japan.
The comments by the Ambassador, Takakazu Kuriyama, an Amherst-educated expert on the United States who until last year was deputy foreign minister, underscored the growing view here that relations are nearing a crisis because of growing trade tensions and the difficulty the United States has in accepting its diminished influence in the post-cold-war era.


Tuesday Night Live
The days of 35-cent movie tickets are long gone, but suddenly there's a prospect of relief from steep prices.
Starting today, on the initiative of Universal Studios, the nationwide Cineplex Odeon theater chain will charge half-price for Universal's first-run films on Tuesdays.
Two regional chains say they'll follow suit.
There has been no rush of other studios or chains to join the experiment.
But there's hope for ticket buyers, given Cineplex Odeon's size -- 1,700 U.S. screens, mostly in and around big cities -- and the success of such discounting in Canada.


CBS Takes a Big Shot and Scores
Much of the time in CBS's telecasts of the Winter Olympics, you get that chopped-up feeling.
Just when an event is building momentum, CBS leaps to another and another and another.
This kind of sport-shifting is part of the network's drama-heightening, something-for-every-demographic strategy, but it distracts fans who'd rather see their sports in a linear fashion.
On Sunday night, for instance, CBS jumped from one pair of ice dancers to 11 super giant slalom skiers to four ice dancers to a Moroccan cross-country skier to footage of Italian skier Alberto Tomba's helicopter arrival in Albertville to an ice hockey preview to 10 ski jumpers to a profile of Eddie (the Eagle) Edwards, Britain's awful ski jumper from 1988, to the final two ice dancers.


She's Behind the Match For That Man of Steel
IN case you've been away 40 years, Wonder Woman is still fine and 20.
Her invisible plane has disappeared.
But the enlightened emissary from the testosterone-free Isle of Paradise, who entered our violent dimension to combat the aggression of history's males through the Amazon philosophy of love and strength, is still the most powerful, determined brunette in a star-spangled strapless swimsuit to educate three generations of comics readers.


Mystery of Strike the Gold Continues
The mystery of Strike the Gold deepened along with his losing streak today when the 4-year-old son of Alydar ran third in the Broward Handicap and lost for the 10th straight time since he won the Kentucky Derby last May.
He finished in full stride only a length behind Honest Ensign, who never trailed, and Peanut Butter Onit, who missed catching Honest Ensign by a nose.
But if ever a race was tailored for a horse with a history, this was it: The track was dry, the opposition was undistinguished, the pace was moderate, he was the people's choice at 4 to 5, and Julie Krone was in the saddle with the hottest riding record of the winter at Gulfstream Park.


Michelle Kline


Dolphin Courtship: Brutal, Cunning and Complex
AS much as puppies or pandas or even children, dolphins are universally beloved.
They seem to cavort and frolic at the least provocation, their mouths are fixed in what looks like a state of perpetual merriment, and their behavior and enormous brains suggest an intelligence approaching that of humans -- or even, some might argue, surpassing it.
Dolphins are turning out to be exceedingly clever, but not in the loving, utopian-socialist manner that sentimental Flipperophiles might have hoped.
Researchers who have spent thousands of hours observing the behavior of bottlenose dolphins off the coast of Australia have discovered that the males form social alliances with one another that are far more sophisticated and devious than any seen in animals apart from human beings.
They have found that one team of dolphins will recruit the help of another team of males to gang up against a third group, a sort of multi-tiered battleplan that scientists said requires considerable mental calculus to work out.


Letter: On University Research; Rectifying How Tax Dollars Are Spent
To the Editor:
In "Crown Jewels at Risk" (editorial, Feb. 9), you take a firm position in favor of shooting the messenger.
If public support for Government-financed research is in danger, and universities are at financial risk, it is not because a Congressional subcommittee or Government auditors exposed unseemly practices.
It is because of unwise budget cuts and because universities misspent funds earmarked for science.
Throughout the 1980's universities operated in a virtual audit-free environment.
Tens of billions of dollars were channeled into these institutions to support much-needed research.
No one questioned how administrators spent American tax dollars, largely because of their reputations for integrity.
But after Stanford University was caught billing the taxpayer for yachts and the like, auditors had to re-evaluate their assumptions about the validity of bills presented to the Government.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Common Stock  *
Forschner Group Inc., Shelton, Conn., has filed for 1.2 million shares to be sold through Allen &amp; Company.
The company markets Victorinox Swiss Army knives and other Swiss-made products.


Valley of Alps Offers Another Point of View
Life looks very good from the top of the French Alps, where Prince Albert of Monaco can be seen cavorting when aristocrats are in season, and where downhill racers begin their breakneck journeys through fat snowflakes during the Winter Olympics.
At the highest Courchevel settlement, host to International Olympic Committee officials, chalets sell for 45,000 francs per square meter (about $760 per square foot) , among the most expensive rates in all of France.
Here at Meribel, site of the Olympic ice hockey tournament and the women's Alpine events, French and American tourists spend the equivalent of $100 on taxi rides to shuttle buses.


Classical Music in Review
I Fiamminghi  Chamber Orchestra Metropolitan Museum of Art


A Film Festival Where the Offbeat Reigns
There are no starlets (well, maybe a few, but they're bundled up in cloth coats), no beaches and there is precious little French Riviera pizazz.
What the Berlin International Film Festival does have is films.
Nearly 800 of them, of every conceivable type.
Plus endless, earnest discussion about those films, and about Film with a capital F.
The Berlin festival, also called the Berlinale, is now in its 42d year, and it has long since established itself as one of the world's most important film convocations.
As a market for highly visible, big-budget films, Cannes remains pre-eminent.
But as a forum for the unusual, as a truly international film interchange, as an intellectual center and as a marketplace for films that for one reason or another don't or can't compete at the glamorous Cannes level, Berlin is exceptional.
With nearly 3,000 attending journalists and 8,000 film professionals, with a state- supported budget of about $6 million, this is a very big deal indeed.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The U.S. and Canada are headed into a phase of confrontation, accusing each other of protectionist ways.
The battlefield is beer, lumber and automobiles.
Prime Minister Mulroney has complained, "We're getting sideswiped by American Japan-bashing," and has said Washington is playing "low-level politics."  [ Page A1. ]


Carole Chenitz-Manley, 45, AIDS Educator
Dr.
Carole Chenitz-Manley, a nursing administrator, educator and researcher who became an advocate for women with AIDS, died Tuesday at Marin General Hospital in Greenbrae, Calif.
She was 45 years old and lived in Greenbrae.
The cause of death was AIDS-related pneumonia, her family said.


Pessimism At Businesses
Proprietors of small businesses have become more pessimistic about the economy, reporting their worst drop in sales in 18 years, according to a survey released Sunday.
The National Federation of Independent Business said the nation's small businesses were less optimistic in January than they were in October, when the group's previous survey was conducted.


Asian Republics Join Regional Trade Group
At the close of a two-day regional summit meeting here, Iran, Turkey and Pakistan declared their commitment today to strengthen economic cooperation with five Central Asian republics of the former Soviet Union that joined the region's economic union.
Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan are the new members in the group.
Despite evidence of a contest of power between Iran and Turkey in Central Asia, officials emphasized the importance of strengthening the expanded Economic Cooperation Organization.


Attempt to Reclaim Sacred Books Erupts Into a Brawl in Moscow


G.E. Appoints Head Of Aerospace Business
Big corporate mergers often bring a wave of resignations and pink slips among top executives, but some executives of acquired companies survive and even thrive in the new order.
Eugene F. Murphy, a lawyer and alumnus of the Central Intelligence Agency, is such a survivor.
On Friday he was named the new head of the General Electric Company's aerospace business.
Mr.
Murphy, who is 55 years old, was head of RCA's communications and electronic services businesses in 1986 when G.E. acquired RCA, and was soon put in charge of G.E.'s communications and services businesses, with 13,000 employees and $2 billion of revenues.


Panel to Consider What Sort of Rules Should Control Gel Implants
As a panel of experts gathers here to make yet another set of recommendations on silicone gel breast implants, it faces an array of options, everything from allowing their unrestricted use to banning them altogether.
But as a practical matter, the range of outcomes has been narrowed by intense pressure from both sides -- implant recipients and others who believe the implants are dangerous, and manufacturers and plastic surgeons who say they are safe.


Putnam (Who?) Abandons Tradition of Noble Obscurity
IT is almost as rare to find a consumer-products company that does not advertise as it is to find someone who never once winced at Mr.
Whipple's efforts to keep shoppers from squeezing the Charmin.
Though some companies remain stalwart in their opposition to advertising, increasingly intense competition in many industries has led even longtime holdouts to reassess their positions.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Write-In; In Nader's Campaign, White House Isn't the Goal
You can't really blame Ralph Nader for not wanting to be President.
"Over the years," he said, explaining his reluctance, "there has been a rather serious and relentless deterioration of our democracy."


In China, as in Its Neighbors, Repression Pays; America Shamed
To the Editor:
President Bush's meeting with China's Prime Minister, Li Peng (front page, Feb. 1), continues to shame America's commitment to the pursuit of freedom around the world.
From the Administration's delicate condemnation of the June 1989 massacre in Tiananmen Square, to Brent Scowcroft's subsequent secret visit to China and the renewal of China's most-favored-nation status, President Bush has disgraced America's historical role.
Largely for economic reasons, the United States has continued to engage and legitimize Li Peng's regime under the proposition that repression would be more likely to wane with our involvement than without it.
But two years after the crackdown against democracy, Mr.
Bush's "constructive engagement" policy is a failure.


Heavens Open To Astronomers On Low Budgets
IN the tradition of cosmic discovery, the stars are supposed to yield their secrets through finely polished mirrors encased in sleek cylinders, set in domes on lofty mountains, or at big dish antennas out in the desert, tuned to faraway radio whispers.
Not through anything as commonplace as mail-order mirrors fixed to a simple metal rack canted toward the sky over the low red hills of Georgia.
This instrument, called the Multi-Telescope Telescope, epitomizes the way the new technologies of electronic sensors, fiber optics and inexpensive computers are giving astronomy some promising low-budget capabilities.
It is the product of a new design philosophy that could change the look and practice of much astronomy, enabling ambitious scientists to break into the big leagues of research with investments as little as $80,000.


From L.I. Teller Machines to Gas Stations, Suburban Robberies Are on the Rise
When Kevin Dowd peered over his shoulder and saw the dull gray glint of an automatic pistol, his fingers began to tremble.
He had been standing at an automatic teller machine, withdrawing $100, when two youths buzzed themselves in behind him.
It was 8 P.M.


Global Snub on Global Warming
The United States heads into important environmental negotiations today with a heavy burden to overcome -- the perception that it is unwilling to join the rest of the industrialized world in trying to reduce the threat of global warming.
Several European countries and Japan have proposed that all nations agree to cap their emissions of carbon dioxide, the chief gas implicated in the "greenhouse" effect that traps heat in the atmosphere.
All five Democratic Presidential candidates support a cap.
But the Bush Administration is balking, leaving the impression that America shrinks from doing its part.


Every Time Bush Says 'Ah,' Second-Guessers Of His Doctor Cry 'Aha!'
ANY time a President is ill, his doctor in the White House is barraged with unsolicited advice and criticism, making him the most second-guessed doctor in the world.
President Bush's personal doctor, Burton J. Lee 3d, knows the phenomenon well.
In news reports and in an avalanche of mail to his office in the White House, Dr.
Lee has been attacked for prescribing the sleeping pill Halcion for Mr.
Bush.
Dr.
Lee was also criticized for the way he handled Mr.
Bush's collapse at a state dinner in Japan last month.
And last year he was harshly criticized for not ordering a thyroid test as part of Mr.
Bush's annual checkup that might have detected Graves' disease before it caused an erratic heart beat.


CHRONICLE
The tenor CHARLES ANTHONY made history at the Metropolitan Opera last night when he appeared in the role of Borsa in Verdi's "Rigoletto." It was Mr.
Anthony's 2,396th performance at the Met and set the record for the most performances sung by a principal artist.
Previously, the record was held by George Cehanofsky, a baritone who retired in 1966, after 2,395 performances.
Born in New Orleans as Carlogero Antonio Caruso -- no relation to the earlier Met tenor Enrico Caruso -- he received his bachelor's degree in music from Loyola University, winning the regional audition for the Metropolitan Opera Company in 1952.
Sir RUDOLF BING, then the Met's general manager, advised him to change his name.
"I couldn't think of anything so we just dropped Caruso, which made grandfather furious," Mr.
Anthony recalls.


Washington May Change Its Position On Climate
AS delegates from around the world meet at the United Nations today to try to avert the threat of global warming, the Bush Administration finds itself in the hot seat, but there are signs that it may be preparing to wiggle out.
Negotiators from Europe and Japan are expected to continue putting pressure on the United States to agree that all industrialized countries should accept a limit on their emissions of carbon dioxide, the chief heat-trapping gas that scientists fear will bring on a possibly catastrophic warming of the earth's climate.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States were closed yesterday in observance of Washington's Birthday.
Government offices, most banks and many businesses were also closed.
An article about trading in overseas markets appears on page D8.


Book Critics Circle Awards
Philip Roth, who won a National Book Critics Circle Award in 1987 for his novel "The Counterlife," has been cited again, this time for a work of nonfiction.
His book "Patrimony: A True Story" (Simon &amp; Schuster), an account of the death of his father, was awarded the prize for biography or autobiography by the board of the National Book Critics Circle at a meeting on Friday at the National Arts Club in Manhattan.
This is the 17th year of the awards, given in five categories to the best books published by American authors.


Albertville
COLD WAR, HOCKEY STYLE
The United States advanced to the hockey quarterfinals in a 3-3 tie, but the American coach was outraged after one of his players suffered a concussion when he was charged.
VICTORY WITHOUT A MEDAL
Mary Docter finished 17th in the 5,000-meter race, but the American speed-skater considers herself a winner because she remains sober.
SportsTuesday, page B9.


Blind Judge Doesn't Bear Burden of Proof; Eye Contact Overrated
To the Editor:
In "A Blind Judge?" (editorial, Feb. 6), you ignore the support available to and used by all Federal judges, which would be available to Richard Casey.
Mr.
Casey may not be fit to sit in the Southern District for any number of reasons, but blindness is not one of them.
You point out that a blind judge cannot see a lawyer's or spectator's gestures; however, many others present in court can.
Even sighted judges are often assisted by the courtroom deputy, court reporter and the judge's law clerk.


Review/Pop; Dianne Reeves's Flavorings
When she made her New York nightclub debut seven years ago under the aegis of Harry Belafonte, Dianne Reeves, a Los Angeles-based pop-jazz singer, emerged as a promising talent who seemed drawn simultaneously in too many directions.
Jazz-fusion, pop-soul and African- and West Indian-flavored material vied for pre-eminence in a repertory that was as scattered as it was ambitious.
Since then, Ms.
Reeves's focus hasn't narrowed appreciably, but she has developed the confidence and vision to put a personal stamp on her material by making connections between far-flung styles and paying close attention to lyrics.
Her remarkable voice has also gained in strength and flexibility.
Among the handful of younger jazz singers who aspire to carry forward the great tradition of Sarah Vaughan and Ella Fitzgerald, Ms.
Reeves is as well equipped as anybody to carry the torch.
She has a clear, powerful contralto that she wields with a leonine confidence, bending, soaring and growling but rarely exploiting her virtuosity for mere display.


Mercury in Atmosphere Is Rising, Study Reports
A NEW study has found that industrial pollution is causing mercury in the atmosphere to increase at a steady rate that could eventually lead to serious health problems for humans.
In an article in the Jan. 30 issue of the journal Nature, Dr.
Franz Slemr and E. Langer of the Fraunhofer Institute for Atmospheric Environment Research in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, said the total gaseous mercury, or the concentration of mercury, has nearly doubled since the 1800's.
They attributed more than 90 percent of the increase to human activities like coal burning, waste incineration and ore refinement.


Islanders Wake Up, And Fans Take Notice
For most of the holiday afternoon, the sparse turnout of Islander fans struggled for reasons to cheer at the Nassau Coliseum.
They whooped when the scoreboard showed the beloved United States leading Sweden in Olympic hockey in France.
They hollered when the scoreboard showed the hated Rangers trailing the Vancouver Canucks in another matinee.
And they roared, some a bit sarcastically, when the Islanders managed any of their nine shots in the first two periods against the Winnipeg Jets.
But in the third period, the play of the home team improved and the volume increased as the spectators' focus narrowed to the game taking place in front of them.
Trailing by two goals after two periods, the Islanders rallied to tie the Jets at 3-3 early in the third.
They went ahead by one goal late in regulation time, then fell back into a tie with 66 seconds left before finally sending the 8,304 fans home happy with a 5-4 victory in overtime.


Democrats' Tax Plan Under Attack
The Bush Administration attacked the House Democrats' tax bill today as a bad deal for the middle class that would bring them "25 cents a day for two years" in exchange for cuts in Medicare, farm subsidies and veterans' benefits and, eventually, tax increases.
In an interview, Richard G. Darman, director of the Office of Management and Budget, amplified the attacks President Bush has made in recent days on the Democratic measure, which is destined for a House vote next week.


Making the Lion's Den Hospitable
Alan Ladd Jr., head of the MGM movie studio, looks at his phone messages these days with a sigh of relief, happy to see that actors, directors and agents are calling instead of lawyers and accountants.
For the last several years, Mr.
Ladd has held together what is left of the fabled studio through the most bizarre chapter of its tortured recent history -- its purchase by the flamboyant Italian financier Giancarlo Parretti, Mr.
Parretti's inability to pay his debts and the subsequent seizure of the company by its main lender, the French bank Credit Lyonnais.


U.S.-CANADA RIFTS GROW OVER TRADE
Despite a three-year-old free-trade agreement, the United States and Canada are headed into a new phase of confrontation, accusing each other of protectionist ways.
The battlefield is beer, lumber and automobiles.
Even as the neighbors negotiate with Mexico about expanding the agreement to include all of North America, the tensions are growing, heightened by political sensitivity about jobs lost through imports.
The lingering economic slumps and approaching elections in both Canada and the United States add more pressure.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Week; New Hampshire Brings Tough Lessons Home
Even before the first votes were cast, let alone counted, New Hampshire had taught the candidates and the nation some home truths about 1992.
Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator-turned-candidate, may take a big bite out of President Bush's hide or he may take a small one.
Much will be made of the exact figures, without a lot of justification; in his 10-week campaign here Mr.
Buchanan has clearly demonstrated the President's political vulnerability.
What will become evident on Tuesday night is the extent of Mr.
Bush's problem.


Janio Quadros, 75, Dies; Leader Of Brazil Yielded Office in 60's
Janio da Silva Quadros, whose abrupt resignation as President of Brazil in 1961 touched off a crisis that led the military to seize power, died Sunday at the Albert Einstein Hospital in Sao Paulo, Brazil.
He was 75 years old.
The hospital said Mr.
Quadros had died of kidney and lung failure and a hemorrhage, The Associated Press reported.


Analysts Fear That 1992 May Turn Out Like '91
Despite recent indications of economic revival, signs that have helped to push long-term interest rates to their highest level in nearly three months, many credit market analysts continue to question whether any kind of expansion can be sustained.
Indeed, they say the risks remain great that the economy's performance in 1992 will prove little different from the recession-like pace of activity in the year just past.


From Zambia to U.S., a Prayerful Plea
Frederick J. Chiluba,the son of a poor copper miner whose grass-roots campaign for democracy in Zambia ended the 27-year rule of Kenneth D. Kaunda in October, is in the United States this week to talk about the new face of politics in Africa.
President of Zambia for barely 100 days, Mr.
Chiluba speaks with the zeal of a missionary.
"Africa has come a long way," the 48-year-old Mr.
Chiluba said in an interview on Sunday.
"We're beginning to understand the meaning of a democratic environment, where civil liberties and human rights are observed and respected."


For Farmers, a Boom in Blooms
At Becker's Farm here, flowers, house plants and seedlings fill five greenhouses, with red and pink geraniums flourishing in the 80-degree moist heat.
Outside, a new parking lot has been completed and a new greenhouse is under construction.
Becker's Farm is part of the fastest-growing segment of agriculture in New York and the Northeast -- supplying trees, shrubs, plants and flowers for homeowners.


Linda M. Arenth, 59, Innovator in Nursing
Linda M. Arenth, a nursing executive and innovator in the care of cancer patients, died Feb. 9 at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
She was 59 years old and lived in Baltimore.
She died of cancer, her family said.


Classical Music in Review
Monteverdi 'Vespers'  Church of St. Mary the Virgin


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Housing Starts . . .
Jan.
Consumer Price Index . . .
Jan.
Thursday  Merchandise Trade . . .
Dec.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  None


Reagan and Pope Reportedly Conferred on Poland
President Ronald Reagan signed a secret order in May 1982 that authorized an array of economic, diplomatic and covert measures to destabilize the Government of Poland and begin to break the Soviet Union's dominance of Eastern Europe, Time magazine reported this week.
The secret order, National Security Decision Directive 32, set in motion aid to the Solidarity movement, more vigorous promotion of human rights, economic pressure and diplomatic isolation of the Communist Government, the article said.


McCaw Cellular Leaves Leo Burnett
It is unusual for a client to leave the Leo Burnett Company, which in the last year and a half has amassed more new billings than any other agency in America.
But nine months after formalizing their relationship, Burnett and McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. have decided to part company.
The decision to end their relationship, which the two parties termed mutual, followed a shift in McCaw's plans for its mobile-telephone services.
McCaw, based in Kirkland, Wash., is placing more emphasis on the Cellular One Group, a venture in which it is a partner with the Southwestern Bell Corporation of St.
Louis and Vanguard Cellular Systems Inc. of Greensboro, N.C.


Classical Music in Review
Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg Violinist Avery Fisher Hall


FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; The Kicker Who Left Who Said He'd Stay
Management in sports has had a long and rich history of lying to the players, of backing down on promises, of doing what is most expedient -- so it naturally comes as a suprise when the reverse happens.
While old laborites may applaud, management steams.
It is indicative of much of the morality and reality of contemporary sports.
We have the case of Ken Willis, the place-kicker, and the Dallas Cowboys, who got kicked.
A week ago, Willis informed his team of last season, the Cowboys, that, as a Plan B free agent, he was accepting an offer of almost $1 million for two years to kick for Tampa Bay.
The Cowboys had earlier said that they would pay him $175,000 for one year.


Patterns
Hard Times, Continued
The winter freeze is far from over on Seventh Avenue, where many companies have been holding on by their fingertips.
Some are slipping off.


So Far, No TV Losers in Olympics
CBS's initial success in attracting more viewers to the 1992 Winter Olympics than ABC did to the 1988 Olympics is a surprise matched only by the fact that the other networks are skating through the Olympic onslaught relatively unscathed.
Every night since the Olympics began, CBS has enjoyed banner prime-time ratings.
But both NBC and Fox Broadcasting also had their best-rated weeks of the year, and ABC exactly matched its yearly average.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Almanac; Talk Is Not Cheap


Tinkering With the Planetary System
ORBITS is an entertaining and informative tour of the solar system.
You can compare conditions on the planets (How much would you weigh on Jupiter or Mercury?), watch them orbit the Sun and see images based on photographs by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
There is much more to the program than that, and it should keep an astronomy enthusiast occupied for some time.
Orbits runs from either floppy disks or a hard disk, using the keyboard or a mouse.
Like many other programs, it works much better with hard disk and mouse.


Sea Change For McKinney
McKinney &amp; Silver Advertising Inc. has changed cruise lines in mid-voyage, taking on the Royal Caribbean Cruise Line account and resigning the smaller Norwegian Cruise Line account.
Royal Caribbean's change of agencies was abrupt.
The account, which had been at Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss Advertising in New York since October 1990, left without a review, even as commercials by that agency were appearing during CBS's Winter Olympics coverage.


Personal Organizers Multiplying
BATTERED by hard times, yuppies may be vanishing, but personal information managers, software equivalents of young professional's appointment calendars, are proliferating.
These programs keep lists, set priorities for projects, automatically dial phone calls, serve as address books and offer reminders of appointments.


Poll Shows Deeper Roots in New York Region
After two turbulent decades of moving in and out of the New York region, its residents have grown less restless as they have aged and become more attached to their homes and communities, according to a New York Times Poll.
The new sense of roots in the region is most evident in the suburbs, where 53 percent of respondents in the poll said they had no plans to leave their communities.
In contrast, when they were asked the same question in 1978, 43 percent of the region's residents outside the city said they had no plans to leave.


Moving A-Arms by Rail: Can Terrorists Be Foiled?
The 25 rail cars the United States has agreed to give the Russians for transporting their nuclear weapons are part of a large fleet retired from active service to substitute methods considered more advanced, weapons experts said yesterday.
Even so, the outdated cars are said to be very good at protecting their cargoes from serious damage during accidents and from armed terrorists intent on stealing a nuclear weapon.


City Shrinks on Garbage Reform
After almost two years of negotiations, the Dinkins administration blinked and granted New York City sanitation workers a raise without insisting on a full day's work for a full day's pay.
Instead the city agreed to more productivity negotiations that could take a year or more, and are not guaranteed to succeed.
What a lost opportunity and costly mistake!
Mayor David Dinkins keeps saying that unions won't get raises unless they grant productivity savings.
Until he demonstrates that, why should the public -- and unions -- believe him?


Save Haiti From Its Army
Last September's coup in Haiti brought staggering consequences: more than 1,500 people murdered in the streets . . . tens of thousands fleeing in small boats to the U.S. and other neighboring lands . . . military conspirators emboldened throughout the hemisphere.
These disasters derive from one narrow source, Haiti's brutish army, just 7,000 soldiers who terrorize a population of six million.
Haiti's neighbors, working through the Organization of American States, have tried to pressure army leaders.
But their economic embargo has proved porous and their diplomatic proposals have been mocked.
This month a blundering State Department eased some of the remaining pressure, inviting even greater contempt from Port-au-Prince.


Buchanan Shock
Once again, Americans have suddenly been plunged into a cram course in the odd form of calculation called New Hampshire Arithmetic.
In 1968, Senator Eugene McCarthy lost the primary yet his 42 percent shook Lyndon Johnson out of office.
In 1976, Ronald Reagan's 49 percent against President Gerald Ford was seen as a defeat.
Jimmy Carter's 28 percent, meanwhile, certified him as nationally viable.


Housing Chief Gets Rebuke From Dinkins
Mayor David N. Dinkins publicly criticized the chairwoman of New York City's Housing Authority yesterday for ignoring his instructions and using money from a foundation financed by the authority to pay for her trip with him to South Africa in late November.
Mr.
Dinkins said the chairwoman, Laura D. Blackburne, accepted $3,100 from the foundation despite explicit warnings by his administration not to do so.
Ms.
Blackburne established the foundation, Friends of Housing Inc., last October, using $9,000 from a special authority fund.


'Terrible' Rutgers Falls To No. 26 UMass
The Rutgers gym has never been a hospitable stop for the University of Massachusetts basketball team.
Even after ending a 16-game losing streak here tonight with an 81-67 victory over the Scarlet Knights, the Minutemen were glad to slip out of town.
The UMass poise was pushed to the breaking point before it was able to pull away for its fifth straight victory and tie West Virginia, a loser at Rhode Island tonight, for the Atlantic 10 Conference lead at 9-3.
Rutgers, with its deafening home crowd, had whittled a 17-point deficit down to 62-56 with 9 minutes 8 seconds left before the Minutemen took control for good.


Mets Strike Out as Cone Gets $4.25 Million Salary
David Cone established a new plateau in salary arbitration yesterday, winning a $4.25 million salary, but even his own lawyer said he hoped it would not stand long as the arbitration record.
"That's very nice," Steve Fehr said after learning of the record award.
"I hope we don't have it tomorrow."


Palestinians Waver on Further Talks
Palestinian leaders sent out mixed signals about Middle East peace negotiations today, with a senior official of the Palestine Liberation Organization saying that a delegation would attend a new round of talks next week but a spokeswoman in Jerusalem warning that the process was "at the brink of collapse."
Indications were that, once the dust settled, the Palestinians would probably be on hand when the talks resume Monday in Washington.
Among the central parties, Israel, Syria and Lebanon have announced they will attend, and Reuters quoted a senior official in Amman as saying today that Jordan would as well.


Turner Broadcasting Plans To Start a Cartoon Channel
The Turner Broadcasting System announced yesterday that it would begin the Cartoon Network, a 24-hour-a-day cable channel showing animated programs primarily culled from Turner Broadcasting's most recent acquisition, the Hanna-Barbera animation studio.
The new channel, to begin service Oct. 1, will rely heavily on the 3,000 half-hours of cartoons in the Hanna-Barbera library, including "The Flintstones," as well as the more than 1,000 hours of theatrical cartoons already owned by Turner through its acquisition of the MGM film library, which includes the "Tom and Jerry" characters.


South Korea Tries, Again, for Close Look At North
Stepping up its campaign to stop North Korea from becoming a nuclear military power, South Korean leaders opened new talks in the north today by pressing for immediate establishment of a joint commission to inspect nuclear installations suspected of making bombs.
Led by Prime Minister Chung Won Shik, a South Korean delegation traveled to Pyongyang Tuesday for another round of talks that started in 1990.
It was the first meeting since North Korea signed a nuclear safeguards accord in Vienna three weeks ago pledging to allow inspection of its nuclear plants.


F.B.I. Agent Is Questioned In Gotti Trial About Tapes
Defense lawyers cross-examined an F.B.I. agent all day yesterday, challenging his testimony about the Gambino crime family and his interpretation of taped conversations of John Gotti.
Testifying as an expert witness for the prosecution in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, the agent contended on Monday that Mr.
Gotti had improperly ordered his lawyers, primarily Bruce Cutler, to defend the interests of the Gambino organization and to make no admissions of any kind.


Spiro Malas, the Very Happy Star Of Broadway's 'Most Happy Fella'
"I'm flabbergasted to be getting all this attention suddenly, at this point in my life," Spiro Malas said during a conversation in his Upper West Side apartment the other day.
"It's a shock, but it's wonderful, you know what I mean? I think of myself as a slightly overweight, not-too-good-looking guy, yet when I come out of the theater there are women telling me that I moved them to tears. It's so gratifying."
The attention is for Mr.
Malas's portrayal of Tony Esposito, the aging Napa Valley grape farmer who marries a young mail-order bride in "The Most Happy Fella." When a revival of the 1956 Frank Loesser musical opened at the Booth Theater last week, the production as a whole, and Mr.
Malas in particular, received rave reviews.


U.S. Weighs New Limits on Asylum
The Bush Administration is considering a plan to curtail sharply the rights of foreigners to seek asylum in the United States.
In a draft document now circulating in the Justice Department, the Administration is proposing to introduce the concept of "summary exclusion," which would give immigration authorities the power to forbid entry to foreigners with fraudulent documents.
The plan, an amendment to the immigration law that would need Congressional approval, would also allow authorities to deport immediately any applicant for asylum who is declared ineligible.


Theater in Review
Ghosts  Pearl Theater Company 125 West 22d Street Manhattan  Through March 14  By Henrik Ibsen; translated by William Archer; adapted by Robert Brink; set by Robert Joel Schwartz; stage manager, Sue Jane Stoker; costumes by Barbara A. Bell; lighting by Vicki Neal; assistant stage managers, Colleen David and Emily Garrick; sound by Donna Riley; technical director, Richard A. Kendrick; properties, Lynn Bogarde.
Presented by the Pearl Theater Company.
WITH: Robin Leslie Brown, Arnie Burton, Michael Levin, Edward Seamon and April Shawhan
In "Ghosts," Henrik Ibsen went for efficiency.
His entire vision is there: the destruction of humanity by social convention, the despair that comes of understanding, the poisoning of happiness by personal restraint and much more.
And it is all laid out plainly: he chose congenital syphilis as a symbol of society's condition and the action of the play suggests the course of the disease.


Spotlight Fixes on Yamaguchi and Ito
It has reached the point of such narrow focus that the other 27 women competing for the singles title in figure skating here at the 1992 Winter Olympics appear only as so much adornment.
Yamaguchi and Ito.


Democrats Act to Keep Ranks Tight on Taxes
By including breaks for capital gains in their tax package, Democrats on the House Ways and Means Committee hope to forestall the insurgency by conservative Democrats that in the past has played into the hands of the Republican White House.
Guided by Representative Dan Rostenkowski, Democrat of Illinois, Democrats on the House Ways and Means Committee unanimously agreed Friday night to $92.9 billion in tax cuts for businesses and individuals, including cuts in the taxes paid on profits from the sale of investments and other assets.
The overall cuts will be roughly balanced by tax increases for the most affluent.


Hard Times in the Schools -- A Special Report; In Classrooms, the Economy Is Teaching a Harsh Lesson
Hard times are reaching into the American classroom.
Just when politicians are calling for a revival in American education, the recession is leaving principals and teachers across the country with less money for more students.


S.E.C. Plan For Small Businesses
Promoting the economic agenda of the White House, Richard C. Breeden, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, proposed measures today to make it cheaper for small companies to raise money.
The proposals would reduce, and in some cases eliminate, the public disclosure requirements for small companies that issue stock.
They would also make it easier for mutual funds to invest in small and new businesses.


Dow Falls By 21.24, To 3,224.73
A weak bond market and concern over inflation, which could halt further easing of interest rates, helped undercut stocks yesterday in hectic afternoon trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 21.24 points, to 3,224.73.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was heavy, at 234.3 million shares, up from 221 million on Friday.
The Big Board composite index was off 2.51 points, to 225.65, with losing issues outnumbering gainers by 1,080 to 714.


Anderson Is Sidelined
San Antonio Spurs guard WILLIE ANDERSON has a stress fracture of the left leg and may be out for several weeks, team officials announced yesterday.


Canadians Survive, By Inches
As narrow escapes go, this one was substantially skinny.
Canada beat Germany tonight, in the first medal-round Olympic penalty shootout ever, by the width of a hockey puck.
The shootout, a nearly random event originally invented for soccer to end matches that would not end, put the most capricious of finishes on a 3-3 tie in a knockout quarterfinal game.
Because a puck rolled to a halt exactly on the goal line behind goaltender Sean Burke, instead of rolling across it, Canada won the shootout, 3-2, and advanced to the semifinals.


Bridge
Post-mortems are an integral part of the game, although they can be a nuisance in tournament play by holding up the proceedings.
There is a story about a post-mortem in a club game that was so heated that the game broke up: The players had argued fiercely for 20 minutes about what might have happened if the deal had not been passed out.
There was a lively post-mortem on the diagramed deal, from a social game in England.
For convenience, we may say that Nellie North and Sam South were playing against Evelyn East and Walter West.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in Business Day on Monday about Federal court action against the Miami financier Victor Posner misstated the relationship between the DWG Corporation, in which Mr.
Posner owns nearly half the stock, and Talley Industries.
A Posner-led group holds between 7 percent and 8 percent of the stock in Talley, a publicly held company.


Primary Results by County


Marion Sale Of Stock Set
The family and charities of Ewing M. Kauffman, the Kansas City philanthropist and baseball team owner, plan to sell shares of Marion Merrell Dow stock valued at about $600 million in a public offering later this year.
Mr.
Ewing is chairman emeritus and a founder of the Marion Merrell Dow Company, a pharmaceutical company based in Kansas City, Mo.
The company will make the underwriting arrangements for the sale under terms of the 1989 merger agreement between Marion Laboratories and the Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals unit of the Dow Chemical Company, Marion Merrell Dow said yesterday.


Gold to Match Tomba's Mystique
It was more than a dramatic showdown of champion skiers.
It was a classic confrontation of Olympic ideals.
Alberto Tomba, whom all of Italy adores, versus Marc Girardelli, the man without a country.
How do you like your Olympics, with flag-waving nationalists or purely for the sake of athletic competition?
For Tomba, the giant slalom course was laced today with thousands of horn-blowing, banner-toting, Tomba-worshipping zealots.
For Girardelli, the only known fervent supporter was his autocratic father and coach, Helmut Girardelli, pulling for his progeny somewhere on the mountain.


David Eisler, 36, Dies; Tenor With City Opera
David Eisler, a tenor who sang many leading roles at the New York City Opera, died on Sunday at the Park Plaza Hospital in Houston.
He was 36 years old and lived in Houston.
He died of pneumonia, said his manager, Merle Hubbard.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire; BUSH JARRED IN FIRST PRIMARY; TSONGAS WINS DEMOCRATIC VOTE
President Bush received a jarring political message in the New Hampshire primary today, scoring a less-than-impressive victory over Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator.
With 99 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr.
Bush had 58 percent of the vote and Mr.
Buchanan 40 percent.


CHRONICLE
The worlds of art and science will meet this evening at an unusual book party at Rockefeller University to introduce FLOYD RATLIFF's new book "Paul Signac and Color in Neo-Impressionism." This work, being published by Rockefeller University Press after 12 years of research and writing, is a study of divisionism, the artistic technique behind Neo-Impressionism.
Dr.
Ratliff, professor emeritus of biophysics and physiological psychology at Rockefeller, will also make a slide presentation on "The Theory of Color and the Practice of the Artist."


The Pop Life
Double Vision
Eye and I's first album, "Eye and I" (Epic), has just arrived, and it's a surprise.
In its five years of toiling in New York clubs (with a date at the Marquis tonight as the opening act for the singer Billy Bragg), the band has put together a futuristic mix of club music, pop and some of the hardest funk heard in the city.
Led by the singer D. K. Dyson and the bassist Melvin Gibbs, Eye and I knows its drama: Ms.
Dyson would start her shows by coming out in a sedan chair before the band blasted off.


Chaney Out in Houston; Rudy T. Takes Over
In the National Basketball Association's sixth coaching change of the season, DON CHANEY, voted coach of the year last season but only a .500 coach this season, was dismissed by the Houston Rockets yesterday and replaced by assistant coach RUDY TOMJANOVICH, who was named interim head coach.
"Once you see that things are deteriorating, you have to do something," said owner CHARLIE THOMAS.
"I'm not blaming Don Chaney. Everyone is accountable and that includes me."


Pitching a Defunct A-Plant: Shoreham Nuclear Power Station
To hear the sellers talk, it is a creampuff: one owner, well maintained, exceptionally low mileage.
Terms negotiable.
But the representatives of a dozen major companies in the energy business who came out today to kick the tires on the Shoreham Nuclear Power Station and consider bids on converting it to natural gas were not too quick to bite.


Earnings Up At Claiborne And Limited
The Limited and Liz Claiborne, two of the country's largest apparel companies, announced record earnings yesterday for the fourth quarter.
Earnings at The Limited Inc., which operates the Limited Stores, Lerner's, Express, Structures and several other specialty stores that largely carry products made by the company, rose 16.3 percent in the quarter.
At Liz Claiborne Inc., the largest publicly traded clothing manufacturer, profits in the quarter edged up 1.4 percent.


60-Minute Gourmet
PORK is one of my favorite meats, especially in recent years with breeders having made such strides in producing leaner, yet flavorful, meat.
Well-trimmed pork is indeed good for you, and succulent, too, if cooked properly.
At home, I often serve lean, center-cut pork chops in various ways.
In one recipe, the chops are first browned for about five minutes on each side over high heat, then finished over lower heat for two minutes.
A quick sauce is made in the same pan with onions, garlic, capers, vinegar, Dijon mustard, chicken broth and tomato paste.
The even quicker recipe below is for breaded pork cutlets with cumin and rosemary.


'No Longer in Control'
Stung by the suspension of one of Germany's top track stars, KATRIN KRABBE, in a drug scandal, a leader of the nation's main opposition party said the party would introduce legislation that would authorize prison sentences for doctors, trainers or coaches who administer performance-enhancing drugs to athletes.
Asserting that sports officials are "no longer in control of things," WILHELM SCHMIDT, a member of Parliament representing the Social Democratic Party, said the proposed law would not be aimed at athletes, who, he said, may not be aware they are taking banned substances.


Hoboken to Decide Future of Waterfront
Hoboken voters will soon decide the fate of their city's soul.
At issue is the future of Hoboken's waterfront, the crusty spirit of this mile-square city on the Hudson.
Next month, for the second time in less than two years, the public will vote on a proposal to develop the once-bustling port, renewing a bitter debate between City Hall and a citizens' coalition that was largely responsible for defeating the first proposal.


Backer Spielvogel Offices in China
Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide will open three offices in China, in Guangzhou, Shanghai and Beijing, as part of plans announced yesterday to expand its presence in the Asia and Pacific region.


Yanks Changing Partners Again?
Partners in the Yankees' ownership will meet in Tampa, Fla., today, apparently to make yet another change in managing partners.
Daniel McCarthy, the current-but-yet-to-be-approved managing partner, declined last night to discuss the reason for the meeting.
Another partner said he understood McCarthy would withdraw from the position and be replaced by Barry Halper, from Livingston, N.J., a noted collector of baseball memorabilia.


'Wisdom' on Alcoholic's Child Called Stuff of Fortune Cookies
MANY popular assumptions about children of alcoholics are being questioned by new research, posing a challenge to the hugely popular therapy movement directed at them and other "adult children" of problem families..
Although proponents of the movement say they have scientific support for their views, critics are unconvinced.


About New York; Heroes and Memories Sail Away
HEROES sailed from New York City's harbor.
Along with the guns, jeeps and tanks that won World War II, they departed from the city's piers.
They threaded through countless teeming ships.
They received their secret communication code from a light blinking in the crown of the Statue of Liberty.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices fell today in Tokyo.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed at 20,618.30, down 253.73 points, or 1.2 percent.


Italy's Day To Shine
Alberto Tomba, the Italian hero who is as revered in his nation as any soccer or tennis player, roared down La Face de Bellevarde for the gold medal in the giant slalom.
Tomba's training partner, Deborah Compagnoni, whose daring style resembles his own, won a gold for Italy in the women's super giant slalom.
U.S.
ADVANCES IN HOCKEY
With a pep talk ringing in its ears, the United States hockey team beat France, 4-1.
SportsWednesday, page B9.


A Big but Delicate Digging Job
When and if the $8.4 billion superconducting supercollider goes into operation here in 1999, it is expected to be the world's most expensive scientific instrument.
But already the site preparation for the Congressionally mandated physics project -- to include 70 miles of tunnels and enough laboratory and office space to fill the World Trade Center -- is posing a world-class precision test for engineers.
Even as the Bush Administration continues to solicit the international participation and financial contributions without which the project may never be completed, the engineers plow ahead.


Rohr Reports Fraud Inquiry
Rohr Industries said today that it might face fraud charges as a result of an investigation by the Pentagon and Federal prosecutors into the company's testing of military aircraft parts.
Rohr, which is based in Chula Vista, Calif., said the investigation centered on its plant in Riverside, Calif., where it makes structural parts for the F-14 fighter, the KC-135 tanker and the C-5 transport plane.


No Brotherly Love Yet for Thomas Paine
To the Editor:
Re your article on Thomas Paine's connection with New Rochelle, N.Y. (Jan. 14): Paine did his most important work while Philadelphia was his home city.
On June 12, 1942, a few months after our country entered the war against fascism under the banner of freedom, the Philadelphia Fairmount Park Commission voted unanimously to reject a request to place a statue of Thomas Paine in the park on the ground that "a controversial matter" was involved.


Treasury Bond Prices Fall Sharply
A move by the Federal Reserve Board intended to spur commercial bank lending was received poorly in the fixed-income markets yesterday.
Bond prices fell sharply and interest rates rose as market participants, already nervous about recent signs of an incipient upturn in the economy that could ignite inflation, viewed the Fed's action as another potential source of strength.
Around noon the Fed surprised the market by announcing that it would reduce bank reserve requirements to 10 percent from 12 percent, effective April 2.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the MGM movie studio misidentified Tony Bill in some editions.
He was the producer of "The Sting" and "Taxi Driver," not the director.


C.D. and Bank Fund Yields Continue to Fall
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit continued to ease in the week ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, which tracks bank rates.
"Short-term certificate of deposit yields -- three and six months -- continue to flatten out, but the strongest signal that the down cycle may be ending is that yields on longer-term accounts, such as five-year certificates of deposit, have begun to inch upward," Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor, said yesterday.
"That reflects the usual pattern of short-term yields lagging the long-term numbers, which generally indicate the next trend."


Corrections
A subheading on Saturday with an article about Defense Department efforts to eliminate the use of some chemicals described the chemicals incorrectly.
The chemicals, among them chlorofluorocarbons and halons, damage the upper atmosphere's ozone layer, which protects against the sun's cancer-causing ultraviolet rays; the chemicals themselves do not directly cause cancer.


Tomba's Training Partner Shows Winning Style in Women's Super G
One by one they had zoomed down the mountain today chasing the crowd's beloved Carole Merle, a daughter of the French Alps, and each had failed by an invisible electronic tick.
And now the Italian, Deborah Compagnoni, known affectionately by her countrymen as "Tombagnoni" because her daring style is reminiscent of her training partner, Alberto Tomba, dared to try to wrest the gold medal in the women's super giant slalom.
Tomba was on another mountain getting ready to make his gold- medal run in the giant slalom as Compagnoni began her mile run over a course that combined the speed of the downhill with the sensitivity needed to negotiate the slalom gates, twists and turns at high speed.


Big Defendants Settle In Miniscribe Lawsuit
The main parties in a lawsuit involving the Miniscribe Corporation have settled the case, lawyers said yesterday.
As part of the settlement, Judge Roy Engelke of the Texas District Court in Galveston vacated a jury verdict from earlier this month that awarded more than $550 million to certain investors in Miniscribe, a defunct disk drive manufacturer that was accused of falsifying financial records.


Hard Times in the Schools -- A Special Report; In Classrooms, the Economy Is Teaching a Harsh Lesson
Hard times are reaching into the American classroom.
Just when politicians are calling for a revival in American education, the recession is leaving principals and teachers across the country with less money for more students.


EXECUTIVES
*
Alliance Capital Management, New York, an investment adviser, appointed Robert W. Kopprasch and Patricia J. Young senior vice presidents. *
Rochester Telephone Corp., Rochester, named Alan C. Hasselwander chairman and Ronald L. Bittner president and chief executive.


Road to the Nomincation


Corrections
A picture caption on the Fashion page yesterday misidentified the designer of the silk top and skirt inspired by the decoration on Ming vases.
He was Valentino.


Sports of The Times; 'You Are Glorious, Alberto'
IN the mountains across from the Olympic giant slalom course, a road now closed with snow twists and turns from the Italian border, only about 15 miles away.
And in yesterday's sunny chill, as if he were leading Caesar's legions through these Alps centuries ago, Alberto Tomba swooped down to claim this chalet village for himself.
"Now," he told Italian journalists after falling to his knees in celebration, "you can call these the Tombaville Games."


TWO SUBS COLLIDE OFF RUSSIAN PORT
A nuclear-powered submarine of the United States Navy collided last week with a nuclear-powered submarine of the former Soviet Navy in the Barents Sea, little more than a dozen miles from strategic naval bases at Murmansk, American officials acknowledged today.
There were reportedly no injuries or serious damage to either boat, and no indication of any damage to nuclear reactors or weapons.
Both subs are capable of carrying nuclear weapons, but neither side would say whether any were aboard at the time, even though indications were that the American sub, at least, was not nuclear-armed.


Czechoslovaks Find Profit and Pain in Arms Sales
Several months ago, Brazilian officials called the Prague Economics Ministry to inquire about an unknown Czechoslovak company that had offered to sell Brazil small arms and automatic guns.
A police check led to a small apartment on the edge of this capital and a mail-order company outfitted with little more than a phone and fax machine.
About the same time, a muckraking weekly, Respekt, obtained lists of weapons for sale by the I.M.
Corporation.
When they called the Bratislava number on the list, an elderly female said she knew nothing about the weapons, adding, "That's my son's business."


Stores Rush to Stock Fresh Exotic Food
IT'S June in January, fall in February and fruit and vegetable harvest all year long for New Yorkers who enjoy fresh produce and are willing to pay top dollar for foods with a just-picked taste.
Bigger fleets of jumbo jet air freighters have turned the produce industry on end, with much of the fresh fruits and vegetables coming this time of year from fields and orchards as far away as New Zealand, Australia, Chile and Peru.


St. John's Is on the Rise
Having stabilized a season that seemed in trouble not long ago, St.
John's has a chance to play for first place in the Big East Conference tonight when the Redmen meet Syracuse at 7 P.M. at Madison Square Garden.
St.
John's (14-7 over all and 8-5 in league play) could go into first place if it defeats Syracuse and if Connecticut beats Georgetown on the road.
The Redmen seem to have withstood the punishment from their victory at Pittsburgh last Saturday.
The three Redmen injured there -- David Cain (sprained right ankle), Shawnelle Scott (thigh injury) and Chucky Sproling (knee contusion) -- practiced yesterday and were expected to be available against the Orangemen.


REPORTS OF AIDS UNSETTLE A TOWN
For weeks the people of this tiny Texas ranching community had been torn by disbelief, anxiety and, finally, grudging acceptance of reports that young people in the town have been infected at an alarming rate with the virus that causes AIDS.
Today they learned that the reports, which have placed them in the national spotlight, are under investigation.
The Texas Department of Health said this afternoon that it would review counseling files kept on the students indicating that six teen-agers at Rivercrest High School, which has an enrollment of 197 students, had tested positive for the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS.


Dinkins Narrows Jails Post List
The Dinkins administration's search for an executive to run New York City's jail system has narrowed to five people, mayoral aides said yesterday.
Norman Steisel, the First Deputy Mayor, said yesterday that the appointment of the new Correction Commissioner is expected within 10 days.


War Games, Money Games
If the Pentagon is going to prop up support for $280-billion-a-year budgets, it has to pump up the threats facing America.
That's just what it has done in sketching scenarios to guide defense planners after the cold war.
Congress needs to greet these inflated claims with healthy skepticism.
A few of the seven scenarios are plausible enough: a coup by drug traffickers closes the Panama Canal, a revived Iraq invades Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, or North Korea attacks South Korea.


Deal for Stake In Phone Concern
Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest operator of cable television systems, agreed to buy 49.9 percent of the Teleport Communications Group, a small corporate telephone services company based in New York, for undisclosed terms.
The move would give Tele-Communications, based in Denver, entry into the phone business.


Police Move to Extradite Suspect in 1989 Slaying of Dancer
The New York City police are seeking the extradition from Pennsylvania of a second suspect in the dismembering of a Manhattan dancer two years ago, saying for the first time that it was a ritualistic slaying carried out by more than one man, rather than the work of a lone man as was previously thought.
The police in Easton, Pa., arrested the suspect, Randy Charles Easterday, 27 years old, on Friday evening.
They are holding him for extradition to New York, where he is wanted on charges of attempted murder and tampering with evidence in the killing of Monika Beerle, said Inspector Joseph Saccavino, commander of the Manhattan Detectives.


'C'mon Along and Listen To . . .'
In the next three months, something like the old hip hooray and ballyhoo are coming back to Broadway.
Twenty-two shows will have opened, almost as many as opened in the entire 1990-91 season.
Some of them will probably have the life span of a mayfly.
Still, better a brief run than none at all, and besides, who knows?
Among the nine musicals are revivals of "The Most Happy Fella" (already here), "Guys and Dolls" and "Man of La Mancha," none of which employ armies, crashing chandeliers or hovering helicopters.
They don't need them.
When a show's got "Standin' on the Corner," say, or "Fugue for Tinhorns," scenery recedes.


New York City's Campaign Finance Law: Some Playing Field
To the Editor:
Obviously convinced that the best defense is a mud-slinging offense, Manhattan Borough President Ruth W. Messinger attacks me (Op-Ed, Feb. 5) for declining to participate in New York City's voluntary campaign financing program.
The 1988 law has cost the taxpayers of this city $27 million.
Just how bad a bargain it has been for the public is well illustrated by Ms.
Messinger's own case.


Science Contest Pressures Kids Too Much
To the Editor:
Your article on the New York winners of the Westinghouse science competition fails to mention its dark side: the intensive pressure, sometimes cruelly unhealthy, on the contestants and especially on the 40 finalists (Education page, Jan. 29).


Agency Aided by Neediest Is Helping Mother to Cope
Adelina G. wants to give her daughter and son something she never had: a childhood.
The 35-year-old native of Mexico and her children, Vanessa, 4, and Henry, 3, live with seven other people in a three-bedroom apartment in East Harlem.
Their welfare check provides enough for food but no leeway for new clothes or a movie.
Still, after dropping off Henry recently at the Head Start program run by the Children's Aid Society, her voice reflected the wonder at her children's opportunities.


Students' Winter Break Means Work for Parents
New York City parents scrambled yesterday to improvise day care and find ways to amuse their children as they coped with a virtually unprecedented weeklong school vacation in the dead of winter.
Some dropped their children off at grandparents' homes.
Others juggled baby sitters' schedules, dragged their children to the office or simply took the day off from work.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Mike Devereaux and Randy Milligan, outfielders, on one-year contracts.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Agreed to terms with Tom Glavine, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Agreed to terms with Steve Searcy and Toby Borland, pitchers, and Bruce Dostal and Tony Longmire, outfielders, on one-year contracts.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Agreed to terms with John Smiley, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Fired Don Chaney, head coach.
Named Rudy Tomjanovich interim head coach.
Continental Basketball Association
OMAHA RACERS -- Signed Willie Brand, guard. United States Basketball League
USBL -- Announced that the New Jersey Jammers have been awarded a franchise for the 1992 season.
NEW JERSEY JAMMERS -- Named Bob Grossman general manager; Bob Nastase head coach; Ralph Adinolfe public relations director, and Jim Clibanoff director of player personnel.
Football  National Football League
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Melvin Patterson, wide receiver, to a one-year contract.


Suit Challenges Process For Electing State Judges
Armed with a state report saying that the system of selecting State Supreme Court justices in New York could not withstand a legal challenge under the Federal Voting Rights Act, a civil rights organization went into Federal court yesterday in an effort to give minority voters a bigger voice.
The suit comes one week after a judicial task force appointed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo concluded that the way the justices were nominated and elected in the state "cannot pass muster" under the rights act, which accords stronger voting protections for racial minorities.
The Task Force on Judicial Diversity had anticipated yesterday's lawsuit when it warned that the Federal courts would impose a legal judicial voting system unless the Governor and the Legislature acted first.


Lloyd's Denies It Seeks Help
Lloyd's of London, the world's biggest insurance market, today denied a news report that it might be seeking help from Britain's central bank, after being rocked by a deluge of criticism from investors.
The Financial Times newspaper said today that Lloyd's was in talks with the Bank of England, which could prompt a request by the central bank to the banking system to lend cash to Lloyd's investors, who back insurance underwriting.


Berlin Journal; Retrieve the Lurid Past? (Some Germans Recoil)
Under a barren field in what was once the "death strip" separating East and West Berlin lie the remnants of the underground complex where Hitler directed the most destructive war in history.
"People don't want to remember it," said Berlin's chief archeologist, Alfred Kerndl, who is leading a campaign to have the bunkers excavated and restored.
"It's part of an uncomfortable past that we are still reluctant to confront."


In Doherty Case, Politics Ruled, Not Justice; Anglo-Irish Gains
To the Editor:
"Anglo-Irish Accord's Empty Promises" (letter, Jan. 23), by the Rev.
Sean McManus, ignores the many achievements of the Anglo-Irish agreement.
The agreement was a landmark in recognizing the right of the Irish Government to be consulted and to put forward views and proposals on all aspects of policy and administration in Northern Ireland.


For These New Immigrants, Eating as a Second Language
"ARE you fat yet?"
That is the question Viviane Mashamba's mother, and her three sisters, who are all thin, ask whenever they telephone from Kinshasa, Zaire.
To them, it is inevitable.
You move to America, the land of Kentucky Fried Chicken, McDonald's and Pizza Hut, and before you know it your waist has disappeared, and your stomach has grown as round as a soccer ball.
"They think everyone in America is fat and eats fast food," Ms.
Mashamba said.
She has been in Brooklyn seven months, and she still looks like a dancer, tall and lithe, even though she does enjoy an occasional Big Mac, the original high-fat variety.
Ms.
Mashamba, who is 28 and is here because she is engaged to marry a New Yorker, said her secret is that she walks a lot.
And she frets.


Studies See Greater Implant Danger
New studies suggest that silicone gel breast implants ruptured more than 10 times as often as manufacturers and plastic surgeons had previously reported, university researchers told a Food and Drug Administration hearing today.
One researcher said silicone that migrated in a patient's body from a ruptured implant apparently led to neurological problems, ending in gangrene of the hands.
Others elaborated on earlier reports linking silicone from the implants to auto-immune disorders.


Theater in Review
Korea  Ensemble Studio Theater 549 West 52d Street Manhattan In repertory through March 4 By Bill Bozzone; directed by Kate Baggott; stage manager, Elizabeth Brady Davis; lighting by Greg MacPherson; set by Sarah Lambert; sound by Michael Sargent; costumes by David Sawaryn.
In Pursuit of America, Series 2, presented by the Ensemble Studio Theater, Curt Dempster, artistic director; Christopher A. Smith, associate artistic director; Dominick Balletta, managing director; Kevin Confoy, producer.
WITH: Pete Benson, Bill Cwikowski, Zach Grenier, Josh Hamilton, Bai Ling, Kevin O'Keefe and Kevin Thigpen.
It is 1968 and the war is raging in Vietnam, but the G.I.'s in Bill Bozzone's "Korea" could be slackers in the peacetime Air Force.
They have been called up and sent to Korea, where they idle away their nights and days in soldierly pastimes like wisecracking and womanizing.
This new play by the talented Mr.
Bozzone has a gentle, wistful tone that wraps its characters -- some of its characters -- in a nostalgic hue, especially so in the case of the protagonist played by Josh Hamilton.


Johnson's $32,000 Car
LARRY JOHNSON had the use of a $32,000 sports car last season that was the property of an automobile dealership with ties to the Nevada-Las Vegas's basketball program, according to a published report.
Such an arrangement is an apparent violation of N.C.A.A. rules that prohibit coaches and other representatives of a school's athletic interests from providing student-athletes with benefits not available to the student body in general.


Learning About Bias: A Reading List


Boom in Fake Identity Cards for Aliens
For more than two years, investigators from the Immigration and Naturalization Service searched for the source of counterfeit documents seized from illegal aliens in 11 states from Washington to Florida, and when they finally found it last September in Los Angeles they were amazed at the size of their booty.
In a series of raids, the immigration service seized two printing presses and more than 250,000 fake identity cards that could be used to circumvent the Federal law prohibiting the employment of illegal aliens.


No Holiday on Ice as U.S. Moves to Semifinals
The United States hockey team feeds off the jeers, off the clamor in the arena and the loud lectures in the locker room and the off-sound of body smashed against wood.
The unbeaten Americans grew bigger and their reliable goaltender grew even more steady with the roar again tonight, in a rowdy 4-1 quarterfinal victory over France.
The chanting crowd and the brassy coach woke them up after a period of sleepwalking had them flirting with sudden elimination from the Olympic tournament.


Storybook End Eludes Jansen as He Fades in 1,000
The event was the men's 1,000-meter speed-skating race of the XVI Olympic Winter Games.
The skater was Dan Jansen, the 26-year-old American whose real-life travails have sounded like a soap opera.
The result, for the second time in these Games, was not success and not really failure.
He tried, and he had the fastest intermediate times.
Then he fell apart, and he won no medal of any kind.
But afterward, Jansen felt good and his wife felt good, and the outcome did not really seem that important.


Andor Foldes, Pianist, Dies at 78; Known for Renditions of Bartok
Andor Foldes, a Hungarian-born American pianist who was closely associated with the music of Bela Bartok and who was also a respected interpreter of the Viennese Classical composers, died at his home in Herrliberg, Switzerland, on Feb. 9.
He was 78 years old.
He died after falling down a flight of stairs, said his wife, Lili Rendy Foldes.


Islanders Trade Weeks
STEVE WEEKS, third-string among Islanders goalies since the return of MARK FITZPATRICK, was traded to the Los Angeles Kings for a seventh-round choice in June's entry draft.


An Improved Egg Product Is Claimed
Michael Foods Inc., one of the country's largest egg producers, said yesterday that it would soon begin selling low-cholesterol liquid eggs containing yolks, and its stock jumped on the news.
The company and outside food experts said that retaining the yolk would give its product, called Simply Eggs, more taste and texture than other low-cholesterol egg products now on the market, like Egg Beaters, made by the Fleischmann unit of RJR Nabisco.


In Doherty Case, Politics Ruled, Not Justice
To the Editor:
Justice has come to a sad state when you endorse the surrender of the Irish Republican Army fugitive Joseph Doherty to Britain on the ground that "extradition is mainly a political matter" ("Time's Up for Joe Doherty," editorial, Feb. 3).


Kirov Ballet and Opera To Perform in New York
The Kirov Ballet and the Kirov Opera are to perform at the Metropolitan Opera House from June 22 to July 18 as the St.
Petersburg Festival.
Presented by Satra Arts International, the season is to open with the Kirov Ballet, which performs through July 3 in "Swan Lake," "Romeo and Juliet," "La Bayadere," and a program of works by George Balanchine and Antony Tudor.
The ballet troupe will be headed by Altynai Asylmuratova, Farouk Ruzimatov, Andris Liepa, Zhanna Ayupova, Yuliya Makhalina, Konstantin Zaklinsky, Yevgeny Neff and Natalya Pavlova.


INSIDE
Qaddafi Prepares
In the face of threatened sanctions, even warfare, over the 1988 bombing of Pan Am 103, Libya is bracing for a struggle with the West.
Page A9.
United Way vs.
Boy Scouts
The United Way of the Bay Area, a big donor to the Boy Scouts, is on the verge of ending its support because they exclude homosexuals.
Page A12.
A Correction
A front-page article on Saturday about cuts in Federal water deliveries to farms in California misstated the extent of the cuts.
Page A18.


Correction: New Limits In California on Water
A front-page article on Saturday about cuts in Federal water deliveries to farms in California misstated the extent of the cuts.
Only farms that received new irrigation when the Central Valley Project opened in 1951 were cut off completely.
This group of about 7,000 farms covers about 1 million acres.
A total of 25,000 farms covering 3.2 million acres are served by the project.
The other 18,000 farms are to receive water from the project at levels ranging from 50 to 75 percent of normal.
Those farms had water rights before the project was built, or exchanged those water rights for project water.
When they joined the project decades ago they won a commitment from the Federal Government that their requests would be given priority during drought years.


A Man Is Shot In the Subway Near City Hall
A 40-year-old Bronx man was shot in the neck yesterday afternoon while talking on a pay phone in a subway station near City Hall, the transit police said.
The victim, Larry Spears of 1435 Harrod Avenue, was speaking on a public telephone about 12:30 P.M. inside the turnstiles, near the token booth of the Park Place station for the 2 and 3 lines, said Lieut.
Robert Valentino, a transit police spokesman.
A slim black man about six feet tall and 30 years old, with a light beard and wearing dark clothing and a round cap, approached and fired one shot, critically wounding Mr.
Spears, Lieutenant Valentino said.
He then fled up the stairs and out the subway entrance.
No Motive Is Known
The police had no motive for the shooting.
"We don't have any indication at all whether it was a robbery or whether they knew each other," Lieutenant Valentino said.


Eating Well
THERE was a time when the brand name of any given food product was printed in the largest type on the package.
But manufacturers hardly seem to care anymore about the type that heralds their names.
What matters now is the marketing gimmick that presents the product as healthful.
The phrase of the decade, in headline-size type, is "fat-free."
A three-hour tour of two supermarkets was a lesson in 90's marketing.
What started as a whisper a couple of years ago -- fat-free as in ice cream -- has become a roar.
Some of the food has acceptable flavor; some does not.
Some of the food is truly fat-free; some is not.
A careful reading of the packages reinforces the sense that some manufacturers will use any gimmick to catch the fat-free wave.


John G. Phillips, Art Expert, 85; Former Department Head at Met
John Goldsmith Phillips, former chairman of the department of Western European arts at the Metropolitan Museum, died on Monday in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 85 years old and had lived in the Palm Beach area since he retired in 1971.
He died of cancer, said his son Anthony.


Fueling the Conspiracy
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis tries to discredit the theory that Jack Ruby killed Lee Harvey Oswald as part of a conspiracy by citing that a postal inspector, Harry Holmes, went to the police station and interrogated Oswald for half an hour, and "without the accident of his presence, Oswald would have left the building long before Ruby arrived" ("J.F.K.," column, Jan. 9).
It seems incongruous that the police let Mr.
Holmes question the suspect -- unless it was to give Ruby time to reach the police station.


Line Begins to Form for Unwanted Band Shell
Picture the neo-classical Central Park band shell, with its coffered dome breaking gently above the treetops.
Now, instead of the Wisteria Pergola behind it, picture the Hudson Highlands.
That is what city officials in Peekskill, N.Y. -- 40 miles north of Manhattan -- are doing.


SoHo's Mr. Clean; A One-Man Anti-Grime Unit
He keeps the garbage barrels and the brooms in the basement.
Stacked in a faded cupboard at the end of his hallway are his acetone and his Vandal Mark Remover for blotting out graffiti, as well as his spectrum of paints (black, red, white, brown).
He has a snow shovel, a spade for adding dirt around the trees, a wad of work gloves.
Every day, Anthony Iannacone gathers his utensils and scrambles out to the street, his feet making scrabbly sounds as he tramps down the stairs.
This is Sullivan Street, between Broome and Spring, in SoHo.
Rolling one of his big barrels on wheels, working a whisk broom and a dust pan on a stick with practiced authority, he picks up every crumpled candy wrapper, every squashed-out cigarette butt, every pile of dog excrement, until the street is clean.
Perfectly clean.


Review/Opera; Matteo Manuguerra in Met 'Rigoletto'
Verdi's hunchbacked jester, the alternately malevolent and pitiable Rigoletto, shuffled onto the Metropolitan Opera stage for the first time this season on Monday evening, accompanied, as ever, by his daughter Gilda and the whole Mantuan court.
The production, Otto Schenk's traditional staging from 1989, with sets and costumes by Zack Brown, is neither risky nor inventive: its most arresting touch is the horse carcass in the dry gulch that serves as the river behind Sparafucile's inn in the last act.
Otherwise, Mr.
Brown's crumbling structures lead one to wonder if Mantua was really in such bad shape in the 16th century.
"Rigoletto," of course, is not about stage sets, even if the production's notions offer occasional distractions.
It is about various kinds of passion and lust, chief among them the lust for revenge, both theoretical, as in Monterone's curse, or practical, as in the courtiers' abduction of Gilda to repay Rigoletto's harshness, or in Rigoletto's plan to have the Duke murdered in retribution for his abuse of Gilda.
In the end, the theoretical becomes practical: when Rigoletto's plan backfires and Gilda is murdered instead of the Duke, the jester knows that Monterone's curse has been realized.


Economic Scene; Tuna and Trade: Whose Rules?
SHOULD the European Community have the right to bar meat from America because it contains traces of hormones that it finds scary, but Washington says are harmless to human health?
A blatant protectionist trick, you say?
Well, America stops imports of tuna from Mexico because Mexican tuna fishing nets accidentally drown more dolphins in the eastern Pacific than are permitted under American law.
If Americans get to decide how Mexicans should catch tuna, perhaps Europeans have the right to decide how their meat is treated while still on the hoof.


Scouts Warned Over Anti-Gay Stand
The United Way of the Bay Area, the largest single donor to scouting programs here, is on the verge of withdrawing its financial support in five counties because the Boy Scouts of America prohibit gay Scout leaders and scouts.
The United Way regional chapter here would be the first in the nation to halt the financing of the Boy Scouts because of their exclusion of homosexuals, an issue that arose when a gay man in Los Angeles, a former Eagle Scout, sued because he was dismissed as an assistant Scout master.


Ewing and Jackson a Winning Combo
It wasn't a big night for sophisticated X's and O's.
In the beginning and down the stretch, the strategy was simple: give the ball to Patrick Ewing.
The Knicks' big man took it from there.


Market Place; Analysts' Views Differ on Centel
WHEN the Centel Corporation, one of the biggest non-Bell telephone companies, said last month that it might consider putting itself up for sale, the market's reaction was unambiguous: Centel went through the roof.
The day before the announcement on Jan. 23, Centel's market value was a bit more than $3 billion; the day of the announcement, frenzied investors bid up Centel's shares by $9 each, to $46, raising the company's value to $3.9 billion.
Analysts said then that the rise was reasonable because Centel might be worth more than $5 billion.


CHRONICLE
It was not exactly a lost chord, just two eighth notes dropped from Stravinsky's Concerto in D for String Orchestra .
But PETER LONGIARU, the pianist, noted the omission during the first week of rehearsals for ELIOT FELD's new ballet, "To the Naked Eye." The pianist was listening to Mr.
Feld's preferred recording of the concerto by the Guild Hall string orchestra and following the score, when he suddenly said: "I think there are two notes missing. They're not there!"
Mr.
Feld, the choreographer, admitted that he had not noticed the omission, but agreed that it might pain Stravinsky experts.
It is still a mystery how the two notes disappeared.
"They are repeated notes and so probably an engineer or a computer was fooled into thinking they'd already been played," Mr.
Feld said.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.00
3.87
6.24
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.83
3.79
5.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.93
3.89
5.91
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.06
6.98
7.68
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.97
7.90
7.98
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.05
8.95
9.15
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.79
6.78
7.23
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Stunned by Voting, Bush Plans to Travel To Boost Campaign
Stunned by the voting in New Hampshire, the Bush campaign decided today to keep President Bush on the road virtually every day for the next three weeks and groped for a way to shake the paralysis that was evident in the nation's first primary campaign.
As Mr.
Bush acknowledged in a written statement issued late tonight that the voting had been "far closer" than expected, White House and campaign aides reviewed their decision to avoid attacks on Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative challenger, as well as an advertising strategy that many Republican strategists said had produced a series of uninspired commercials in New Hampshire.


Getting a Phone's Benefits Without Owning One
In developing countries, people who want a telephone may often find the installation too costly or the wait too long.
Perhaps a less expensive solution would be "virtual telephone service," a type of automated answering service that aims to provide many of the benefits of phone service without requiring ownership of a telephone.
Comverse Technology Inc., a Woodbury, L.I., manufacturer of voice mail systems, said it had received an order for its computerized answering machine equipment for use in virtual phone service in the northwestern part of Mexico.
The order came from Telefonos del Noroeste, a unit of Mexico's telephone company that serves the northwestern part of the country.


More Speculation About Mastercard
The long-running speculation about the relationship between Lintas New York and Mastercard International has flared anew as a front-page article in Adweek said the account would be put into review this week.
Executives at Mastercard in New York would not comment.
But the agency issued a staff memo yesterday, calling the article unfounded.
The memo, signed by Tony Miller, the agency's chairman and chief executive, said the agency was proud of its work on the account, which has billings estimated at $40 million to $50 million.


Corrections
A "Campaign Memo" article on Monday, about the Presidential candidates' economic messages, misstated rules for voting in the New Hampshire primary.
Voters could take part only in the primary of the party in which they are enrolled; they could not cross party lines.
The deadline for changing party affiliation for the primary was in December.


American Express Rewards 2 Executives
Two executives of the American Express Company who helped clean up messy situations in separate branches of the company's financial-services business in 1990 were rewarded with promotions yesterday.
Jonathan S. Linen, who was sent to stop the financial hemorrhaging at the Shearson Lehman Brothers division nearly two years ago, was named president and chief operating officer of the Travel Related Services unit.
He will serve under Harvey Golub, the unit's chairman and chief executive, effective March 1.


The Soundings From Reading
Since the autumn of 1990, when the nation's ninth and longest postwar recession was beginning to unfold, The New York Times has been taking periodic soundings of developments in Reading and surrounding Berks County, an old-line industrial area with a modern mix of retailing, manufacturing and services that is fairly typical of the Northeast.
The occasional articles, consisting mainly of interviews with business people, workers and shoppers, have sought to capture current economic reality and, by extension, some idea of the immediate future.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN Man in the News: Patrick Joseph Buchanan; Mutineer Rocking the G.O.P. Boat
For a self-described lover of the 1950's, Patrick J. Buchanan's choice of "We Will Rock You," the song by the rock group Queen, to herald his entrance at campaign rallies seems a bit odd.
But generational differences in musical taste aside, Mr.
Buchanan's surprising showing in the New Hampshire primary, no doubt, has shaken both the White House and the Republican establishment.


Successor Is Named At Hanson's U.S. Unit
David H. Clarke, the president and chief operating officer of Hanson Industries, the American arm of Hanson P.L.C., the British industrial conglomerate, has been named to succeed Lord White as head of United States operations.
Mr.
Clarke, 50, will become executive chairman in 1997 when Lord White, who is 67 and who founded the company with Lord Hanson 28 years ago, retires.
An heir to Lord Hanson, who is 70, has not been named.


Pro-Iran Lebanese Choose a Successor
A Shiite Muslim who led the militant wing of the pro-Iranian Party of God was elected leader of the Muslim fundamentalist group today only hours after his slain predecessor was buried.
Artillery and rocket duels raged in southern Lebanon for the second straight day as Israeli helicopter gunships tried to silence fundamentalist positions that have been firing rockets into northern Israel.


Winding Down Is a Pleasure for Wylie
Last Saturday night, Paul Wylie of Denver surprisingly won the Olympic silver medal in men's figure skating.
His life has not been the same since.
The skating ended about 10:30 P.M.
The medals ceremony and a news conference kept him occupied past midnight.
Then he, his parents, his girlfriend and his sponsor commandeered a bistro here and celebrated there until 3:45 A.M.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Albertson's Inc., Boise, Idaho, a retail food and drug concern, agreed to buy 34 Jewel Osco food and drug stores from American Stores Co.
Terms were not disclosed. *
American Airlines, Fort Worth, started an overnight delivery service.


U.S. AND RUSSIA SEE NEW ARMS ACCORDS FOR A JULY SUMMIT
The United States and Russia agreed today to try to complete an ambitious set of new arms control accords in time for a July summit meeting, including establishment of a joint ballistic missile early-warning center, possible sharing of "Star Wars" technology and deep cuts in long-range nuclear missiles.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev, said after talks today that to get the agreements ready for signing by President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin in July they would bypass the traditional arms control negotiating process, in which dozens of mid-level experts bargain for years in Geneva.
They said that instead they would try to tie up the understandings themselves in a series of high-level negotiating sessions, beginning March 10 in Brussels.
No More Haggling
"Hopefully we are beyond the point of having to sit down with huge numbers on each side and spend endless months and years haggling about the tiniest little detail," Mr.
Baker said.
"We are both committed to trying to pursue this new path."


Review/Film; A Dadaist Who Makes Music Out of Everything
Fred Frith, the English guitarist and composer who is the subject of "Step Across the Border," is one of the more respected figures in the gray area of music where rock meets the avant-garde.
A Dadaist improviser with a streak of the mystic in him, Mr.
Frith, like that granddaddy of avant-gardists John Cage, finds music in everything that clanks, squeaks, rattles and hisses.
He can turn just about anything lying around the house into a musical instrument.
And in one sequence, he and some friends give an impromptu backyard performance of bossa nova music using rhythm instruments made of empty bottles and other household debris.
The guitarist's indomitable curiosity and playfulness inspirit the documentary by the Swiss film makers Nicolas Humber and Werner Penzel with a cheeky energy.
And in their musical portrait of Mr.
Frith, which opened today at Film Forum, they carry his open-ended esthetic to movie making.
The result might be described as a kind of Dadaist symphony of sound and image.


In Dire Times, Every Little Kopeck Helps
Snow or slush, the gantlet forms in the early morning.
It starts at the main entrance to Detsky Mir -- Children's World, the biggest children's store in Moscow -- and forms into two facing lines stretching around one corner, down a long city block and around another corner.
The sellers stand shoulder to shoulder, stomping their boots in the cold, while a steady stream of shoppers shuffle through, stopping occasionally for a quick exchange and sometimes for a sale.


Mob Sway Over Bars Called Strong
Organized crime's historical influence in the liquor business is still strong in New Jersey, state officials said today, and they blamed local liquor authorities for the problem.
At the opening of a two-day hearing into the control of bars and restaurants by crime figures, James R. Zazzali, chairman of the New Jersey State Commission of Investigation, said the commission's staff had surveyed 66 towns in all 21 counties and could not find one that was looking closely enough at the holders of liquor licenses to detect any hidden ties to the mob.


Waiting in Line


Hate Groups Seen Growing As Neo-Nazis Draw Young
The number of white supremacist hate groups increased significantly in 1991, a private nonprofit group that monitors such activity says.
The annual report by Klanwatch, based in Montgomery, Ala., noted that the trend was accompanied by more violent oratory from the newer and more militant groups.
At the same time, the Klanwatch report said many of the more traditional groups were stressing political action in some of their new appeals and avoiding talk of hatred and violence.


Prophet of Love Has the Timing Of a Comedian
IN "A Return to Love," published last week by HarperCollins, the new-age guru Marianne Williamson occasionally strikes a Pollyanna note.
"Love is the intuitive knowledge of our hearts," she writes.
"It's a 'world beyond' that we all secretly long for."
But as Miss Williamson discovered a few weeks ago at Town Hall, where she lectures once a month, the search for love in New York can have an acerbic twist.
During a question-and-answer session after Ms.
Williamson's talk on "Functional Relationships," a young woman in the fifth row stood up and said: "There's a man I've been going out with who showers me with too many compliments. He sounds so hokey and insincere."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; Petition Challenge May Keep Tsongas Off the State Primary Ballot
Even as Paul E. Tsongas basks in his victory in the Democratic Presidential primary in New Hampshire, his prospects of even appearing on the New York State primary ballot in April were thrown into considerable doubt today by a legal challenge to his petitions to enter the contest.
The challenge was filed by the New Alliance Party, a fringe political group.
But in a strong indication of the tensions between camps of the first- and second-place finishers in New Hampshire today, the head of Mr.
Tsongas's New York campaign charged that the group had acted under the "direction and orchestration" of aides to Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.


Critic's Notebook; TV Journalists' Urge To Prettify the News
The report this week that more than two-thirds of the single men and almost a third of the adults in families housed in New York City's shelters are on drugs or alcohol may startle people who are addicted to television news.
More often than not, a news story or documentary on the homeless will feature a hard-working, straight-living young couple or an attractive teen-ager and her child who have run into a spell of bad luck.
The reasons for the choices are not obscure.
If you want to arouse sympathy for the homeless, you do not put forward off-putting specimens.
Television news producers can count on advocacy groups to supply them with model victims for viewing purposes, people who may even be untouched by the other afflictions discovered in the recent survey of the homeless: mental illness, AIDS, domestic violence and lack of education and skills.
And why should a producer focus on 1 of the 50 percent of single homeless people who have served time in jail when he can just as easily find someone without a record?


Quotation of the Day
"I understand the message of dissatisfaction." -- PRESIDENT BUSH.  [ A1:6. ]


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ill Wind for the President; A Wave of Discontent in New Hampshire May Be an Omen for Bush in Other States
The Republicans of New Hampshire made their views clear enough today.
Nearly half of them felt dissatisfied enough with George Bush's performance, especially his handling of the economy, to vote for a television commentator, Patrick J. Buchanan, in preference to the incumbent President.
The question is: Will Republicans elsewhere feel and do the same?
And will Mr.
Bush's evident weakness, together with the rather indecisive outcome of the Democratic primary, propel other Democrats into the contest?


Wine Talk
DROP into any popular Manhattan restaurant at lunchtime.
The kind of place where you would expect people to drink wine.
Count the number of guests who are drinking wine.
Chances are these days that hardly anybody is.
What's going on?
Funny that you should ask.
The wine industry has been asking the same question for years.


Round II in Cuomo vs. D'Amato
After taking an overnight breather, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato today resumed his oratorical assault on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
And the Governor returned the favor.
Senator D'Amato fired off a letter on his Senate stationery today, accusing the Governor of "personal attacks" and demanding "fundamental change" in the state budget and the way New York provides services.


CHRONICLE
Another book party, this one a coffee klatch open to the public, will honor NORTH CALLAHAN, the historian, whose latest book about George Washington, "Thanks, Mr. President," has just been published by Cornwall Books.
The event is scheduled for 10:15 A.M. tomorrow at Ellen's Stardust Diner on 6th Avenue at 56th Street.
Dr.
Callahan, professor emeritus of history at New York University who has written extensively about General Washington and the American Revolution, said his new work focuses on the peacetime life of the President, specifically the period between 1793 and 1797, "when Washington was at the apogee of his high office."


Baxter to Redeem Preferred Stock
Baxter International Inc., a maker of health-care products, has announced that it plans to redeem its preferred stock and raise its common-stock dividend.
All outstanding shares of its adjustable-rate preferred will be redeemed on April 1 for $50 a share.
After the redemption of the 6.8 million preferred shares, there will be no outstanding preferred stock ahead of the common.


Sikh Militants in Punjab Impose Boycotts on Work and on Voting
Sikh militants and anti-Government forces demonstrated their influence over the troubled Punjab today by closing much of it in a protest against legislative elections scheduled for Wednesday.
A senior state official said a work stoppage today was 60 to 70 percent successful.
Officials said the work stoppage and a boycott of the voting is to continue Wednesday.


Vienna Philharmonic Cancels Part of Tour
The Vienna Philharmonic has canceled the first two performances of its world tour because Carlos Kleiber, the 61-year-old Munich-based conductor who was to have led the performances, has been hospitalized with pneumonia.
Walter Blovsky, the orchestra's general manager, said that Mr.
Kleiber became ill last week while visiting his wife's family in Zagorje, Yugoslavia.
The tour was to have started with performances in Paris on next Sunday and Monday, but the orchestra was unable to find a substitute for Mr.
Kleiber.
His cancellation will not affect the orchestra's three American appearances, at Carnegie Hall on Feb. 27 and 28 and at the Kennedy Center on March 1.
Those performances are to be conducted by Lorin Maazel, as originally scheduled.


Books of The Times; Another Name for Columbus Day
Black Hills/White Justice  The Sioux Nation Versus the United States, 1775 to the Present  By Edward Lazarus  Illustrated. 486 pages.
HarperCollins. $27.50.
Native American Testimony  A Chronicle of Indian-White Relations From Prophecy to the Present, 1492-1992  Edited by Peter Nabokov  Illustrated. 474 pages.
Viking. $25.
Some American Indians would like to rename Columbus Day in 1992 National Native American Day because they consider the quincentenary of the landing of Christopher Columbus in the Western Hemisphere a day of mourning, not celebration.
The reasons can be found in two books that offer essential and often exciting reading about the struggle to preserve Indian life, land and rights.


The Chastened Pakistanis: Peace With U.S. Is Aim
Faced with an embargo on virtually all American aid and a cutoff of major military sales because of its nuclear weapons program, Pakistan has embarked on the precarious process of recovering its friendship with the United States.
In the last few weeks, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif has moved with some decisiveness to persuade Washington that it should not abandon Pakistan, now that its role as a gateway to China and, more important, as a front-line adversary of the Soviet Union is no longer needed.


Angela Carter, 51, British Writer Of Fantasy With Modern Morals
Angela Carter, a novelist and short-story writer, died at her home in London on Sunday.
She was 51 years old.
She died of cancer, said a spokeswoman for Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, her publisher in New York.


Tyson Trial Coverage
To the Editor:
Why have you been covering the rape trial of Mike Tyson in the sports pages?
Does The New York Times now consider felony trials to be sporting events?
EVELYN NUSSENBAUM New York, Feb. 9, 1992


Administration Offers Agreement on Budget
The Bush Administration told lawmakers today that it might consider spending money cut from the military budget on domestic programs, but only if Congress accepted its proposal to impose limits on mandatory spending programs like Medicare.
Richard G. Darman, director of the White House Office of Management and Budget, made the offer at a hearing before the Senate Appropriations Committee, suggesting that it would be a way to regain control of Federal spending.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ELECTING JUDGES: SUIT IS FILED
Armed with a state report saying that the system of selecting State Supreme Court justices in New York could not withstand a legal challenge, a civil rights organization went into Federal court in an effort to give minority voters a bigger voice.
B3.
WHO ARE THE HIBERNIANS?
Despite a roster of famous members, the Ancient Order of Hibernians in America remains obscure.
Few people know more about the fraternal organization of Catholic Irish-Americans than this: For the second straight year, it has barred a gay and lesbian group from marching under its own banner in New York City's St.
Patrick's Day Parade.
B2.
WHITHER THE BAND SHELL?
City officials in Peekskill, in Westchester County, have made the first of what may be several serious offers to provide a new home for the Naumburg Bandshell, which the Parks and Recreation Department would like to remove from the Concert Ground in Central Park.
B3.
POINT, COUNTERPOINT
John Gotti's lawyers challenged an F.B.I. agent's testimony about the Gambino crime family and his interpretation of taped conversations of Mr.
Gotti.
B3.
New arrest in East Village slaying of dancer.
B2.
Man talking on phone is shot in subway.
B3. 5 finalists in search for jails chief.
B3.
REGION  THE HOBOKEN OF THE FUTURE
Next month, for the second time in less than two years, citizens of Hoboken will vote on a proposal to develop the once-bustling port, renewing a bitter debate between City Hall and a citizens' coalition that was largely responsible for defeating the first proposal.
B4.
LIQUOR AND THE MOB
Organized crime's historical influence in the liquor business is still strong in New Jersey, state officials said, and they blamed local liquor authorities for the problem.
B4.
THE MYSTERY OF THE TORCHED MANSION
Few tears were shed in the Long Island village of Mill Neck in January when someone burned down the huge home Steven West was building.
Now, the Nassau County police are looking for the arsonist, and the list of potential suspects is long enough to populate an Agatha Christie novel.
Among them, the police say, are contractors, suppliers, architects, landscapers, neighbors, vandals and the Wests themselves.
A1.
BREAKING THE TRUCE
A week after pledging bipartisan cooperation to solve Nassau County's knotty fiscal problems, Democratic county supervisors filed suit against their Republican counterparts, accusing them of illegally issuing paychecks to hundreds of mainly Republican county managers.
B4.
FOR SALE: POWER PLANT, LIKE NEW
Representatives of a dozen major companies in the energy business went out to the never-opened Shoreham Nuclear Power Station on Long Island as they consider making bids on converting it to natural gas.
B4.
Cuomo vs.
D'Amato, Round II.
B7.
About New York B3  Neediest Cases B7


A Time of Troubles for Hibernians
John Cardinal O'Connor is one.
So is the Brooklyn prosecutor, Charles J. Hynes, and the Nassau County District Attorney, Denis Dillon.
They are all Hibernians, along with about 191,000 other men in the United States.
Despite its well-known members, the organization itself, the Ancient Order of Hibernians in America Inc., remains obscure.
Few people know little more about the fraternal organization of Catholic Irish-Americans than this: For the second straight year, it has barred a gay and lesbian group from marching under its own banner in New York City's St.
Patrick's Day Parade.


Medication After Life Support
WHEN hopelessly ill patients are removed or kept from life support, they are often given sedatives and pain-killing drugs but the drugs are given as often to comfort family members as they are to soothe the patient, a new study suggests.
In a third of the cases, the study found, the aim was also to speed the patient's death.
"We were not surprised that the physicians and nurses working with these patients would like to allow the patient to peacefully depart once it's been decided that further medical therapy would be of no benefit," said Dr.
William Wilson, a resident at the University of California at San Diego and one of the authors of the study.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Kelley Still Unbeaten  Featherweight Kevin Kelley of Flushing persevered for 12 furious rounds last night at the Paramount to gain a unanimous decision over Troy Dorsey and remain unbeaten.
Kelley, ranked No. 1 by the World Boxing Association, improved to 27-0 and retained his World Boxing Council Continental Americas featherweight championship.


Food Notes
Multinational Bazaar
For the broadest possible interpretation of Mediterranean food, there is now Natura, a large, airy, multinational shop at 615 Ninth Avenue (43d Street) in Manhattan.
This grand bazaar representing Spain, France, Italy, North Africa, Greece, Turkey and the Middle East offers a tempting array of glossy olives, fragrant spices, earthy grains, a hundred or so cheeses, oils, dried beans and assorted yogurts.
Pandeli Andonopulo, the owner, also owns the Ninth Avenue Cheese Shop on 39th Street.
He branched out because he needed more space for all the foods he wanted to sell.
Beyond the Mediterranean, there are specialties from Russia, Poland, Mexico, Asia and even quite an assortment from Peru.
This is a place to find fresh and dried chilies, Thai jasmine rice, strings of tiny Turkish dried okra to stew, dried mulberries, star anise and freshly quarried blocks of halvah studded with pistachios.
In the back of the store is a well-tended produce market that carries everything from plain yellow onions to exotica like purple potatoes, mizuna (Japanese mustard) and frisee, a type of curly mustard.
The bakery on the premises turns out delicious waffle-textured sesame-sprinkled Turkish pita, plus enough flaky syrup and honey-drenched pastries for 1,001 nights.
The kitchen makes well-seasoned salads, dips, spreads and other dishes.
A spicy Mediterranean goat-cheese spread is an eye-opening appetite whetter.
The silken Ottoman-style artichoke hearts and vegetables in olive oil and lush elephant-bean salad are some other reasonably priced dishes at $3.95 or so a pound.
And Mr.
Andonopulo promises there will be more to come.
Natura is open 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Monday to Saturday and 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. on Sunday; (212) 397-4700.
Fast French Fries
Sam Balan knows his chips.
This aerospace engineer, who was on the team that created the lunar module, has now come up with a computerized vending machine capable of turning out one four-ounce serving of french fries a minute.
The manufacturer, Adelaide Manufacturing of Miami, also has a more powerful model that can do the job in half the time.
Previous attempts at creating such a machine relied on frozen fries.
This machine is far simpler and less bulky.
It uses tiny barley-sized pellets of dehydrated potato that are reconstituted instantly by mixing them with a jet stream of water.
They are then pushed through a mold shaped like a french fry, dropped into hot canola oil, ejected into a cup and sold for $1 -- probably more at the local 20-plex.
The fries are crispy and tasty enough, their creamy mashed-potato centers never mealy, like some frozen fries.
The machine, which uses standard 110-volt current, costs $15,000; the wholesale price for distributors will be $10,000.
Net profit on each $1 order of fries is estimated at 35 cents.
The first machines are expected to begin operating by the end of April.
Breads and Pastries
Cuisine de l'Art, 166 Main Street (near Franklin Street) in Nyack, N.Y., is a bakery and craft shop that opened in late December and offers an assortment of crusty sourdough breads and inviting pastries.
Stevan Nikolic, the owner, previously worked with Eli Zabar at E.A.T. in Manhattan and was one of the founders of St.
Famous Bread on Ninth Avenue, near 53d Street.
For his new venture he has created a potato-dill sourdough bread ($2.50), another bread seamed with four cheeses ($4), a rich apple-cinnamon-raisin loaf ($3), apple and raspberry squares ($1.25) and savory spinach and cheese turnovers ($1.50).
The focaccia d'Avignon ($2), with its herbaceous tomato topping, is excellent warm and cut in strips.
Mesquite Jelly
Grilling over mesquite seems to have been a flash in the pan.
Chefs now pay more attention to the kind of oil drizzled on the plate than the fuel for the fire.
If you miss mesquite, here's a new way to taste it.
Texas Traditions, a fledgling company in the hill country near Austin, makes a golden jelly made from mesquite beans.
It has a delicate lemon-honey flavor and is good as a spread or in glazes and sauces.
The company also makes a rosy prickly-pear cactus jelly and some pepper jellies.
The jellies are sold in shops in Texas and are also available by mail order from Texas Traditions, Route 1, Box 123B, Georgetown, Tex. 78626; telephone (512) 863-7291, or fax (512) 869-6212.
The price is $5 for a 10-ounce jar, plus shipping.
IT'S THE SEASON FOR SHAD
SHAD have started moving up the Atlantic Coast and are starting to be sold at the Fulton Fish Market in Manhattan.
The fish, many of which are caught off the Chesapeake Bay, are quite abundant even though it is still early in the season.
Fish markets in the New York region are selling fresh shad fillets for $7 to $8 a pound.
Shad -- moist, pinkish and fairly rich-tasting -- is usually sold filleted because this fish, a member of the herring family, has multiple rows of needle-thin bones that take experience to remove.
Shad roe is $6 to $8 a pound in most markets that sell shad.


Public &amp; Private; The Abortion Orphans
The photograph on the postcard is of a Gibson girl, hair piled atop her head, lace on her rounded shoulders, and a face in profile that is not so much pretty as soft and very young.
Beneath the picture are these words:  CLARA BELL DUVALL WAS A 32- YEAR-OLD MOTHER OF FIVE  WHEN SHE DIED OF AN ILLEGAL  ABORTION IN 1929.


Massachusetts to Open a Public Science School
Citing the need to act quickly to inspire high school students to choose math and science careers despite tight school budgets, Massachusetts officials plan to open a public academy focused on those subjects at Worcester Polytechnic Institute this fall.
The new Massachusetts Academy of Mathematics and Science would be the first such nonresidential, state-financed school of excellence to be housed at an existing college, said one sponsor, State Senator Arthur E. Chase, a Republican from Worcester.
The academy would serve high school juniors and seniors, who would compete for admission.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  THE OLD COOPERATION CONTINUES
The United States and Russia will work to complete ambitious new arms-control accords in time for a July summit meeting, including establishment of a joint ballistic-missile-warning center and possible cooperation on space defenses.
A1
U.S. and ex-Soviet submarines collided last week near Murmansk.  A6
Recently illicit, Moscow's street-market commerce thrives.
A6  LIBYA PREPARES FOR CONFLICT


Theater in Review
Lady Bracknell's Confinement and The Party  Vineyard Theater 108 East 15th Street Manhattan Lady Bracknell's Confinement By Paul Doust; directed by Maria Aitken; set by G. W. Mercier; lighting by Phil Monat; sound by Bruce Ellman; costumes by Muriel Stockdale; wig and makeup by Michael Costain; production stage manager, Crystal Huntington.
Presented by the Vineyard Theater, Douglas Aibel, artistic director; Barbara Zinn Krieger, executive director; Jon Nakagawa, managing director.
With: Edward Hibbert The Party From three stories by Virginia Woolf; adapted by Ellen McLaughlin; directed by David Esbjornson.
With: Kathleen Chalfant
Tepid epigrams inflated with words like "pulchritude" and "perpendicularity" tumble from the stage of the Vineyard Theater "Lady Bracknell's Confinement," by Paul Doust, the first play of two one-acts that seem aimed at Anglophilic audiences.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
The other Saturday I agreed to take my 2-year-old to see "Beauty and the Beast" at a local theater in Hastings-on-Hudson. (Twice had not been enough for him).
On our way to the theater he fell asleep; nevertheless, I put him on my shoulder and stood in line.
Nearing the ticket booth, a selfish plan came to mind.
"Two for 'Grand Canyon,' " I said wickedly.
I bought my popcorn and sat down, my son still asleep in my lap.
Twenty minutes into the film he woke up.
For a few minutes, he watched Danny Glover and Kevin Kline, while silently munching on my popcorn.
Suddenly, it hit him.
"Where's the beast?" he yelled to me in the quiet auditorium.
"Where's the beast?"


Hewlett Shows New Fast Chip
The Hewlett-Packard Company announced the next generation of its microprocessor technology.
The new generation, known as Precision Architecture RISC 7100, will be at least 50 percent more powerful than the company's existing microprocessors.
An official of Hewlett-Packard, based in Palo Alto, Calif., said the new chips would execute more than 100 million instructions a second and operate at a speed of up to 100 million cycles a second.
They will be used in high-end work stations and minicomputers that will be shipped in the second half of the year.


Mets' Commercials Promise Aggressive Style of Baseball
HOPING to woo fans with an aggressive promise of aggressive play, the New York Mets are starting their annual pre-season advertising blitz with this confident pledge: "Hardball is back."
The campaign, being introduced this week, is as sure a sign that another baseball season is nigh as the fact that pitchers and catchers report to spring training on Friday.
And just like advertising for soup or soap, the ads, by TBWA Advertising Inc. in New York, are intended to establish a brand identity for the Mets.


A Life Stranger Than the Movie, 'Europa, Europa,' Based on It
The truth of Solomon Perel's life is even stranger than the movie.
Mr.
Perel was the inspiration for the film "Europa, Europa," the tale of a young German Jew trapped by the shifting front lines of World War II who passes himself off as Aryan and ends up in the Hitler Youth.
The film version is bizarre enough.
It opens with the deportation of a Jewish family to Poland in 1936.
Three years later, the hero flees east from the advancing German Army, takes refuge in a school for young Communists in the Soviet Union, learns Russian and the Marxist-Leninist catechism.


Fed Lets Banks Lower Reserves To Aid Lending
In an unusual move aimed at increasing bank lending to spur the economy, the Federal Reserve announced today that it was cutting the amount of money that banks must hold in reserve to offset possible losses.
The central bank said the action, effective April 2, would enable banks to take $8 billion in reserves not earning income as they sit in bank vaults and use them for investing or lending.
Economists, however, said the short-term effect would be modest because banks might wait to strengthen their finances further before they lend.
Sending a Message
Today's announcement came after persistent pleas to the Federal Reserve from the White House and many members of Congress, who, with their eyes on Election Day as well as the economy, have been urging that monetary policy be eased still further.


In Overtime, Fetisov Remedies Devils' Problems
With one blistering shot from the top of the left circle in overtime, Slava Fetisov made the Devils forget their troubles tonight and provided the heralded Russian defenseman with an unforgettable moment.
Wiped out by the Fetisov goal at 1 minute 42 seconds into the extra period was a sluggish start by the Devils, their prolonged lack of high intensity, their continued ineptness on the power play and especially their lapse that allowed the Philadelphia Flyers to tie the game with 5 seconds left in regulation time.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve cut the amount of money that banks must hold in reserve.
The move, which takes effect April 2, is meant to enable banks to take $8 billion in funds not earning income and use it instead for investing or lending.  [ Page A1. ]
The S.E.C. proposed measures to make it cheaper for small companies to raise money by reducing public disclosure requirements.
The plans would also make it easier for mutual funds to invest in small and new businesses.  [ D1. ]


Libya, Fearing Attack, Braces for Clash With West
In the face of threatened sanctions and possible military action over the 1988 terrorist bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, Libya is bracing for what it apparently believes is an inevitable confrontation with the West.
Along the coast, bulldozers have gouged out huge trenches to thwart what officials say might be an invading force.
Machine-gun nests have been set up outside communications centers and Government offices.
Merchant ships from Italy, China and Turkey clog the harbor unloading grain and goods, including spare parts for the country's industries, to be stockpiled in the event of an embargo.


Woman With an Eye for Ring Talent
Early last year, this manager and her fighter were unknown.
No more: 1991 turned out to be a shining season for Jackie Kallen and James Toney.
Toney shocked the fight world last May when he knocked out the International Boxing Federation middleweight champion, Michael Nunn, in Nunn's hometown of Davenport, Iowa.


E.P.A. Reimposes 2 Toxic-Waste Rules but White House Wants Them to Be Eased
Resolving a dispute with the White House, the Environmental Protection Agency tonight reissued two of the rules that formed the core of the nation's program for safely disposing of hazardous wastes.
The two regulations had been ruled invalid in December by a Federal appeals court, which decided that the agency had violated Government procedure by issuing them in 1980 without prior public comment.


In Nassau County, Democrats File Lawsuit Over Pay to Supervisors
A week after pledging bipartisan cooperation to solve Nassau County's fiscal problems, Democratic county supervisors filed suit today against their Republican counterparts, accusing them of illegally issuing paychecks to hundreds of county managers, mostly Republicans.
The lawsuit is the latest symptom of a breakdown of government here, after Democrats won enough votes on the Board of Supervisors to block all legislation proposed by the Republicans, but not enough votes to pass their own alternatives, under the weighted voting system in use on the board.


Switch Out of Center? Coleman's Philosophic
Vince Coleman of the Mets said today that there was no great indignity in being relocated from center field to left in order to accommodate a player who has spent all of a month in the outfield.
Coleman, who said last season that he had all along considered himself a "natural center fielder," said today as well that there was no great personal disappointment in his having to surrender the more glamorous section of the outfield stage.


Fighting in Somalia Slows, but Civilians' Suffering Goes On


Still Awaiting Proof in Reading, Pa.
Ronald K. Buckley, vice president of a furniture store on Penn Street here, says his customers are gradually beginning to return again, which he sees as a sign that the long-delayed economic upswing is poised to begin.
"Those that are ready are going to do business," Mr.
Buckley said, referring to his fellow merchants here and around the nation.
"Those that are not are going to miss the boat."


Personal Health
EACH year about two million Americans suffer an injury or undergo surgery that hampers their mobility.
When knees, ankles, feet, hips or legs are temporarily out of commission, they suddenly find themselves relying on crutches for ambulatory independence.
Unfortunately, learning how to use them is a trial-and-error experience that often leaves them exhausted and frustrated.
Unless they are enrolled in therapy for everyday skills, novice crutch-users are rarely taught more than the barest rudiments of the many techniques that can make temporary incapacitation safer and simpler.


Democrats' Tax Plan Gets Going Over by Republicans
Republicans turned up the volume of their verbal assault on the House Democrats' tax plan today, saying it did little for the middle class and less for economic growth.
Coordinated, but not entirely consistent, attacks were issued from the White House, the Treasury and House and Senate.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Paul E. Tsongas and his wife, Nikki, arriving for a town meeting in Exeter, N.H., misidentified the site in some copies.
It was Phillips Exeter Academy, not Phillips Academy, which is in Andover, Mass.


BASEBALL: Sports of The Times; Old Dodger Returns, To Yankees This Time
THIRTY-THREE years later, Russ Meyer returned to the major leagues yesterday.
It hadn't changed that much: Men still sit around in their underwear and tell stories.
Meyer has a few stories of his own, many of them about pitching for a team in Brooklyn from 1953 to 1955, otherwise known as Next Year, when the Dodgers defeated their nemesis, the Yankees.


Brown Uses Time Wisely As Hoyas Trim Huskies
Joey Brown thought for a second, smiled and finally shook his head.
"Nope," he said.


5 Teen-Agers Accused of Killing Youth
A New Jersey high school student was strangled on Sunday as he prayed with his killers, the victim of five teen-agers who had been plotting his death for months, the police said.
The police and prosecutors said yesterday that the plot was the work of a tightly knit group with strange religious overtones, which had tried to kill the victim, 17-year-old Robert A. Solimine Jr. of North Haledon, twice before.


GERMANS ANGUISH OVER POLICE FILES
The former East German secret police, the Stasi, no longer exists, but last weekend it nonetheless claimed another life.
Gerhard Riege, a member of the Bonn Parliament from eastern Germany, hanged himself on Saturday after it was reported that he had been a Stasi informer in the 1950's.


Yamaguchi Glides to Top of Surprising Pack
On a night of uncommon errors, curious strategies and improbable results, Kristi Yamaguchi of Fremont, Calif., was an oasis of predictability, skating an elegant and nearly flawless original program to take the lead in the Olympic women's figure- skating competition.
As 28 other skaters began chasing the title won in the last two Winter Olympic Games by Katarina Witt, then of East Germany, Yamaguchi performed tonight as if all that mattered was making people smile.
With Strauss's "Blue Danube Waltz" setting a soft, romantic mood, she fairly floated from one required element of her program to the next and won the highest scores from all nine judges.


Employer Offers Holiday Child Care
Don't ask a certain group of parents how they are doing this week.
Some will mutter, "Miserable." Others will simply snarl.
The problem: Their children's schools are closed, but their offices are open.
A child-care crisis is at hand.


ALBERTVILLE '92: OLYMPIC PROFILE


John M. Burns, 67, Former Lawmaker And Ad Executive
John M. Burns, a former state legislator, advertising and broadcast executive and officer of several nonprofit agencies, died on Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of pancreatic cancer, his family said.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the molding of political messages by campaign "spin doctors" rendered the name of a senior editor of the New Republic magazine incorrectly.
He is Hendrik Hertzberg.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  McEnroes Are Defeated  John McEnroe missed a match point and was given a penalty point for tossing his racquet before being defeated in first-round play today at the Eurocard Classic tournament in Stuttgart, Germany.
McEnroe, who was unseeded, held match point against Karel Novacek of Czechoslovakia, who is seeded eighth, at 6-5 in the second-set tie breaker but hit a backhand service return wide and was beaten 3-6, 7-6 (9-7), 6-2.
"I choked," McEnroe said.
"To be up match point and lose, that's a big disapointment. In a sense, I was expecting to win and I shouldn't have gone into the match with that attitude. I should have just gone in with a play-well attitude and see what happens."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Siouxsie and the Banshees  The Ritz
Siouxsie Sioux danced like a showgirl as she led the Banshees at the Ritz on Monday night.
Her hands fluttered, her arms described spirals, she shimmied and did high kicks.
But she was singing about things showgirls wouldn't mention: crumbling cities, asylums for the insane, peep shows, dark compulsions.
And those were only the hits.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Syd Straw
Church of St. Ann and the Holy Trinity Brooklyn Heights
Syd Straw has a battery of different voices at her disposal, and she used them all on Friday night.
In the upper range her voice is as high and breathless as a child's; when she slips into the middle range she's proud and defiant, lending lines like "Hey man, I'm making moves/And I am so much stronger than you" a touch of postfeminist empowerment.
Down low she's vulnerable, able to communicate heartbreak in the stretch of the single syllable of love.
Then there's her deadpan speaking voice.
At one point in the concert, standing on the church's altar-stage surrounded by a band that included violin, cello, upright bass, guitar and drums, Ms.
Straw strapped on a heavy blue electric guitar.
The incongruity with her folkish chamber-rock as well as her outfit (in a well-tailored gray suit she looked like a mod Diane Keaton) was immediately apparent.
"Think I'll turn it up to 10," she joked.


New-Home Building Again Shows Gains
In a report that showed continued gains in new-home construction, builders in January broke ground on new dwellings at an annual pace of 1,167,000, the briskest since May 1990.
The 5.5 percent surge from December's 1,106,000 pace marked the fourth month in a row without a decline, but the gain was less robust than it appeared since it was heavily concentrated in apartment-house construction, which had nose-dived the month before.
Moreover, the rise occurred only in the Midwest, with starts edging down in the South and West and falling 7 percent in the Northeast.


Legions of Homeless Make People Indifferent
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 20 front-page article on public apathy toward the homeless: Scenario, a typical day in Manhattan.
Go to subway entrance, where a man, obviously homeless, stands with empty coffee container asking for money.
Go downstairs to token booth, where one or more men stand, empty coffee containers thrust forward, asking for money.


Beth Israel Reaches Pact With Union
Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan reached a potentially precedent-setting accord with the hospital workers' union yesterday that guarantees all 4,000 employees their jobs for the duration of the 40-month contract, provides them with free medical benefits and creates an unusual partnership with management to improve recruitment, training and patient care.
The agreement does not specify the size of wage increases.
Rather, it promises to match, at the union's option, whatever raises are negotiated either with the League of Voluntary Hospitals and Homes, the industry's main bargaining group for 38 institutions in New York City and Long Island, or with the hospitals operated in Manhattan and the Bronx by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York.


Thousands in Lebanon Flee Israeli-Arab Artillery
Thousands of villagers fled their homes in southern Lebanon today amid fierce artillery and rocket exchanges between Muslim fundamentalists and Israeli Army troops.
The police said that 30 villages in southern Lebanon came under Israeli bombardment.
First reports said that four people were killed and 50 wounded in the exchanges.
The police estimated that 75,000 to 100,000 Lebanese had fled villages north of the Israeli buffer zone in southern Lebanon in the last three days.


Managed Care Hasn't Lived Up to Its Promises; Tsongas's Case
To the Editor:
Paul Tsongas is running for President advocating a change in the health care system called managed care.
This sounds great, but what does it really mean?


Ex-Linebacker Testifies On Payoffs for Lodi Bar
Brian Kelley, a former Giants linebacker, told state investigators today that he has been paying $500 a week for the last three years out of his bar business to a man he identified as a consultant but who state officials said is an associate of the Genovese crime family.
Mr.
Kelley, testifying before the State Commission of Investigation under a grant of immunity from prosecution, said he puts $500 in cash in an envelope and leaves it under the bar at the Satin Dolls lounge in Lodi for pickup by Vincent Ravo.


Hornets Trade Chapman to the Bullets
He was the franchise's first draft choice and the team's career scoring leader, but yesterday guard REX CHAPMAN was traded by the Charlotte Hornets to the Washington Bullets in exchange for forward TOM HAMMONDS.
Chapman, the former University of Kentucky star chosen as the eighth pick in the 1988 National Basketball Association draft, has missed the last 30 games because of a bruised left heel.
"I'm happy," Chapman said.
"I wasn't too happy with them and I guess they weren't too happy with me. It's been up and down here, but I guess that's to be expected with an expansion team."
Added Coach ALLAN BRISTOW : "With the emergence of KENDALL GILL at the off-guard this season, Rex would not receive as many minutes as he deserves."
Chapman said he hoped to begin playing again by the middle of next month.
Hammonds, the former Georgia Tech standout, was selected ninth over all by the Bullets in the 1989 draft.
In 37 games this season, he has averaged 11.9 points and 5 rebounds. (AP)


Review/Dance; Teaching a Young God About Art and Conduct
Structurally, George Balanchine's "Apollo" is one variation after another.
Yet this work to a serene score by Stravinsky is not simply a suite of dances.
Even in the abridged version, which Balanchine came to prefer at the end of his life and which the New York City Ballet now performs, "Apollo" has a theme.
It shows how three muses teach a young god much about art and civilized conduct.
That theme was only dimly evident on Friday night at the New York State Theater.
When the curtain rose, Nilas Martins, as Apollo, was posed like a handsome golden-haired Greek god.
When he moved, he looked suitably boyish.


Review/Dance; What Happens When People Turn Into Animals
Tom Evert likes to turn dancers into plants, animals and goblins.
Mr.
Evert, a former member of Paul Taylor's company who now directs a group of his own in Cleveland, also likes to make his dancers resemble people.
But in terms of choreographic vividness, the human condition was upstaged by the nonhuman condition when the Tom Evert Dance Company performed on Saturday night at the Marymount Manhattan Theater.
A devil, a skeleton, a goat and some bats cavorted in "Neewollah," a revel which has been presented here before and which retains its ghoulish charm.
What's it about?
Read the work's title backward to learn the answer.


Telephone Network Safeguards
About eight months after a software mistake snarled service for five million customers in the metropolitan Washington area, Bell Atlantic and the company that supplied the flawed program, the DSC Communications Corporation, said today that they had taken substantial steps to insure the accident did not recur.
The tiny software error was equivalent to a mistyped word hidden among five copies of Melville's "Moby Dick."


Four Nebraska Victories at Risk . . . and a Running Back Will Stand Trial
The news was not good for another Nebraska running back, too, yesterday when SCOTT BALDWIN was bound over to district court in Lincoln for trial on two assault charges stemming from an attack on a woman last month.
Lancaster County Judge JACK LINDER ordered Baldwin held without bond.
Baldwin's attorney, HAL ANDERSON, said he will seek a bond hearing at Baldwin's next court appearance scheduled for Feb. 26 in Lancaster County District Court.
Baldwin, a junior from Roselle, N.J., is charged with one count of assault in the beating of 23-year-old GINA SIMANEK in an unprovoked attack outside her Lincoln apartment building on Jan. 18.
He also is accused of one count of assault of a police officer.
If convicted, Baldwin could face up to 20 years in prison and a $25,000 fine on the assault charge involving Simanek and up to five years and $10,000 in the assault charge involving Officer GREG SIMMS.
Doctors said Simanek, who sustained brain damage, is recovering at the Madonna Rehabilitation Center in Lincoln. (AP)


Sheets For Fans Of Subtlety
A store can be defined not just by its merchandise, but by its palette.
In the late 1970's there was the High Tech look, and stores like Industrial Revolution in Los Angeles and Ad Hoc Housewares and Dot Zero in Manhattan sold only objects that were black, white or gray.
In 1982, when Peri Wolfman opened Wolfman-Gold and Good Company in SoHo, every object -- bowls, plates, cups -- was white.
Terra Verde Trading Company, which opened in SoHo in 1990, sells unbleached sheets and blankets in a limited palette of white and beige.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire; Democratic Candidates' Next Three Weeks: a Scramble Around America
The race for the Democratic nomination rolled out of New Hampshire today with a newly credible Paul E. Tsongas, a revived Bill Clinton and a far more complicated course ahead, with primaries and caucuses in 25 states over the next three weeks.
Mr.
Tsongas, a former Senator from Massachusetts, got the opportunity to build a national campaign on his New Hampshire victory and demonstrate that he can carry his message beyond his region.
Declaring that he had "great potential to move," he began a trip to Maryland, New York, South Dakota, Maine and Georgia, a scramble emblematic of the days to come, and the challenge he faces in quickly and substantially expanding his campaign.


Poll of Republicans Was Off the Mark
A poll of primary voters leaving voting stations across New Hampshire on Tuesday accurately mirrored the final vote for the Democratic candidates, but was off the mark for the Republicans.
Voter Research and Surveys, a joint effort of ABC News, CBS News, CNN, and NBC News, set up the poll.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Labor; Unions to Go Their Own Ways in Primaries
Divided over Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, the nation's leading labor unions decided today to go their own ways in choosing whom to back in the Democratic Presidential primaries, at least until a political consensus forms.
Leaders of 32 unions that make up the executive council of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations are meeting here this week to set their agenda.


Punjab Holds Vote but Threats Deter Many
After being postponed for more than five years, elections were held today in Punjab State, which has been battered by violence by separatists and the police.
The elections, ordered to be held by the Indian Government, took place under the guns of more than a quarter of a million police officers and soldiers, a security presence intended to protect candidates and reassure voters that it was safe to vote.


Growing
THIS big old house is full of good junk.
Down in the shadowy regions of the cellar are mason jars and jelly glasses, milk pails and stone crocks laced with cobwebs, clay pots and old nail kegs, tin boilers that once simmered smoked hams for hours on the stove.
The back porch (though it isn't a porch at all but a long drafty room off the kitchen, full of windows that rattle when the north wind blows) is crammed with tables full of pots and pans and cookie tins and meat grinders and badminton nets and croquet sets and a hedge trimmer with about a zillion feet of electric cord.
There is an old refrigerator that fills up with beer when the whole clan is here, and a tall old pine cupboard that's so full you have to be careful when you open the glass-paned door.


Abroad at Home; A Devalued Asset
Being the Leader of the Free World is not worth what it used to be in American politics.
That was one stark message from the New Hampshire primary.
During the decades of the cold war -- and the primal American fear of Communism -- an incumbent could expect to take at least one great asset into a campaign.
He was the protector of U.S. national security.


Essay; The 1996 Campaign
My early prognostication still holds.
Clinton gets the Democratic nomination, chooses Kerrey for V.P., and they run a respectable race; the economy turns up briskly and the Bush-Quayle ticket wins.
To check this out on the morning after New Hampshire, I called a former boss and observed how this was a great day for Old Nixon Hands.


British and U.S. Researchers Find a New Form of Radiation Injury
A novel form of radiation injury, one that causes longterm genetic damage to living cells, has been discovered independently by two groups of researchers.
The effect, if confirmed, may eventually lead to more stringent standards for protecting nuclear power workers and others from radiation.
One research group, in a report being published in today's issue of the journal Nature, said that when they exposed mouse cells to the type of radiation known as alpha particles, abnormalities of the chromosomes appeared in some descendant cells several generations of cell division later.
Alpha particles are emitted by radioactive plutonium and by radon gas.


BRIEFS
*
Best Buy Inc., Bloomington, Minn., said it was interested in taking over six Child World Inc. stores that had been closed in Chicago. *
Carnival Cruise Lines Inc., Miami, agreed to acquire up to 5 percent of Seaborn Cruise Lines, through two secured 10-year loans of $15 million and $10 million.


Senate Votes Energy Bill, 94 to 4, Without Allowing Arctic Drilling
After it jettisoned a plan to drill for oil in the Arctic wildlife region, the Senate overwhelmingly passed an energy bill today intended to encourage the development of alternative-fuel vehicles and ease Federal regulations on nuclear generators and other forms of electrical power.
The highly technical legislation was sewn together by liberals who sought to conserve energy, and conservatives who hoped to stimulate more energy production.
As a patchwork of proposals and amendments, it did not wholly satisfy most senators nor the White House, although it was approved by a vote of 94 to 4.


On a D Train in Disguise, the Grammys Ride In
The Grammy Awards ceremony, which will be broadcast on Tuesday night from Radio City Music Hall, is more than a television show and longer than a night.
The city's participation, for the second consecutive year, in the 34th annual Grammy Awards may bring as much as $40 million in business to New York City.
The occasion involves not just the ceremony but also major charitable donations and a week of public and private events, from a benefit concert with Natalie Cole tomorrow night at the Apollo Theater to the broadcast of the awards ceremony on the huge Sony screen above Times Square.


Walker Loses His Spot On a 4-Man U.S. Sled
Herschel Walker's dreams of winning an Olympic gold medal were detoured today when the pro football player who doubles as a bobsled rider was removed from the USA I four-man sled.
When the competition is run in La Plagne on Friday and Saturday, Chris Coleman of Vestal, N.Y., will be the brakeman again for the sled driven by Randy Will of Endwell, N.Y.
Coleman lost the job to Walker four weeks ago in a pushoff competition in Altenberg, Germany.


For Swiss Banks, Solid World Shifts
Add one more item to the list of the world's disappearing certainties: Swiss banking, long an unchanging symbol of discreet prosperity, is suddenly mired in difficulties that are ruffling the sang-froid of the nation's bankers.
Once a bastion of security in a divided Europe, Switzerland and its banks now find themselves isolated in a Europe coalescing around them.
A series of setbacks -- including the abrupt collapse of a mid-sized regional bank, the disclosure of several major bad loans, and the downgrading of Credit Suisse's credit rating -- have heightened a national mood of troubled self-scrutiny.


Sponsors to Review a Project on Fairness in Political Ads
AN innovative program to police the content of political advertising is being reviewed after serious faults became evident in a test during the New Hampshire primary.
Sponsors of the program, called Project Run Fair, are the League of Women Voters, the American Association of Advertising Agencies and the Markle Foundation.
They hope to revise the program, which ran from Feb. 5 through Tuesday, Primary Day, and to continue it through the Presidential campaign.


Appeals-Court Ruling by Thomas Limits F.C.C. Affirmative Action
In a decision written by Justice Clarence Thomas, a divided Federal appeals panel ruled today that the Federal Government may not give preferential treatment to women in awarding broadcast licenses even though it does so for blacks and other minority groups.
The opinion, a draft of which was written by Justice Thomas when he was still on the lower court, revealed considerably more of his approach to affirmative action programs than he offered in confirmation hearings on his nomination to the Supreme Court last fall.


2 Items to Spur Investments Put Into Democrats' Tax Bill
Responding to protests from their colleagues that their tax plan offered little to stimulate the economy, Democrats on the House Ways and Means Committee modified the measure today to add two provisions to spur investment.
In a two-hour party caucus this morning, complaints rose across a broad spectrum of ideology that the original recommendation of a permanent one percentage point cut in the corporate income tax would not only do little good but would also look bad when compared with the measure's two-year cut in taxes for the middle class.


De Klerk's Party Loses Seat to Rightists
The governing National Party of President F. W. de Klerk suffered a defeat tonight as a coveted parliamentary seat here fell to an aggressive challenge from the right-wing Conservative Party.
The by-election, widely regarded as the most critical since the 1989 elections that installed Mr. de Klerk as President, was closely watched as a barometer of white support for his moves to dismantle apartheid and negotiate equal rights for the nation's black majority.


FED CHIEF UPBEAT ON THE ECONOMY
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, today gave his most optimistic assessment in months of the economy's near-term prospects, but he said the signs of an upturn could still peter out.
Testifying before a House subcommittee, Mr.
Greenspan said that "we are beginning to see stirrings" of a recovery as he pointed in particular to a pickup in retail sales and in home building, including a 5.5 percent jump in construction of new homes in January that was announced today.  [ Page D1. ]


Market Place; Wall St. Support For Oregon Steel
SOME Wall Street analysts are turning their attention to Oregon Steel Mills Inc., a minimill that produces steel by melting scrap and has the distinction of being the only American steelmaker to increase profits last year.
While Nucor Inc., the North Carolina producer of steel joists, bars and sheets, has long been the most prominent of the mini-mills, Oregon Steel has drawn a following for its niche products.
The low-cost producer of steel plate and pipe has benefited from the surge in demand in the last two years for steel plate products to build or rehabilitate highways, bridges and oil and gas pipelines in California and other Western states.


CHRONICLE
SALMAN RUSHDIE, who recently marked his third anniversary under a death sentence proclaimed by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, is to be married after a secret courtship, Reuters reported from London.
The prospective bride's name was not disclosed.
Scotland Yard warned editors on Tuesday that to reveal her identity would "place the lives of both parties and probably others at grave risk."
Mr.
Rushdie has been in hiding since Feb. 14, 1989, when the Ayatallah Khomeini ordered him killed for his book "The Satanic Verses," which was considered blasphemous to Islam.
Since then, bookstores selling the Rushdie book have been fire-bombed and the book's Japanese translator was murdered.


Children's Clothes, Children's Psyches
IN the sea of parents and nannies waiting outside Public School 87 on the Upper West Side of Manhattan the other afternoon, Marilise Flusser was hard to overlook.
She was the mother in the Mickey Mouse colors -- canary yellow clogs and matching sweatsuit under a tomato red raincoat lined in more canary yellow.
The one-green-sock, one-red-sock mother.
"Kids love color," she said as girls and boys in bright parkas and backpacks began spilling out of the school door and onto the sidewalk.
Suddenly this stretch of West 78th Street between Amsterdam and Columbus Avenues became a fashion runway with Ms.
Flusser, a former children's fashion coordinator at Saks Fifth Avenue, doing curbside commentary.


Sports of The Times; 'I Never Can See Her Face'
DURING an Olympic practice, Nancy Kerrigan skated over to where her parents were sitting near the ice.
"Stay right here," she said to her mother.
"I'll come by and do a jump right in front of you."


Lapses Seen in Monitoring Bronx Girls in Foster Care
Child welfare workers visited a Bronx foster mother 26 times and saw no indication that the children were being abused before last Saturday night, when one child in her care was killed and the other was seriously injured, city officials said yesterday.
The city would release only sketchy information about its monitoring of the foster mother, Mary Ann Ayala, and the two children in her care, Millicent, 6, who died, and her sister, Stephanie, 4, who is hospitalized.


New Hampshire Becomes a Memory


Bowie's Stab at Defense Stops Pistons
There were 20.3 seconds left in the fourth quarter and the Nets were leading the Pistons, 104-102.
Just about the juncture when experienced and successful teams like Detroit seize the day.
Not tonight, though.


Cable Giant To Sell Chain Of Theaters
Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable operator, agreed to sell its United Artists movie theater chain yesterday for $680 million to a company owned by Merrill Lynch Capital Partners Inc. and the former chief executive of United Artists, Stewart Blair.
The move came a day after Tele-Communications said it was buying 49.9 percent of the Teleport Communications Group, a corporate telephone service that is owned by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company and Cox Enterprises.
No terms were disclosed.


Four Nebraska Victories at Risk . . . and a Running Back Will Stand Trial
The news was not good for another Nebraska running back, too, yesterday when SCOTT BALDWIN was bound over to district court in Lincoln for trial on two assault charges stemming from an attack on a woman last month.
Lancaster County Judge JACK LINDER ordered Baldwin held without bond.
Baldwin's attorney, HAL ANDERSON, said he will seek a bond hearing at Baldwin's next court appearance scheduled for Feb. 26 in Lancaster County District Court.
Baldwin, a junior from Roselle, N.J., is charged with one count of assault in the beating of 23-year-old GINA SIMANEK in an unprovoked attack outside her Lincoln apartment building on Jan. 18.
He also is accused of one count of assault of a police officer.
If convicted, Baldwin could face up to 20 years in prison and a $25,000 fine on the assault charge involving Simanek and up to five years and $10,000 in the assault charge involving Officer GREG SIMMS.
Doctors said Simanek, who sustained brain damage, is recovering at the Madonna Rehabilitation Center in Lincoln. (AP)


200 Rally To Support Housing Aide
Asserting that the news media are waging a racist campaign to discredit the chairwoman of the New York City Housing Authority, about 200 people went to the steps of City Hall yesterday to express their support for the head of the agency, Laura D. Blackburne.
Ms.
Blackburne has come under sharp criticism in the last week, after news reports that she had spent $345,000 in Federal money for office renovations, flew first class on business trips, stayed in expensive hotels and accepted $3,100 from a foundation to pay for her to travel to South Africa with Mayor David N. Dinkins.
On Tuesday, Mr.
Dinkins said that Ms.
Blackburne had exercised poor judgment on the arrangements for the trip.


School Dean Held on Sex Charge
A Queens public school dean has been charged with sexually abusing a 17-year-old female student, who then wore a hidden microphone while he discussed the incident with her, school investigators said yesterday.
The dean, Robert Dipadova, 58 years old, in charge of security at Benjamin N. Cardozo High School in the Bayside section, had asked the girl to work as a baby sitter for his two children during a trip to Atlantic City, said Ed Stancik, Special Commissioner of Investigations for the New York City School District.


Hornets Trade Chapman to the Bullets
He was the franchise's first draft choice and the team's career scoring leader, but yesterday guard REX CHAPMAN was traded by the Charlotte Hornets to the Washington Bullets in exchange for forward TOM HAMMONDS.
Chapman, the former University of Kentucky star chosen as the eighth pick in the 1988 National Basketball Association draft, has missed the last 30 games because of a bruised left heel.
"I'm happy," Chapman said.
"I wasn't too happy with them and I guess they weren't too happy with me. It's been up and down here, but I guess that's to be expected with an expansion team."
Added Coach ALLAN BRISTOW : "With the emergence of KENDALL GILL at the off-guard this season, Rex would not receive as many minutes as he deserves."
Chapman said he hoped to begin playing again by the middle of next month.
Hammonds, the former Georgia Tech standout, was selected ninth over all by the Bullets in the 1989 draft.
In 37 games this season, he has averaged 11.9 points and 5 rebounds. (AP)


Review/Dance; High Energy With Many Surprises
It is not so unusual these days for a young modern-dance choreographer to revel in the kind of high-energy pure physicality that marked the pieces presented by Hilary Easton and Company on Saturday night at the Downtown Art Company.
What makes Ms.
Easton's work so distinctive and so exhilarating is its wit.
Each of the program's four new and recent dances was crammed with surprising incident.
Sometimes the surprise came with a sudden, quick gesture that connoted a specific emotional relationship in a dance that was at least superficially abstract.
Other times, the surprise lay in unexpected phrases and transitions or in the way Ms.
Easton used an expected move at an unexpected time.
Ms.
Easton's gift for subliminal logic was most apparent in her new "Come Hither," a solo for Nancy Sakamoto.
Dressed in a white satin tank suit with a white tulle skirt, Ms.
Sakamoto looked at first like a barefoot ballerina as she moved before a white square of light ingeniously centered on the stage's black back wall to suggest a fashion photographer's setup.


Managed Care Hasn't Lived Up to Its Promises; It's H.M.O. or Nothing
To the Editor:
Alain E. Enthoven and Richard Kronick offer as evidence of public support for their managed competition concept of health care the growth of membership in health maintenance organizations over 10 years and the rapid growth of preferred provider organizations ("Better Care at Lower Cost," Op-Ed, Jan. 25).


Restore Quota for Russian Immigrants
To the Editor:
"Seeking Shelter in U.S. After the Soviet Storm," on the latest influx of Russian immigrants (front page, Jan. 25), perpetuates a commonly held but inaccurate picture of the history of Russian immigration to the United States.
While there was a true wave of immigration -- 206,645 people -- from 1899 to 1915, there have been no waves of ethnic Russian immigrants since the revolution of 1917.
Indeed, Russians are one of the few ethnic groups of any significance who have not come to the United States in sizable numbers.
The last time an appreciable number of ethnic Russians (40,241) set foot in the United States was in 1914.


Skull Fragment Identified as Earliest Human Fossil
Scientists have identified what they think is the earliest known fossil of a member of the Homo line of human ancestors.
They are dating it as 2.4 million years old, and so extending by half a million years the age of the genus that would lead to and include modern humans.
The fossil, a fragment of a skull, has provided the first evidence that human ancestors in East Africa made the crucial transition to the larger brain genus Homo at a time coinciding with the earliest known examples of stone tools.


Noriega Aide Describes Cooperation With C.I.A.
Testifying on videotape from a Panamanian prison, a former aide-de-camp of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega today told of his country's dealings with the Central Intelligence Agency and the Israeli military and recounted General Noriega's quick reaction to an assassination plot against him.
Maj.
Cleto Hernandez, a member of General Noriega's personal staff who was also in charge of counterintelligence in Panama, denied repeatedly that he had ever provided protection for cocaine traffickers on orders from the deposed Panamanian leader, as prosecutors have contended.
But in his most interesting testimony, though tangential to the charges against General Noriega, he painted a picture of a close relationship between Panamanian and American intelligence agencies.
Guest of the C.I.A.
Major Hernandez told the prosecution and defense lawyers who questioned him in Modelo Jail in Panama City that from 1972 through the late 1980's, he and General Noriega had regular "contact with the C.I.A. directly." He said he had also passed on information to a number of American agencies, including the United States Embassy's Military Group and the Immigration and Naturalization Service.


A Quest For Another Gold Ends in Pain for Deborah Compagnoni


Sproling's Heroics Rescue Redmen
How do you explain?
A deteriorating season that left St.
John's desperate for a victory -- just one -- has seen the Redmen win their last five games.
A team once groping for answers finds itself one-half game from first in the Big East.
A shooting stroke once presumed lost -- the one belonging to Chucky Sproling -- rescued St.
John's last night.
Sproling's most memorable shot of an often-frustrating college career, a 15-footer with 11 seconds to play -- and 1 second remaining on the shot clock -- became the difference in a breathless 63-62 victory over Syracuse at Madison Square Garden.


I.R.A. Fugitive Sent to Belfast From U.S. Jail
Joseph Doherty, an Irish Republican Army guerrilla convicted in Northern Ireland in the killing of a British soldier nearly 12 years ago, was deported from the United States to Northern Ireland yesterday, American and British officials said.
Mr.
Doherty, a 37-year-old former longshoreman, was arrested in Manhattan in 1983 and had been held in Federal jails for more than eight years while courts considered whether the slaying was a political act, making him immune from extradition.
He argued that the killing qualified as political because it took place during an I.R.A. ambush of a British Army patrol.
Back to a Familiar Jail
Yesterday, five weeks after the Supreme Court said the Justice Department was within the law when it denied Mr.
Doherty's request for an asylum hearing last year, he was taken from his cell in Lewisburg, Pa.
The police in Belfast told The Associated Press that he had landed at a United States air base in eastern England; had been flown to Belfast by the British Air Force, and had been taken back to the prison from which he escaped in 1981.


Bridge
One of the top events in Australia is called the Champion Cup, for a reason that is not as obvious as might appear: it is named for an expert of yesteryear, Victor Champion.
In the 1991 contest the diagramed deal featured a mystery move by Steve Burgess, who has long been known as one of the world's best players.
In theory a player who makes a pre-emptive opening is not supposed to follow with a penalty double, but West thought his hand represented an exception.
Burgess, as South in four diamonds doubled, showed him the error of his ways.


Robert Levine, 86, Entrepreneur And Longtime Business Lawyer
Robert L. Levine, a longtime business lawyer and entrepreneur, died Tuesday at Brookhaven Memorial Hospital in East Patchogue, L.I.
He was 86 years old and lived in Brooklyn and Palm Beach, Fla.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Washington State Layoffs at Boeing
The Boeing Company said its employment level in Washington state would be reduced by about 6,500 employees this year.
The company said that the reductions would be accomplished through layoffs and attrition, and that a companywide hiring freeze, which took effect in October, would be continued indefinitely.
Boeing, based in Seattle, has 104,000 employee in Washington and 156,000 worldwide.


Study Says Korean Airliner Was on Its Intended Course When Downed in '83
A retired airline navigator has gathered evidence that in his view shows that the South Korean airliner shot down over Russia in 1983 was on a deliberate flight path and did not stray accidentally into Soviet territory.
A principal part of his analysis is his refutation of what has been the prevailing theory, that the plane unintentionally flew off course because of a single-digit mistake in keying flight coordinates into the navigation system.


'Big Daddy' and His 23 Kids
The United States hockey team did not bang a single body today.
Instead, while the players and coaching staff waited for the Unified Team to torment Finland at the Olympic ice rink, the Americans took a unified walk through the snow-capped Alps.
They inhaled the breeze and were one with the mountain.
The touchy-feely guide was Coach Dave Peterson, Big Daddy himself.


Review/Theater: Crazy for You; A Fresh Chorus of Gershwin on Broadway
When future historians try to find the exact moment at which Broadway finally rose up to grab the musical back from the British, they just may conclude that the revolution began last night.
The shot was fired at the Shubert Theater, where a riotously entertaining show called "Crazy for You" uncorked the American musical's classic blend of music, laughter, dancing, sentiment and showmanship with a freshness and confidence rarely seen during the "Cats" decade.
Arriving within days of the enchanting production of "The Most Happy Fella," its next-door neighbor in Shubert Alley, and a few weeks before three other eagerly anticipated American musicals promised for this season ("Guys and Dolls," "Jelly's Last Jam" and "Falsettos"), "Crazy for You" could not be a more celebratory expression of a long-awaited shift in Broadway's fortunes.
And what more appropriate house could it play in than the Shubert, a theater too cozy to contain London's musical spectaculars, a theater that has been the sad symbol of the hole in Broadway's heart since "A Chorus Line" closed there two years ago?


Corrections
A chart in some copies yesterday giving results of a poll of Democratic primary voters in New Hampshire misstated the response to one question.
Among those who said they voted for Gov.
Bill Clinton, 58 percent said that the economy and jobs were among the issues that mattered most in determining their vote.


Knee Ligament Injuries: Skiing's Great Leveler
Over the last 20 years, skiing has become a relatively safe sport.
Safer, that is, than it used to be when the image of a skier sitting before a roaring fire wearing a reindeer sweater and a large leg cast was the stuff of cartoons and television shows about the sport.
For seven years, Dr.
Robert Johnson, an orthopedist at the University of Vermont Medical School and a skier, and other medical personnel have been studying injuries suffered by skiers at a New England ski area. (Johnson has protected the area's anonymity so that superstitious skiers won't begin to associate the mountain with injury.)


Review/Dance; Exploring the Somewhat Unknown
"Face the Music" is a three-year-old program that was founded by the impresario Jedediah Wheeler to give audiences and performers a chance to delve together into the music and dance of the late 20th century, through concerts followed by open-ended conversations.
It was in that free-wheeling setting that Donald Byrd presented his new "Duet/Drastic Cuts" on Tuesday at Symphony Space.
One of Mr.
Byrd's most rigorously simple dances, it is also one of his best.
The duet is performed to music by Mio Morales, Mr.
Byrd's frequent collaborator, who dependably provides the choreographer with scores with a steady beat and subtle, steadily building urgency.
The piece starts with the dancers walking side by side to the rear of the stage and then to the front again.
Nothing much more complicated happens.
There are some flying catches, and the woman hangs suspended from the man's raised arms.
Their bodies wrap around each other and cling from time to time.
A few balleticisms -- foot beats and some arabesques -- work their way up through the dance's surface.


Government Housing Plan Aims to End Tenants' Dependence on Public Aid
The Government is embarking on a quiet attempt to transform its subsidized housing programs by requiring some tenants to go to school, get jobs, or take other steps to free themselves of Government aid.
The number of tenants affected will be small at first but is scheduled to grow, and supporters of the plan say it will help restore public housing to its original purpose of serving as a way station for the upwardly mobile.


Review/Dance; Feld's Meditation on 'L'Apres-Midi d'un Faune'
Choreographers like young dancers because they are malleable.
But the dancer who is molded into something special frequently returns the compliment by inspiring a choreographer's best work.
The entente was perfect on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater between Eliot Feld and Darren Gibson, who functions, in effect, as Mr.
Feld's male muse.
In "Evoe," the Feld premiere that opened the five-week season of the Feld Ballets/NY, Mr.
Gibson pours out another extraordinary performance, so expressive that it appears to come from the gut despite being kept within the confines of strict form.


A Park Is Born


Japanese Slain In Boston Hotel, Adding to Fears
The president of a Japanese university, here to sign an exchange agreement with the University of Massachusetts in Boston, was shot and killed in his hotel room on Tuesday evening, an act likely to feed stereotypes in Japan about the prevalence of crime in America.
Iwao Matsuda, the 72-year-old president of Chukyo University in Nagoya, was shot in the back after a man with a bandana over his face forced his way into the visitor's 16th-floor room in the elegant Westin Hotel, the police said.


Brooklyn Man Arrested in Rape Of Pratt Student
A 24-year-old Brooklyn man who had been paroled after a previous robbery conviction was charged yesterday afternoon with the rape and robbery of a student in a classroom at the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, the police said.
The student was walking down a hallway in the South Hall building last Thursday evening when a man forced her into a classroom.
He raped her, took a small amount of cash from her, then tied her with her scarf to a radiator and fled, police and school officials said.


Toll-Free Line Helps With the Homework Blues
Here's the problem: A farmer has 15 animals, cows and chickens, that have a total of 36 legs.
How many cows and how many chickens does the farmer have?
From the fifth-grade students who are slightly confused by that homework question to the totally befuddled parents who find it beyond the limits of their math and husbandry skills, help is but a toll-free call away in Mercer County.


Sale at Occidential
The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said it planned to sell up to half its stake in its Canadian petroleum unit to help pay debt.
Occidental, based in Los Angeles, said it would offer to the public in Canada up to 16 million shares of Canadian Occidental Petroleum Ltd, at $25.75 (Canadian), or $21.90, a share, for a total of $412 million (Canadian), or $350 million.
The sale will complete a two-year program, totaling $3.53 billion (Canadian), or $3 billion, to reduce debt.
The sale of all the shares will leave Occidental with a 24 percent interest in the Canadian unit, from its current 48 percent stake.
Canadian underwriters have agreed to by 12 million shares, with an option on 4 million more.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
5.00
7.11
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.83
3.83
5.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.95
3.93
5.93
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.99
7.06
7.72
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.90
7.97
8.03
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.95
9.05
9.20
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.80
6.79
7.30
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Gartner Banned for 3 Games
Mike Gartner, who leads the Rangers in goals with 32, was suspended yesterday for three games as a penalty for slashing Ulf Samuelsson of Pittsburgh in a game on Feb. 5.
Along with the injured Mike Richter, Tim Kerr, Joe Kocur and Mark Hardy, Gartner will miss tonight's game with the Islanders at Nassau Coliseum.
Although they won't appeal the decision by Brian O'Neill, the N.H.L. executive vice president, Gartner and General Manager Neil Smith said the punishment was too harsh.
Gartner had never been suspended before in his 13 years in the league.


Little of $100 Billion Loss Can Be Retrieved
During the 1980's, the savings and loan industry was a playpen for white-collar criminals.
Losses from the debacle are estimated at roughly $100 billion, and while reckless lending in an overheated real estate market accounted for much of that, fraud by savings and loan officers and directors added billions of dollars to the bill for taxpayers.
In fact, fraud contributed to the collapse of 35 percent of the more than 650 savings institutions under control of the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency created to clean up the industry's mess.


INSIDE
U.N. Presses Iraq on Arms
The United Nations Security Council sent an envoy to Baghdad to seek new assurances that Iraq will cooperate in the destruction of arms.
Page A3.
New Look at '83 Jet Downing
A navigator has undercut a theory that simple error led a South Korean airliner to stray over Russia before it was shot down in 1983.
Page A12.
Hospital Pact Is Reached
A Manhattan hospital reached an agreement with its union that guarantees all 4,000 employees their jobs and free medical benefits.
Page B1.
Hollywood's February Rite
"Bugsy's" 10 nominations lead an Oscar pack that includes an animated feature in the best-picture category and a 24-year-old director.
Page C15.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about a bankruptcy reorganization plan filed by the LTV Corporation misidentified the company that plans to participate with LTV in a joint steelmaking venture.
It is Sumitomo Metal Industries Ltd.


'Bugsy' a Big Winner In Oscar Nominations Rife With Surprise
By 6 o'clock this morning, the studio and public relations executives were standing on darkened, silent Wilshire Boulevard, shouting into cellular phones the only news that mattered in Hollywood today: " 'Bugsy' got 10!" " 'Beauty's' in!" "Barbra didn't get one!" "Jodie and Bette were nominated!"
The 64th annual Oscar nominations, announced before dawn by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to catch the morning television news shows on the East Coast and in the Midwest, provided a number of surprises, including a windfall of nominations for "Bugsy," the omission of Barbra Streisand from the roster of nominated directors and the nomination of "Beauty and the Beast" as the first animated feature ever put up for best picture of the year.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Jack Owens
Blues singer The Triplex
When Jack Owens sings a blues about the devil, he sounds like an eyewitness.
His melodic phrases take sudden swerves toward ancient, untempered notes; his voice is a high, eerie keening, with a quaver that appears at emotional peaks.
Plucking steady, subtly polyrhythmic guitar parts, his expression soberly deadpan, he has the voice of someone who has been changed forever by harrowing events.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 14
Feb. 7
Feb. 15
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
6.7
6.6
Distillate production, daily
2.7
2.7
2.8
Gasoline stocks
231.2
228.3
229.2
Distillate stocks
116.6
122.5
105.8
Crude imports, daily
5.9
4.8
6.2
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.5
1.4
Crude stocks
332.8
334.9
335.0
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
78.9
81.6
84.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Let's Wait For a Winner
Like the Oracle of Delphi, New Hampshire's voters have spoken to us in riddles.
President Bush has been savaged by a challenger who can't win.
Paul Tsongas is a winner with few places to go.
Gov.
Bill Clinton has bounced back because Senator Bob Kerrey, an authentic war hero, can't seem to take advantage of the renewed debate over Vietnam.
The conventional wisdom among Democratic leaders is that we should unite quickly behind a nominee.
The sages in Washington would like to scrub these hapless newcomers and bring in a brand name like Gov.
Mario Cuomo or Senator Lloyd Bentsen.
Unhappily for them, one of the few clear messages from New Hampshire, in the form of a paltry 3 percent for the New York Governor, is that voters aren't looking for candidates who sat on the sidelines when the President looked invincible.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Write-In; Cuomo Aides Dissect the Campaign That Wasn't
Even non-candidates, it seems, need spin control from time to time.
So it was that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his aides tried to put the best face today on his 4 percent showing in the New Hampshire primary.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Victor; TSONGAS MAKES BID TO WIDEN SUPPORT
Paul E. Tsongas, the Democratic winner of the New Hampshire primary, began an intense search yesterday for the money and votes he needs to take his campaign beyond New England.
The former Senator from Massachusetts had a private fund-raising event and rally in Baltimore, then three fund-raising events with the Greek-Americans yesterday evening in Astoria and Brooklyn.


Lessons From New Hampshire
The retail phase of the Presidential campaign just ended abruptly.
After an unusually short pre-season run, the candidates now shift from personal politicking into industrial mode.
In the next three weeks, two dozen states will conduct primaries or caucuses; the candidates will need to magnify their messages with media and mailings.
New Hampshire can provide some momentum; Gary Hart's 1984 victory there probably catapulted him to his success soon after in Florida.
What New Hampshire surely provides is lessons for the spring campaign:


U.N. Warns Iraq and Sends an Envoy
Warning Iraq that it faces "serious consequences" unless it abandons its weapons of mass destruction, the United Nations Security Council sent a senior envoy to Baghdad today to seek fresh assurances that President Saddam Hussein will cooperate with its plans for eliminating Iraq's nuclear, chemical and biological arms and ballistic missiles.
The Council envoy will be Rolf Ekeus, head of the special commission set up to oversee the destruction of Iraq's most dangerous weapons.
He told the Council today that he is unwilling to continue with this task unless Baghdad reverses its policy and gives him full details of its ability to produce the banned weapons.
Iraqis May Come to U.N.
Mr.
Ekeus, a Swede, will be accompanied by two teams of United Nations inspectors.
One team plans to blow up more than 300 corroded Iraqi chemical rockets considered too dangerous to move to an incinerator.
The other team will ask Iraqi engineers to start destroying industrial equipment used in the Scud missile program.


Wells Chooses Bank Regulator
Michael Patriarca, western regional director of the Office of Thrift supervision and the person who called early attention to the problems at the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, will join Wells Fargo &amp; Company next month as an executive vice president.
Wells said that Mr.
Patriarca would also hold the newly created position of "risk control officer," putting him in charge of the internal credit evaluations and relations with regulatory agencies.


Lawmakers Share Views On Mariners
The Congressional delegation from the State of Washington, including Speaker of the House Thomas Foley, met with Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, today to discuss ways to save the troubled Mariners' franchise for Seattle.
And though Vincent emphasized that baseball's process will not allow for simple or quick decisions on the fate of the Mariners or on the $100 million offer by Nintendo of Japan to buy the team, both sides said the meeting had been enlightening.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
MESSINESS, like beauty, is often in the eye of the beholder.
Parents marvel at how their children can deftly navigate around the piles of clothes and toys that decorate their rooms like an ever-changing sculpture gallery, yet never seem concerned by the apparent disorder.
For many children, messiness is simply a way to assert their individuality.
For others, it is a matter of convenience.
The damp towel left on the bathroom floor shows their faith that someone else -- usually a parent -- will pick it up.
Although adults may find their children's slovenliness frustrating, and worry about how it reflects on them as parents, child-development experts agree that it's seldom a cause for real concern.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Supporters Try to Figure Out How Their Campaign Went Wrong
Last week, President Bush's strategists here made a television commercial featuring a retired state police major, who recalled that when Mr.
Bush was making the decision to send American troops to the Persian Gulf, "Pat Buchanan stood with Teddy Kennedy, Alan Cranston and the liberal Democrats, and said our boys couldn't fight."
Arguing first that negative advertising was un-Presidential, then that the ad was too late, the White House refused to put it on the air,


Ouster of Principal Is Reported
The principal of a Queens high school for students with learning disabilities has been removed in an investigation of financial irregularities, school officials said yesterday.
The Queens principal, Dennis Durkin, 39 years old, who is principal of the High School for Career Development at 142-10 Linden Boulevard, was transferred to Board of Education headquarters three weeks ago as the investigation was proceeding, said James S. Vlasto, a spokesman for the Board of Education.


Repairs Soar in New Jersey's Baby-Boom Schools
When Abraham Lincoln was on his way to Washington to be inaugurated as President in 1861, he stopped off at Burnett School in Newark to give a speech on the schoolhouse lawn.
Lincoln has been dead for six score and seven years, but Burnett is still in use -- one of nine schools in the state, six of them in Newark, that are still in service after 120 years.


Stocks Gain in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices rose today as traders saw some signs that interest rates may drop.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues gained 153.62 points, or three-quarters of a percent, to close at 20,771.92.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei lost 253.73 points.


California Fund In Housing Bid
The California Public Employees Retirement System voted Tuesday to increase the financing for a new program to spur construction of single-family homes in California.
The retirement system said it would increase by $150 million, to $375 million, its investment in partnerships set up to give a boost to the state's recession-battered construction business.
The system, known as Calpers, voted last month to invest $225 million in the program, the first time a public pension fund has invested directly in the large-scale building of single-family houses.


Skating Judges Receive Typical Marks
Two of the first three figure-skating competitions of the Olympics, the men's singles and the dance, have produced minor flaps over nationalistic judging.
A Canadian judge appeared to score the performance of Kurt Browning of Canada too high, and a French judge helped Isabelle and Paul Duchesnay in the dance by scoring the eventual winners, Marina Klimova and Sergei Ponomarenko of the Unified Team, too low.
It would seem that the Olympics, the most visible of international competitions, might be the last place a judge would exercise selfish tendencies.
But the judging here, according to the chairman of the International Skating Union technical committee, is no worse than it ever is.


For Nannies, a Suite of One's Own Works Best
WITH its white clapboard siding and black shutters, their Cape Cod-style house on a small suburban plot in Fairfield, Conn., evokes the houses William J. Levitt squeezed by the thousands into the potato fields on Long Island after World War II.
Robert and Taylor Veidenheimer bought the three-bedroom, one-bathroom "starter" house three years ago.
When it was built, in 1938, it was considered ideal for raising a family, but the Veidenheimers soon found themselves with a need that the planners of that era did not anticipate in so modest a house, a private room for a live-in nanny.


A New World Order Or Another Cold War?
Do you believe in instant replay? Twelve years later?
Today, the Unified Team that remains part of an American sports memory set the stage for an eerie hockey showdown with the United States on Friday.
Dressed in the red that remains part of their political heritage, and with that combination of startling passing, quick-strike attacks and the ability to fall back immediately, the former Soviet squad trounced Finland, 6-1.


3 Hospitals Are Weighed As Affiliate
Mount Sinai Medical Center is one of three hospitals under consideration for a $40 million contract to provide doctors and medical care to Queens Hospital Center, city hospital officials said yesterday.
The quest for a private hospital affiliation began in November, when the Long Island Jewish Medical Center announced it was ending its 26-year contract with the Queens Hospital Center.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Journal; Setback for the Media Manipulators
The most overused slogan in the Presidential campaign here probably was "take back." Orators differed on what precisely needed to be taken back -- the election, the system, the Government, the country -- but they agreed on what had taken it away: money and media.
Politics was being corrupted by slick television images, quick sound bites, sleazy attacks and generally superficial media manipulation.
Well, the votes are in here, and it's not looking good for the media manipulators.
The Democratic primary was won by a homely candidate with a small advertising budget who was initially written off by the press and did not run any negative or even very interesting commercials.
The candidate with the most dramatic spot advertising -- and the meanest attack advertisements -- finished fourth, just two percentage points ahead of a candidate who barely did any spot advertising at all.


Lands' End Official Is Named President
William T. End was promoted yesterday to president and chief operating officer of Lands' End Inc., the direct-mail clothing and merchandise company.
Mr.
End, who joined the company last year as executive vice president of marketing and planning, succeeds Richard C. Anderson, who will continue as vice chairman and chief executive.
In addition, David F. Dyer was named vice chairman for merchandising.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  RABIN LEADS IN ISRAELI VOTE
Yitzhak Rabin was leading Shimon Peres in a vote to decide who will lead Israel's opposition Labor Party in national elections scheduled for June.
But if there is a runoff, some commentators say, many of the votes that went to other candidates could fall Mr.
Peres's way.
A1
Israeli forces and Lebanese guerrillas traded artillery fire.  A8  U.S. DEPORTS DOHERTY
Joseph Doherty, an I.R.A. guerrilla convicted in the 1980 killing of a British soldier, was deported from the United States to Northern Ireland.
Arrested in Manhattan in 1983, Mr.
Doherty was jailed in the United States for more than eight years while courts considered whether the slaying was a political act.
A1
The police have a hard time calming the public in Northern Ireland.
A5  U.N.
WARNS IRAQ ABOUT WEAPONS
The United Nations Security Council sent a senior envoy to Baghdad to seek assurances that President Hussein will cooperate with plans for eliminating Iraq's nuclear, chemical and biological arms and ballistic missiles.
A3  RIGHTIST VICTORY IN SOUTH AFRICA
South Africa's governing party suffered a setback as a coveted parliamentary seat in the Transvaal fell to the rightist Conservative Party.
A3  FEAR SHADOWS VOTE IN PUNJAB
After repeated delays, India held local elections in Punjab State, which has been battered by violence by separatists and the police.
But death threats seemed to keep the majority of voters away.
A9  CHARMS OF BAKU AND DUSHANABE
Aides to Secretary of State Baker were relieved to return to the comforts of a Moscow hotel after a grueling swing through the Caucasus and Central Asian republics.
But the tour offered a broad look at life in the former Soviet empire.
A10  PRAVDA CAN BE HARD TO FIND
Soaring printing costs are forcing news publications, including some that helped bring down the Soviet dictatorship, to curtail operations in Moscow.
The very same papers have championed the market reforms that are driving up prices.
A10  PERPLEXING PATH OF KOREAN JET
A navigator has gathered evidence that in his view shows that the South Korean airliner shot down over Russia in 1983 was on a deliberate flight path and did not stray accidentally into Soviet territory.
A12
A suicide in Germany prompts warnings about spy revelations.  A10
Stockholm Journal: Still no solution to the slaying of Olof Palme.
A4  National A14-22  BUSH PONDERS NEXT STEP
Stung by a modest victory in New Hampshire, President Bush and his advisers considered their next moves against Patrick Buchanan in order to avoid a similarly tainted victory in the South.
A1
Bush advisers acknowledge mistakes in New Hampshire.  A20  DEMOCRATS MOVE SOUTH
With New Hampshire voters having turned Paul Tsongas into a credible national candidate and bolstered Bill Clinton's once-flagging campaign, the candidates moved to the South and West.
A21
Aides to Governor Cuomo tried to explain his poor showing.  A20
Former Senator Tsongas seeks money and votes in Maryland.  A21
Gov. Miller of Georgia lambastes the Democratic front-runner.A21
When the votes were tallied, users of slick ads lost out.  A22
A.F.L.-C.I.O. leaders withheld endorsement of a candidate.
A22  OPTIMISM ON THE ECONOMY
Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, said he was "somewhat more optimistic" about the economy than a few weeks ago, but he cautioned that the signs of a recovery could still peter out.
A1  SENATE PASSES ENERGY BILL
After jettisoning a plan to drill for oil in the Arctic wildlife region, the Senate overwhelmingly passed an energy bill intended to encourage the development of alternative-fuel vehicles and ease Federal regulations on nuclear generators and other forms of electrical power.
A1  A NEW SAM SPADE
In Ed Pankau's world, there are good guys and bad guys.
Mr.
Pankau is a good guy, one of a new breed of financial sleuths who track down the assets hidden by white-collar crooks.
And his is a booming field.
A1  RULING ON WOMEN'S RIGHTS
In a decision written by Justice Clarence Thomas, a divided Federal appeals panel ruled that the Government may not give preferential treatment to women in awarding broadcast licenses.
A1  REVISING THE HISTORY OF MAN
A skull fragment recently tested by scientists was identified as the earliest known fossil of a member of the Homo line of human ancestors, dating it as 2.4 million years old.
A14  JAPANESE SCHOLAR SLAIN
The president of a Japanese university was shot to death in his Boston hotel room, an act likely to feed Japanese stereotypes about crime in the United States.
A14  PANAMA AND THE C.I.A.
In videotaped testimony at General Noriega's trial, a former Noriega aided offered a revealing look at the close relationship between Panamanian and American intelligence agencies.
A14  NEW EFFORT ON HOUSING
The Government is embarking on an attempt to transform its subsidized housing programs by requiring some tenants to go to school, get jobs or take other steps to free themselves of Federal aid.A16  FEARS ABOUT THE N.A.A.C.P.
The recent upheaval in the leadership of the N.A.A.C.P. has many civil rights advocates worried about the organization's future.
A17  MORE TESTS FOR IMPLANTS
On the eve of the Food and Drug Administration's vote on whether to allow use of silicone gel breast implants, the nation's leading manufacturer of the implants said it would carry out 15 more safety tests on the devices.
A18  WASTE RULES ARE REINSTATED
Resolving a dispute with the White House, the Environmental Protection Agency reissued two of the rules that form the core of the nation's program of safely disposing of hazardous wastes.
A18
What's an environmental hazard?
Detroit's Mayor offers his answer.
A18  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-12  Q. &amp; A. for building contractors.
C1  Child care in a school vacation.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C13-26  "Bugsy" a big winner on the Oscar nominations list.
C15  Theater: "Crazy for You." C15  Obituaries A23  Sports B7-18  Olympics: Yamaguchi glides to top of pack.
B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  New Hampshire lessons.
Unchanging Israel.
Homeless shelter addiction.
Letters A24  William Safire: The 1996 campaign.
A25  Anthony Lewis: A devalued asset.
A25  Bruce Babbitt: Let's wait for a winner.
A25  Edwin Meese 3d: How Bush can save himself.
A25


Another Blow for Marvel
The Marvel Entertainment Group, whose stock fell $11.375 Tuesday after a critical article appeared in Barron's, suffered another blow yesterday.
Eight artists and writers, including the producers of Spider-Man and X-Men, announced that they were leaving Marvel Comics, the nation's largest comic book publisher, to form a new comics publishing group.
The new imprint, Image Comics, will be a part of the Malibu Graphics Publishing Group, which in 1991 was the fourth-largest publisher of comic books in the country.


Gen. James H. Polk, 80, Is Dead; Led U.S. Army in Europe in 60's
Gen.
James H. Polk, a commander of the United States Army in Europe during the cold war, died Tuesday at the William Beaumont Army Medical Center in El Paso.
He was 80 years old and lived in El Paso.
He had been suffering from cancer and pneumonia, said a relative, Shirley Leavell.


Yields on Money Funds Are Down Slightly
The yields on both tax-exempt and taxable funds moved down a bit for the week ended Tuesday, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
"Once more the yields on the tax-exempts declined," said Walter Frank, economist for Donoghue's.
"And what we see is that the flow of money into the funds has dried up a little because of lower yields in the latest weekly period." As for the taxable yields, he said that large amounts of institutional money had moved out of the taxables to seek better yields elsewhere: for instance, in commercial paper or Eurodollar deposits.


RABIN PULLS AHEAD IN VOTING TO LEAD ISRAELI OPPOSITION
In a vote that may affect the shape of Israel's next Government and the course of Middle East peace talks, Yitzhak Rabin outpolled Shimon Peres early today for the leadership of the opposition Labor Party in national elections early this summer.
In a four-candidate party primary, the first ever conducted in Israel, Mr.
Rabin barely scraped together the 40 percent share of the vote that he needed to avoid a runoff against Mr.
Peres, the incumbent leader and his political rival for nearly two decades.


Changing World, Unchanging Israel
There's ample reason for gloom as Arabs and Israelis gird for another round of direct talks in Washington next week.
Both sides have reverted to violence, and Israel, which could be exploiting unparalleled opportunities for peace, seems lost in the reflexive vengeance of the past.
Israel's "security zone" in southern Lebanon now reverberates with rocket fire following Israel's helicopter assassination of a Lebanese Shiite militant, Sheik Abbas Musawi.
Israel presumably struck at the sheik to avenge the murder of Israeli soldiers sleeping in their own camp and the shelling of Israeli settlements from southern Lebanon.


Biggest Yet: Sierra Wins $5 Million
Both at the start of their salary arbitration hearing with Ruben Sierra on Tuesday and at the end, representatives of the Texas Rangers tried to impress upon the arbitrator that this was a case of enormous magnitude.
If he selected Sierra's figure, they emphasized, the arbitrator would penetrate a new stratosphere in the esoteric but costly realm of arbitration.
William Rentfro, the arbitrator, apparently was not intimidated by the possibility.
He made his decision yesterday and awarded Sierra a $5 million salary, giving the switch-hitting outfielder the arbitration hearing record only 30 hours after David Cone of the Mets had gained a record $4.25 million.


How Bush Can Save Himself
The New Hampshire results are the wake-up call the Bush Administration needs.
The President's political survival now demands that he return to the conservative principles on which he campaigned in 1988.
The message could not have been clearer: Washington caused the recession, and voters expect leadership that will undo the damage and put people back to work.
The President must first announce a detailed economic game plan.
Then he must persuade voters he intends to stick to it.


Managed Care Hasn't Lived Up to Its Promises
To the Editor:


Events: Gardening Guidance
Greenhouse and Garden
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard
, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.
There will be an exhibition of orchids and ferns at the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory at the garden through March 1.
Free guided talks will be given on Saturday and Sunday: at 1, 2 and 3 P.M. on ferns, and at 1:30 and 2:30 P.M. on orchids.
Also, designers of the garden benches on display will speak about their work at 3 P.M. on Saturday and from 1:30 to 3:30 P.M. on Sunday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Runner-Up; Clinton Travels to South To Shore Up Foundation
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas took his campaign South today, relieved at having escaped New Hampshire intact and anxious to restore the underpinnings of a campaign strategy that relied heavily on maintaining the support he has built in his home region.
Once he arrived in Atlanta, he handed over the reins of political attack to a fellow governor, Zell Miller of Georgia, who told a cheering crowd that now that Mr.
Clinton had survived New Hampshire, "maybe they'll stop treating him like the only fire hydrant at a dog show."


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Ill., a manufacturer of health-care products, named Robert N. Beck senior vice president, human resources.
He succeeds Duane L. Burnham, who retired. *
Atlantic Records, New York, a unit of Time Warner, named Danny Goldberg senior vice president.
He had been a founder and president of Gold Mountain Entertainment.


Reporter's Notebook; By Trip's End, Moscow Looks Good
It began as a low whisper among aides to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.
But as the plane taking them to Moscow at the close of Mr.
Baker's grueling tour of former Soviet republics took off, the whispers grew into a vigorous chant: "Penta, Penta, Penta, Penta."
The Penta is the deluxe German-run hotel in Moscow where Mr.
Baker always stays.
After a week of sleeping often two or three to a room in seedy, run-down former Communist Party guest houses in the wilds of Ashkhabad and Dushanbe, Mr.
Baker's aides were desperate for the down comforters, hot water and efficiency of the Penta.
It was the first time any of them could recall longing to get to Moscow.


Prudential Securities Sued by Ex-Worker
A former top executive at Prudential Securities Inc. has contended in a lawsuit that the firm coerced executives to contribute up to 5 percent of their salaries to state and local political campaigns.
The charges are also being investigated by the United States Attorney in St.
Louis and are the subject of an arbitration hearing by the National Association of Securities Dealers.
In a lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Philadelphia, Mark D. Schwartz, a former first vice president and regional manager of Prudential's Philadelphia office, said he had been dismissed for complaining about the forced contributions.
He also contended that top Prudential executives had threatened employees with dismissals or the withholding of raises and bonuses if they failed to make contributions to candidates of the firm's choice.


Magic to Go Behind the Mike
First, Magic Johnson was an extra analyst for NBC on a Chicago Bulls-Los Angeles Lakers game on Feb. 2.
Then he dazzled the world when he scored 25 points in the National Basketball Association All-Star Game a week later.
On NBC.
And last week, the emotional retirement of Johnson's number 32 was the halftime attraction during the Lakers-Boston Celtics game.
On NBC.


At Gotti Trial, Daughter Tells Of Day Her Father Disappeared
In a hushed courtroom, a 23-year-old woman testified in the John Gotti trial yesterday about the day her father suddenly disappeared in 1988, never to be heard from again.
The woman was Deena Milito, testifying as a prosecution witness in Mr.
Gotti's murder-racketeering trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
Her father was Liborio Milito, one of several men whose murders Mr.
Gotti is charged with authorizing.


Fire Guts Floyd's Home in Florida
An early-morning fire heavily damaged the Florida home of RAYMOND FLOYD, leaving the two-story house near Miami in virtual ruins after Floyd's wife and 12-year-old daughter made it safely outside.
Floyd, who was in San Diego for the Buick Invitational that begins today, immediately flew to Miami, according to his daughter, CHRISTINA, who said she was awakened by her mother and taken outside just before the roof caved in.
There was no immediate word on a possible cause of the fire.
The house, which had an assessed value of $1.7 million, was one of 38 houses, some costing more than $4 million, in the private golf-course community of Indian Creek Village on the Intracoastal Waterway. (AP)


TKTS to Begin Experiment With 2-Tier Price Discounts
For three months beginning Monday, tickets to Broadway and Off Broadway shows will be available at discounts of either 25 or 50 percent at the three TKTS booths in New York City, the Theater Development Fund announced this week.
Until now, tickets to performances not sold out on any given day have been offered for half-price plus a $2 service charge.
The service charge will remain the same under the new arrangement.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
HOME carpentry projects often suffer or are needlessly difficult because of poor-quality lumber and confusion about how lumber is sold.
The following guidelines and tips may help.
Lumberyards usually carry only standard sizes used for house construction.
Lumber from evergreen trees, like pine, is termed softwood, and lumber from deciduous trees, like oak, hardwood.


People
*
Tunis Denise, a senior vice president and management supervisor at McCaffrey &amp; McCall, New York, has been promoted to executive vice president.
Also, Alan Herzog has been promoted to executive vice president and group creative director, from senior vice president and creative director. *
Lynne Wallace and John Kroening, management supervisors at Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Chicago, have been promoted to senior vice presidents from vice presidents.


For Tenants, a Fire's Toll in Loss and Heartbreak
GARY MUSCARNERA was talking to his mother on the phone when he heard sounds "like glass breaking." When he opened his apartment door, he saw smoke rolling around the corner in the hallway.
It was Feb. 6, about 5:30 P.M., the start of a fire that would cause $1.5 million in damage to the Flower Hill Apartments on Middle Neck Road here, hundreds of thousands more to personal property, and incalculable heartbreak.


Four Nebraska Victories at Risk. . .
A single preseason junior-college scrimmage more than five years ago may have cost Nebraska four of its nine 1991 victories and its share of the Big Eight championship.
That was the word from Nebraska yesterday after the university concluded an internal investigation into the eligibility of Cornhusker fullback OMAR SOTO, a Miamian who was dropped from the team as a precaution a day before the Cornhuskers lost to Miami in the Orange Bowl.
That move came after The Palm Beach Post suggested Soto had used up his four years of collegiate eligibility the previous season.
University officials declined to discuss the findings, but The Post said it had learned that investigators had determined that Soto had in fact used up one of his four years of eligibility long before going to Nebraska as a junior-college transfer.
Although Nebraska is expected to forfeit the four games it won with Soto in the lineup last year, including two against Big Eight opponents, the decision will be up to the Big Eight.
If the forfeits are ordered, Nebraska's record would go from 9-1-1 to 5-5-1 and Colorado, which shared the conference title with Nebraska, will be the sole champion.
Soto, who missed much of the season with a broken leg, played in only four games. (AP)


Miscellany
*
Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc., New York, has changed the name of its direct marketing subsidiary to Chiat/Day Direct Marketing Inc. from Perkins/ Butler. *
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Co.
P.L.C., London, has agreed to pay $5.1 million for the 50.1 percent of Campaign Palace that it did not already own.
Campaign Palace is an ad agency in Sydney, Australia.


Why Can't Dish Towels Entertain?
TO Ken Brown, a designer and illustrator, coffee is the "lifeblood of America." So he put that image on that most vital of kitchen items, the dish towel.
The effluvia overtaking his loft in the TriBeCa section of Manhattan is on his cotton towels in four designs.
One has lava lamps and toasters.


Quotation of the Day
"The longer the case has gone on, the more fog that has grown up around it." -- HANS OLVEBRO, the head of the Swedish police team investigating the 1986 assassination of Prime Minister Olaf Palme.  [ A4:4. ]


Prices of Treasury Issues Climb
Prices of Treasury securities rose and interest rates moved lower yesterday on signs that inflationary pressures remain modest.
Traders sold securities early in the session after the Government reported that housing starts rose by a brisk 5.5 percent last month.
Credit-market analysts tended to play down the significance of the increase, which was primarily attributed to a big jump in starts of multifamily dwellings.


BRITISH TRY TO END THE FEAR IN ULSTER
Leaders of the police and British Army are finding it increasingly difficult to persuade a frightened public that violence is not spiraling out of control.
They seized upon a British Army victory on Sunday night over an Irish Republican Army unit as proof that the security forces still have the upper hand.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about leadership changes at the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People misstated the action taken against Hazel N. Dukes at a board meeting on Saturday.
She was voted out as national president; she was not voted out of the organization.


Albertville
YAMAGUCHI LEADS
Kristi Yamaguchi and her American teammate Nancy Kerrigan skated flawless original programs and hold the top two places in figure skating.
Midori Ito of Japan is fourth after a fall on a triple jump.
STERLING SILVER
Capping a skiing career of hills and valleys, Diann Roffe of Potsdam, N.Y., conquered a mountain and finished second to Pernilla Wiberg of Sweden in the giant slalom.
CALL IT DESTINY
The Americans and the Russians will meet, as they did at Lake Placid in 1980, in the hockey semifinals on Friday.
SportsThursday, page B7.


A New Breed of Sam Spade Trails Crooks' Hidden Assets
Ed Pankau is a private investigator who seems to have walked off the pages of a pulp novel.
A former Green Beret and the son of a bootlegger, the 46-year-old private eye has had his share of cases involving murder, mayhem and colorful characters.
A green Bugatti sports car adorns his suburban driveway.
He won it years ago in a jailhouse poker game from a client, a wealthy rancher accused of manslaughter.
In Mr.
Pankau's world there are good guys and bad guys.
Mr.
Pankau is a good guy; he invariably describes his quarry as "sleaze balls" or "dirt bags" or both.


Mets Have Put the Ball in Cone's Hand
The sun, perhaps appropriately, disappeared briefly as Dwight Gooden hurtled calculatedly through his first delivery of the morning.
For the Mets, it can't help but be an ominous moment whenever Gooden takes the mound, and it likely will be so for the foreseeable future.
In his fourth appearance on the mound since he underwent shoulder surgery last September, Gooden worked 10 carefully calibrated and essentially uneventful minutes this morning.
He unloaded strikes to Mackey Sasser and consulted regularly with his trainer and pitching coach.
He then walked quickly to the clubhouse, cameras clicking wildly and television cables snaking after him.


You'll Get A Clipping, But Oh, the Ambiance!
GETTING a shampoo and cut (about $50) at the Architects and Heroes Fillmore Annex, a San Francisco salon, not only involves staring at yourself in tilted mirrors but admiring wrinkled butcher-paper wallpaper and contemplating computer-generated art and naked electrical outlets.
The salon, designed by the Kobeou concern with the assistance of Suiki Lor, the owner, was honored in International Design Magazine's 1991 annual review.


Stocks Are Mixed, With the Dow Up 5.59
Stocks closed mixed yesterday with blue-chip issues up slightly and the broader market moderately weak.
A firm bond market helped lift stocks from early losses, and the Dow Jones industrial average closed up 5.59 points, to 3,230.32
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was heavy at 234.8 million shares, up from 234.3 million on Tuesday.
The Big Board composite index rose 0.20 point, to 225.85, with losing issues outnumbering gainers by 963 to 753.


Woman Dies After Attack
An 80-year-old Brooklyn woman died at Brooklyn Hospital yesterday after she was knocked to the ground and robbed on Friday, the police said.
The woman, identified as Mary Kerner of 135 Willow Street in the Park Slope section, was attacked in front of 115 Willow Street by a youth who took her purse and pushed her down.
Mrs.
Kerner struck her head on the pavement, the police said.
The assailant escaped.


Top Official At I.B.M. Is Leaving
A leading candidate to become the next chairman of I.B.M. stunned the giant computer maker by announcing today that he would leave to head the Hughes Aircraft Company, the military contractor that is reshaping itself into a commercial technology company.
The executive, 53-year-old C. Michael Armstrong, is one of five members of I.B.M.'s management committee and the chairman of the company's foreign operations.
He was widely considered to have the best shot at replacing John F. Akers as chairman three and a half years from now, when Mr.
Akers is scheduled to retire at age 60.
Struggling to Streamline


Yankees May Have Sierra and Bonds on Their Minds
The Yankees' limited partners met in Tampa yesterday, but the meeting apparently had nothing to do with Daniel McCarthy and his status as the Yankees' nominee for new managing general partner.
Instead there were indications that the team might be preparing for another important player acquisition.
A person with knowledge of the partners' meeting yesterday said the session was called to discuss the financial situation of the Yankees because the club has been pondering a potentially expensive move.


In a Stove, a Mythic Burning Passion
TULIKIVI, a Finnish company, says its fireplaces are mythical.
Tulikivi's woodburning stoves, including the new model 3100L, at right, are environmentally thoughtful, made of natural materials and have a proud Nordic look.
They are made of soapstone, a heavy-on-the-green-and-gray stone that absorbs heat well.
The stoves use thermal mass heating, the method in European castles.


Koreans Make No Headway on Nuclear Issue
Leaders of North and South Korea held intensive talks today to defuse tensions on the nuclear issue amid signs that North Korea was resisting prompt establishment of a joint commission to inspect installations suspected of making nuclear bombs.
In a full day of meetings in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, delegations led by Prime Minister Chung Won Shik of South Korea and Prime Minister Yon Hyong Muk of North Korea failed to agree on the next steps to be taken on the nuclear issue and scheduled another set of meetings for Feb. 27.


Stockholm Journal; 6 Years Later, Olof Palme Street Keeps Its Secret
There are few in Sweden who cannot remember exactly what they were doing the moment they heard the news, those first stuttering bulletins six years ago that confronted them with a mystery as unthinkable as it has proved to be unsolvable: Who shot Olof Palme?
Mr.
Palme, Sweden's Prime Minister of four years, and the nation's most dominant political figure for almost two decades, was assassinated on Feb. 28, 1986, as he strolled through central Stockholm with his wife, Lisbet, after leaving a downtown movie theater.


U.S. Women Show the Way
Twelve days into the Winter Olympics, the United States has surpassed its total medal count from the 1988 Calgary Games, and it is the women who have led the way.
Women have garnered all three of America's gold medals and five of the seven medals over all.
And they stood poised to bring in more as Kristi Yamaguchi and Nancy Kerrigan ranked first and second after the first of two days of women's figure-skating competition.


Nepal Doesn't Need A Role in U.N. Force
To the Editor:
What Flora Lewis refers to as Nepal's martial hill tribes ("Gurkhas Can Solve the U.N.'s Problem," Op-Ed, Feb. 8) are in reality part of a gentle, intelligent but impoverished peasantry, carefully selected and trained to do the dirty work of the British and Indian Governments.


Calendar: All About Architects
Architecture and Beyond
Avery Hall at Columbia University, Broadway at 116th Street; (212) 854-3414.
Mark Wigley, a professor at Princeton University, will speak tomorrow about architecture and philosophy, at the first in a series of lectures about architecture.
Future speakers will include Wes Jones (Wednesday), Anthony Ames (March 4) and Kisho Kurokawa (March 25).
All talks start at 6:30 P.M. in the Wood auditorium.
Free.
Black Architects
Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6868.
A panel discussion about black architects will be held from 6:30 to 9:30 P.M.
Wednesday.
There will also be a book signing for "African-American Architects in Current Practice," a recently published work about 35 architects.
Admission: $8; $5 for members, students and those 62 and older.
A Visiting Designer
Katie Murphy Amphitheater, Fashion Institute of Technology, 227 West 27th Street; (212) 246-7063.
Gert Dumbar, a Dutch graphic artist, will speak about his work on Tuesday at 7 P.M.
The talk is sponsored by the New York chapter of the American Institute of Graphic Arts and the Society for Environmental Graphic Design.
Admission: $10; $5, members; $2, students.
Behind the Scenes
Lawrence A. Wein Center for Dance and Theater, 890 Broadway (19th Street); (212) 935-3960.
The Municipal Art Society is sponsoring a tour of the 19th-century skyscraper, which has been converted to craft studios, rehearsal spaces and workshops, on Wednesday from 4 to 5:30 P.M.
Reservations required.
Fee, $18 ($16, members).
Bright Designs
The Textile Museum, 2320 S
Street N.W. (Massachusetts Avenue), Washington; (202) 667-0441.
Lavishly embroidered and mirror-studded costumes, bags and wall hangings from the 19th and early 20th centuries in India and Pakistan will be on view through July 27.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday through Saturday; 1 to 5 P.M.
Sunday.
Suggested contribution is $5.


Press in Russia Is Hurt By the Reforms It Backs
Leading news publications, including some that helped bring down the Soviet dictatorship, are being forced to curtail operations because of skyrocketing printing costs under free-market reforms now being championed philosophically in newspapers.
Muscovites today could not find their daily Komsomolskaya Pravda, which went to alternate-day publication this week because of newsprint costs that have jumped from 300 rubles per ton of paper to 13,000 rubles in the last year.
With more than 20 million readers, the newspaper is one of the world's largest.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY WITHOUT A TRACE
In a hushed courtroom, a 23-year-old woman testified about the day her father suddenly disappeared in 1988, never to be heard from again.
The man was Liborio Milito, one of several men whose murders John Gotti is charged with authorizing.
B3.


New York School Patronage Has Long History
To the Editor:
So 20 years ago -- before decentralization presumably "politicized" the city's public schools -- New York City principalships were parceled out "in straightforward civil service fashion" ("Trade-Off in the Schools: Principals Pay Political Dues to Get Jobs," news article, Feb. 7).


Addiction in the Homeless Shelters
New York City's Commission on the Homeless has produced startling documentation of the extent to which residents of homeless shelters suffer from drug or alcohol addiction and, to a lesser extent, mental illness.
Since mental illness cuts an even bigger swath among homeless people on the streets, the findings show more clearly than ever the need for programs that combine housing with drug treatment and other social services.
The commission's sensible proposals to reform New York's shelter system deserve attention and support from all New Yorkers and in Washington as well.
In particular, the report adds powerful weight to the case for greater public spending on drug treatment.


Howe Has More Problems Than Pitching for Yanks
He will not discuss the subject, but Steve Howe cannot escape it.
Not even here in the warm embrace of a glowing Florida day.
He would like to.
He would like to simply come and go this spring, as if his only concern was to prepare himself for his second season with the Yankees.
But it isn't likely to happen.


E.P.A. Reissues Regulations Governing Disposal of Waste
Resolving a dispute with the White House, the Environmental Protection Agency has reissued two of the many rules that together form the core of the nation's program for safely disposing of hazardous wastes.
The two regulations, reissued by the agency on Tuesday night, have long been under attack by industry, which contends that they are too costly.
They were ruled invalid in December by a Federal appeals court, which decided that the E.P.A. had violated Government procedure by issuing them in 1980 without prior public comment.


Accounts
*
Miles Inc., Bedford Park, Ill., to Killian &amp; Co., Chicago, for the introduction of S.O.S.
Kitchen Safe All Purpose Cleaner.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Major League Baseball Properties to Partners &amp; Shevack, in New York, in a consolidation of its account, which had been split between that agency and Bonneville Communications in Salt Lake City.
The account, which has billings estimated at $3 million, includes an image advertising campaign as well as advertising for merchandise that carries baseball team logos.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; BUSH CONSIDERING A SHIFT IN TACTICS TO FIGHT BUCHANAN
Despite the discontent evident in the New Hampshire primary results, the White House and the Bush campaign plan no changes in the economic policies of President Bush and focused today on the tactical question of how hard to attack his challenger, Patrick J. Buchanan.
Although Mr.
Bush himself still seemed to waver over how far he should go in that direction, the President began his assault on Mr.
Buchanan by citing quotations his aides have amassed from the columnist's prolific writings to suggest that Mr.
Buchanan wants to make Social Security a voluntary system.


Corrections
A brief article on Friday about a New York State court ruling that a judge in Warren County acted properly in barring a prosecutor from wearing an American flag lapel pin misidentified the prosecutor.
He is District Attorney William E. Montgomery 3d.
The article also referred incorrectly to the defense attorney who had objected to the pin.
He is Kurt Mausert.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. priced $150 million in senior notes, due 1999, at 99.290 with a 7 3/4 percent coupon to yield 7.884 percent.
They are noncallable.
Preferred Stock
*
Republic New York Corp. priced $100 million issue of cumulative fixed-rate perpetual preferred stock through Lehman Brothers at $25 a share with a 7.75 percent dividend rate.
Moody's has rated the issue A1, and Standard &amp; Poor's A+.
Common  *
Walker Interactive Systems Inc. filed for 2.6 million common shares to be sold through Morgan Stanley.
The San Francisco company makes financial and control application software.
Ratings  *
Austin, Tex., won an AA rating for $147 million in public improvement refunding bonds from Fitch Investors Service.
They will be sold through Merrill Lynch in the next few weeks.


CHRONICLE
The Lincoln Center Institute for the Arts in Education officially opens its new "black box" theater today amid music, drama and dance.
With black walls and nontraditional seating and stage, the Clark Studio Theater can function as a rehearsal studio, a small concert hall or an intimate theater.
The theater, in the new Rose Building at 70 Lincoln Center Plaza, is the only one in New York designed as a teaching theater, to bring the arts to teachers and students, said MARK SCHUBART, president of the institute.
The Clark Studio will be devoted primarily to education, but it will also be available for developing repertories and for use by Lincoln Center and experimental groups.


U.S. Hockey Squad Faces The Unified Team on CBS
The unexpected success of the United States hockey team in the Winter Olympics yesterday persuaded CBS to pre-empt its regular programming tomorrow at 11 A.M. for the live broadcast of the semifinal game between the Americans and the Unified Team.
It will be one day short of 12 years since the United States hockey team shocked the Soviet Union on ABC in the semifinals of the Games at Lake Placid, N.Y., the triumph that set up the gold-medal victory by the United States over Finland.


The Insights in 2 Mayors' Personal Papers
Robert F. Wagner Jr., scion of one of New York City's most distinguished political families, gazed at the old news clippings in the scrapbook that his mother had put together decades ago, when his father was Mayor.
He paused at a photo-filled feature entitled "Thanksgiving at the Mayor's Home." Mayor Robert F. Wagner and his family, including Robert Jr., then a young schoolboy, were pictured with heaping platters of holiday food.


More Studies on Breast Implants Vowed
The leading maker of silicone gel breast implants, the Dow Corning Corporation, today promised to carry out 15 more safety tests on the implants and to establish a registry to follow implant patients.
The announcement came at a meeting of a 22-member expert panel called by the Food and Drug Administration to review the safety and benefits of the implants, which are being used by an estimated one million American women.


A Promotion to Chief At Limited's Lerner Unit
Barry Aved, executive vice president and general merchandise manager of the Lerner New York division of the Limited Inc., the retail chain, has been promoted to president and chief executive.
He replaces Robert C. Grayson, who is leaving for personal reasons, the company said Tuesday.
"My decision to leave has been difficult," Mr.
Grayson said in a statement.
"But I am convinced it's the best course for my family and me."


Anti-Crime Lottery Sales Falling Far Short of Goal
New York City officials said yesterday that a special city lottery intended to raise money for Mayor David N. Dinkins's broad anti-crime program has fallen far short of expectations and is now projected to produce just $5 million of the $38 million they orginally planned for this fiscal year.
The Mayor disclosed the shortfall as he announced the creation of a new $1 scratch-off game -- half the price of the old one -- that officials hope will step up sales.
Last fall the city said the special lottery was raising only about half of what they expected, which they attributed to the price and to skepticism about how the proceeds would be used.


Hewlett Net Climbs 49%
Buoyed by strong sales of its high- powered computer work stations and laser printers, the Hewlett-Packard Company surprised Wall Street today with earnings that exceeded most analysts' estimates.
Hewlett-Packard shares soared $9.125 today, to close at $73.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Review/Opera; Robert Wilson Stages His Vision of 'Parsifal,' in Houston
It would not be difficult to find absurdly mannered elements in Robert Wilson's production of Wagner's "Parsifal," which the Houston Grand Opera presented on Tuesday night at the Wortham Theater Center.
Characters were obsessed with their hands: they stretched them out, spasmodically jerked them in the air, gazed at them in fascination, posed with them in imitation of ancient Egyptian wall paintings.
The characters also never seemed to look at one another, let alone touch one another as they moved at glacial tempos across the stage.
There was no kiss from Kundry to awaken Parsifal's guilt-ridden desire.
There was no Eucharist with bread and wine.
There was not even a Grail.
Frida Parmeggiani's costumes added to the peculiarities: Klingsor was attired in a distorted Mother Superior outfit, Parsifal was wearing a jump suit with the legs cut open, the knights wore what seemed to be gowns, and the squires were all attired in Pharaonic outfits.
The only characters whose sex was clear from their clothing and makeup were Gurnemanz and Kundry.
But despite problems, this is a fascinating production of this grand and sickly work.
The staging was originally planned in 1981 for the Kassel State Opera, but budget and technical problems delayed its premiere until the Hamburg State Opera presented it last spring as a collaboration with the Houston company.
By all reports, Houston has now done it greater justice, giving the visual and conceptual elements an imposing musical foundation, aided by English surtitles.
Even though I have seen little of Mr.
Wilson's work aside from "Einstein on the Beach," the style was familiar: the attempt to create a different sense of space and time through slow transformations of expertly lightened stage images, the highly ritualized use of artificial gesture, the sense that particular meanings of words are less important than the work's mysterious power.
So instead of a naturalistic set, Mr.
Wilson placed the opera in front of a white rectangle the size of a movie screen, with a tilted metallic hill leading up to it.
By using lined scrims and carefully controlling lighting, the dominant effect was of an expanse of water, suited to the languid, rippling passions of the music.
Klingsor's castle was a black monolith rising out of this liquid floor, with a door dropping open to reveal a fluorescent cubicle; inside, the monstrous villain, in mime makeup that distorted his eyes, gestured and posed as if he was King of the Night.
The Temple of the Grail was represented by a white torus lowered from the sky, encircling an enormous crystal, a sort of New Age Church.
Curiously, all of this was less avant-garde than it seemed.
Productions of "Parsifal" have been dominated by images from Bayreuth. (In fact, more than any other of Wagner's operas, "Parsifal" was inextricably linked to Wagner's stage temple; at first, performances were not permitted elsewhere and the Met could only offer its 1903 production because the United States did not then recognize international copyright restrictions).
Bayreuth productions have tended toward abstraction, particularly after Wieland Wagner's 1951 staging, which set the whole opera on an illuminated disk, (the torus's ancestor).
The opera, with its sense of slowly changing interior mental landscapes, practically forbids realism.
Wagner himself wrote about "Parsifal," in 1878: "After creating the invisible orchestra, I should like to invent the invisible theater as well."
What, for example, should happen on stage when Kundry sings to Parsifal for 20 minutes about his mother?
Mr.
Wilson rejected the notion that there is anything naturalistic about this kind of communication.
He decided that it should not be portrayed as a conversation, nor in a typically operatic manner, with the hands held out expressively ("Is it raining?" Toscanini used to ask), but with formal gestures choreographed to the music's phrasings.
The result was a schematic, languorous representation of the drama.
Kundry's gestures mirrored and resisted Klingsor's; Parsifal's and Gurnemanz's movements created a subtle dance of imitation and recognition.
The communication between characters happened only indirectly, without contact or gaze.
The music provided the connections.
But the artifice, rather than lessening the score's power, added to it.
The production was immeasurably aided by Christoph Eschenbach, the music director of the accompanying Houston Symphony, who held together the long, flowing lines without diminishing the intricate undercurrents and tensions that shift the music's allusions.
Each phrase seemed thoroughly rehearsed, but never routine.
The cast also comprised first-rate singers.
The baritone Richard Paul Fink gave Klingsor a mixture of obsession and strength.
Monte Pederson's lines as Amfortas created an impressive combination of pain and authority.
Harry Peeters was an authoritative Gurnemanz, commanding the stage in the framing acts.
John Keyes's Parsifal seemed to undergo a musical evolution toward expressivity as his spiritual transformation proceeded.
Dunja Vejzovic, who has sung Kundry at Bayreuth, was a matronly figure here, her vocal lines suggestively weary and haunting; her second-act encounter with Parsifal was touching even as it turned bewildering under Mr.
Wilson's direction.
But through no fault of Miss Vejzovic's, the character of Kundry was the weakest part of this production: her motivations were unclear, her gestures with a long wand were too oddly distracting, her sexless threat too unconvincing.
Moreover, by having the "kiss" become some sort of metaphysical seduction, by having even the Flower Maidens never touch Parsifal, and by confusing the sexual appearance of nearly every character, this opera -- so founded upon notions of sexuality and renunciation -- became oddly inhuman in ways even Wagner could not have imagined.
But it is a measure of the strength of Mr.
Wilson's imagination and the abstract power of Wagner's music that the work became seductive even in its detachment.
While it was too self-consciously affected to provide the "invisible theater" Wagner envisioned, its visible aspects -- peculiarities and all -- remain in the mind and the ear like a troubling dream, somewhat like "Parsifal" itself .
Parsifal  Opera in three acts by Richard Wagner; conductor, Christoph Eschenbach; director and set designer, Robert Wilson; costumes by Frida Parmeggiani; lighting by Jennifer Tipton and Mr.
Wilson.
At the Brown Theater, Wortham Theater Center, Houston.
Parsifal . . .
John Keyes
Kundry . . . Dunja Vejzovic
Amfortas . . . Monte Pederson
Gurnemanz . . . Harry Peeters
Klingsor . . . Richard Paul Fink
Titurel/Second Knight . . . Kelly Anderson
With: Richard Clement, Annette Daniels, Teri Hansen, Patricia Johnson, Tamara Kaufman, Kimberly Lane, Lee Merrill, Carl Saloga and Ralph Sanders.


CHRONICLE
With Broadway's top musical, "The Will Rogers Follies," already on his hands, PIERRE COSSETTE is getting ready to produce his annual extravaganza, the Grammy Awards, at Radio City Music Hall on Tuesday.
While he isn't giving away any secrets, he predicts stardom for MARY CHAPIN CARPENTER, a country singer who has been nominated for a Grammy and will be part of the show.
In 1971 Mr.
Cossette bought the rights to produce the show live from the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences.
He likes to reminisce about the time the show almost didn't go on.
In 1973 he decided to broadcast it from Nashville instead of Los Angeles, but ABC canceled it, fearing the stars might not join in.


Senators Say Russians Agree to Help on M.I.A.'s
Russian intelligence agencies with extensive information on Soviet activities in Indochina during the Vietnam War have agreed to help a United States Senate committee investigate cases of missing American servicemen, committee leaders said today.
For the first time, files and other documents on American prisoners and deserters collected by the Soviet Union beginning in the 1940's will be turned over to American investigators by the Russian foreign intelligence service and other organizations, according to Senator John Kerry and Senator Robert C. Smith, chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs.


A Silver in the Giant Slalom Amid Misty Moment for Roffe
She waited years for this moment, and so what if it wasn't golden?
This was the Olympics, where second best also brings a medal of valor.
Diann Roffe, co-runner-up to Pernilla Wiberg of Sweden today in the women's giant slalom, couldn't help but have a good cry.
In the moments after she realized that she and Anita Wachter of Austria had tied and earned silver medals, Roffe found herself hugging Bob Beattie, the ubiquitous American ski maven and television journalist, behind the finish-line area.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Acquired Charlie Hayes, third baseman, from the Philadelphia Phillies to complete the Jan. 8 trade involving Darrin Chapin.
Designated Alan Mills, pitcher, for assignment.
National League
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Agreed to terms with Jamie Arendt, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Agreed to terms with Steve Finley, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK METS -- Agreed to terms with Joe Vitko, pitcher; Brook Fordyce, catcher; Chris Donnels, infielder; and Pat Howell, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
Football  National Football League
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Named Chet Fuhrman conditioning coordinator.
Hockey  National Hockey League
NHL -- Suspended Mike Gartner, New York Rangers right wing, for three games for a major slashing penalty in a game on Feb. 5.
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Recalled Terry Yake, center; Mark Greig, right wing; and Michel Picard, left wing, from Springfield of the American Hockey League.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Recalled Bill Guerin, left wing, from Utica of the AHL.
Sent Chad Erickson, goalie, to Utica.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Traded Paul Coffey, defenseman, to the Los Angeles Kings for Jeff Chychrun, defenseman.
Traded Mark Recchi, right wing, to the Philadelphia Flyers, for Rick Tocchet, right wing; Kjell Samuelsson, defenseman; Ken Wregget, goaltender, and a draft choice to be named later.
PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Acquired Brian Benning, defenseman, and a 1992 first-round draft choice from the Los Angeles Kings as part of the trade that sent Tocchet, Samuelsson, Wregget, and a draft choice to the Penguins.
East Coast Hockey League
HAMPTON ROADS ADMIRALS -- Traded Brian Martin, forward, to Knoxville for future considerations.
Placed Murray Hood, forward, on the injured list.


Bodies Go Flying as General Managers Scramble for Playoffs
Yesterday's flurry of mega-deals sent a talented but aging Paul Coffey to the desperate and passe Los Angeles Kings, improved the current Pittsburgh Penguins and may help the future Philadelphia Flyers.
The three-cornered, seven-player trade marks the beginning of the end of the regular season and is an early link in a chain of potential roster shuffles as general managers try to fill holes before the March 10 trading deadline.


A Droll Stroll Through the Mind
"TAKING a look inside your head would tell you virtually nothing about how it works," Paul Spooner, an English sculptor and illustrator, writes in his book, "Museum of the Mind" (Abrams, 1992, $19.95), which will be in bookstores in April.
Despite this naysaying note, Mr.
Spooner delves into the mind through paper, engineering, his droll pen-and-ink drawings and philosophical ramblings.
He provides ways to replicate four states of mind: the vacuumist, dodo, Europa and the bull-and-headache.


Key Lawmaker Wants to Keep Bell Companies Out of Information Business
Newspaper publishers received support today from an important lawmaker in their campaign to keep the regional Bell telephone companies from being allowed to own electronic services offering information like news, stock quotations and sports scores.
At a hearing of the House Judiciary Committee's Subcommitte on Economic and Commercial Law, Representative Jack Brooks, Democrat of Texas and chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, made it clear that he favored continuing restrictions on the Bell companies.
His committee has jurisdiction over antitrust issues.


U.S. Memo Saw B.C.C.I. Trouble in '78
Thirteen years before the Bank of Credit and Commerce International was seized in 1991, a senior American bank examiner warned in a written memorandum that the Luxembourg-based bank was loaded with bad loans and used front men to disguise highly questionable transactions.
The warning appears to have been the earliest evidence that American Government officials were made aware that B.C.C.I. was engaged in such practices.


DELEGATE TALLY


New Japanese Company to Buy Pebble Beach Golf Resort
The Pebble Beach golf resort is being sold again, this time to a newly formed Japanese corporation called the Lone Cypress Company, the company said today.
Lone Cypress is owned by Taiheiyo Club Inc., owner and operator of many golf courses in Japan, and Sumitomo Credit Service Ltd., a unit of Sumitomo Bank that is the leading issuer of Visa International credit cards in Japan.
Lone Cypress said today that it had a signed letter of intent to buy Pebble Beach from companies controlled by Minoru Isutani, a Japanese business executive.
Mr.
Isutani acquired the 5,300-acre resort in Monterey County, Calif., and its operator, the Pebble Beach Company, in September 1990.
The terms of the deal announced today were not disclosed, but sources close to negotiations said the price was about $500 million.
If so, that would be about 40 percent less than the $841 million Mr.
Isutani paid.


Governor in the S.&amp; L. Spotlight
Facing accusations that he has joined the roster of other prominent Arizonans in symbolizing the nation's savings and loan mess, Gov.
J.
Fife Symington 3d of Arizona, a Republican, comes to Capitol Hill on Thursday with accusations of his own.
The hearing, he says, is a political charade, the latest in an attempt of ill-motivated exercises to torpedo his political future.
Indeed, the hearing will raise thorny questions about Governor Symington's dealings as a real estate developer and director of a failed Phoenix savings institution, about the diligence of Federal savings regulators and about the extent to which Congress is trying to shirk responsibility for the largest financial debacle in American history.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan, gave his most optimistic assessment in months of the economy's near-term prospects, though he said any upturn could still stall.
He told a House subcommittee that he saw "stirrings" of a recovery, particularly in retail sales and homebuilding.  [ Page A1. ]
New-home construction in January surged 5.5 percent from December to its briskest pace since May 1990.
But the rise occurred only in the Midwest, with other regions falling.  [ D1. ]


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a visit by President Frederick J. Chiluba of Zambia to the United States misidentified a guest reportedly turned away from a reception at the Zambian Embassy.
He was a representative of the Angolan guerrilla leader Jonas Savimbi, not Mr.
Savimbi himself.


Preserving the Power of Microwaves
AS recently as the mid-1970's, microwave ovens were a novelty.
"Restaurants and rich people had them," said Andrew Heller, a partner in Micro-Ovens of New York, which has repaired microwave ovens since 1976.
These days, few homes are without a microwave oven.
Some people even have two.
"We recently repaired an upstairs kitchen microwave for a woman who used it just to heat food for her dog," Mr.
Heller said


Books of The Times; Behind Olivier's Glitter, Shadows of Suffering
Laurence Olivier A Biography By Donald Spoto Illustrated. 460 pages.
HarperCollins. $23.


Interpublic Plans Payout
The Interpublic Group of Companies in New York yesterday announced a proposed 2-for-1 stock split, in the form of a 100 percent stock dividend, pending shareholder approval at the advertising company's annual meeting on May 19.
The announcement followed by a day Interpublic's report of earnings gains for the fourth quarter and the full year, which were in line with analysts' expectations.
The split was recommended by Interpublic's board, as was a 9.5 percent increase in the company's quarterly dividend.


Home Video
From the rave notices -- "visually arresting," "a triumph" and the like -- one might think "L. B. J." was a major motion picture.
In fact, PBS Home Video, which will release the praised television documentary about Lyndon B. Johnson next week, doesn't shy from trying to piggyback the program, which it calls a "four-hour blockbuster," onto a current movie about a President who also goes by a set of initials.
"Now, for the first time on home video, the highly acclaimed 'L. B. J.' underscores the events of L. B. J.'s Presidency as closely as 'J. F. K.' does the Kennedy years," reads the promotion.
In a slow time for feature films on tape, prominent television titles are getting more play from distributors.
For example, Time-Life Video and Television of Alexandria, Va., which sells tapes by mail order, is having success with the 12-part "Trials of Life," a popular nature program produced by the BBC and the Turner Broadcasting System and shown last year on TNT. (The series is not yet available in video stores.)


New Campaigns
*
A television commercial in Visa International's campaign tied to the 1992 Olympics, by BBDO New York, features N.B.A. stars who will be members of the United States basketball team at the summer games in Barcelona, Spain.
Among the players in the spot, due to begin running tonight, is Magic Johnson.


Panic Strikes at Federal Express's Witching Hour
Eight-forty-five at night, and it was dead, just dead.
Greg Erskine, the late-night agent, could hear a fly land.
"Don't be fooled," he cautioned.
"In another half-hour, you won't be able to move. It's going to get pretty weird."
Of course. It always does the last half-hour at Final Drop-Off.


Four Nebraska Victories at Risk. . .
A single preseason junior-college scrimmage more than five years ago may have cost Nebraska four of its nine 1991 victories and its share of the Big Eight championship.
That was the word from Nebraska yesterday after the university concluded an internal investigation into the eligibility of Cornhusker fullback OMAR SOTO, a Miamian who was dropped from the team as a precaution a day before the Cornhuskers lost to Miami in the Orange Bowl.
That move came after The Palm Beach Post suggested Soto had used up his four years of collegiate eligibility the previous season.
University officials declined to discuss the findings, but The Post said it had learned that investigators had determined that Soto had in fact used up one of his four years of eligibility long before going to Nebraska as a junior-college transfer.
Although Nebraska is expected to forfeit the four games it won with Soto in the lineup last year, including two against Big Eight opponents, the decision will be up to the Big Eight.
If the forfeits are ordered, Nebraska's record would go from 9-1-1 to 5-5-1 and Colorado, which shared the conference title with Nebraska, will be the sole champion.
Soto, who missed much of the season with a broken leg, played in only four games. (AP)


Court Says Jewish Divorce Settlement Was Unfair
A settlement agreed to by an Orthodox Jewish woman to obtain a religious divorce has been struck down by a New York state appeals court, which said her husband's absolute power to withhold it was tantamount to coercion.
The woman's lawyer said her client had to give in to every demand made by her husband before he would agree to grant her a Jewish divorce, which in Hebrew is called a get.


Fire Guts Floyd's Home in Florida
An early-morning fire heavily damaged the Florida home of RAYMOND FLOYD, leaving the two-story house near Miami in virtual ruins after Floyd's wife and 12-year-old daughter made it safely outside.
Floyd, who was in San Diego for the Buick Invitational that begins today, immediately flew to Miami, according to his daughter, CHRISTINA, who said she was awakened by her mother and taken outside just before the roof caved in.
There was no immediate word on a possible cause of the fire.
The house, which had an assessed value of $1.7 million, was one of 38 houses, some costing more than $4 million, in the private golf-course community of Indian Creek Village on the Intracoastal Waterway. (AP)


Don't Ask. Just Love Thy Neighbor.
THROUGH 30 billboards in lower Manhattan, Les Levine, a sculptor, is trying to get people to think about their neighbors.
Diana with her bow and arrow, leaning forward, appears on all 30, as do the words "ease pain."
What's it about?


Review/Film; Mellencamp Goes Home For a Tale on Going Home
"Falling From Grace," directed by John Mellencamp and written by Larry McMurtry, unfolds in an invitingly familiar corner of McMurtry country, where old flames burn forever and the small town has the power of a magnetic field.
The town in this case is Doak City, somewhere near Indianapolis, and the original home of Bud Parks (Mr. Mellencamp), a big singing star.
Bud, one of Mr.
McMurtry's familiar prodigal celebrities, is returning to the scene of his early experience, a scene populated by many other fixtures of Mr.
McMurtry's, from the sister who sits crying quietly at her breakfast table to the rich, idle, faithless wife who declares: "Now I may not get exactly what I want, but I'm not gonna be bored. In this town, that takes a certain talent."


ISRAELI ARMY HITS BASES IN LEBANON, PIERCING U.N. LINES
An Israeli armored force backed by helicopters and artillery broke through United Nations barricades in southern Lebanon today to stop rocket attacks by Shiite Muslim guerrillas.
The advance to the villages of Kafra and Yater by tanks and armored personnel carriers was believed to be the largest beyond the nine-mile self-proclaimed Israeli "security zone" in southern Lebanon since the Israeli invasion in 1982.


CHRONICLE
For at least one celebrated union, the magic is lost.
DR.
WILLIAM H. MASTERS and VIRGINIA E. JOHNSON, the sex research pioneers, announced Wednesday that they would seek a divorce after 35 years of working together and 21 years of marriage.
The couple, who founded the Masters &amp; Johnson Institute in St.
Louis in 1964, will continue to work together.
Dr.
Masters, 76, is now serving as a consultant, "although he still works seven days a week," William Young, the institute's director, said yesterday.
Mrs.
Johnson, 67, is the chairwoman of the institute's board.


Bolivia Knows What Free Market Means
To the Editor:
La Paz, the Bolivian capital, has been rattled by almost daily demonstrations against privatizing state-owned industries.
As workers march and chant, downtown traffic grinds to a halt and tear gas fills the Plaza Murillo, where politicians inside heavily guarded Government buildings passionately debate the issue.


Pop/Jazz; Where Folk Really Does Mean Folk
In an era of world music, when traditional forms from all over the globe are exported and hybridized, the very term folk music has begun to seem a little quaint.
Yet for the 37 musicians who are participating in the three-evening Fast Folk Revue at the Bottom Line, it still means a very specific kind of music.
Most of the performers who will appear belong to a solo acoustic tradition that embraces Woody Guthrie, Pete Seeger, Bob Dylan and Joni Mitchell.
Their songs aspire either to a certain literary depth or editorial edge.
Although not averse to commercial success, they do not aim their work directly at the pop marketplace.


Some Americans Came With the Territories
They come from Lowell, Mass., and Hibbing, Minn., and Milwaukee -- and they are competing for other countries in the Olympics.
Welcome to the wild and crazy world of musical countries.
Can't make the Olympic skiing team in America?
How about Brazil?


Black Gang Movies Have Something to Teach; Not Fantasy Violence
To the Editor:
I am a freelance writer-producer who participated in marketing the movie "Juice." I speak only for myself, not for Paramount Pictures or the film's producers.


I.B.M.-Apple Appointment
Joseph Guglielmi, a vice president of I.B.M., will be named Monday to head Taligent, one of two joint ventures being formed by I.B.M. and Apple Computer Inc. as part of their broad alliance, industry officials said today.
Mr.
Guglielmi, a longtime I.B.M. employee, is now a leading official behind I.B.M.'s push to revive the OS/2 personal computer operating system, which has so far been slow to catch on with computer users.


Corporate Tax Cut Deleted As Democrats Polish Bill
Congressional Democrats moved today to increase the chances for passage of their tax proposals.
House leaders dropped an unpopular corporate tax provision and a powerful Senator said he would try to include a politically attractive health insurance measure in the bill.
House Democrats, after a second day of party caucuses dominated by continual criticism of a proposed one-percentage-point cut in the corporate income tax rate, decided to eliminate the provision from the bill entirely.
On Wednesday, they had decided to limit the cut to two years rather than make it permanent, as first planned.


Sports of The Times; A Mystique Or Miracle At Meribel?
THEY'VE been known as the Soviets, the Russians and now as the Unified Team, but by any other name, the hockey players in the red-and-white uniforms would skate as swiftly.
And shoot as sharply.
In the beginning, shortly after World War II, their first coach, Anatol Tarasov, taught from a textbook by the late Lloyd Percival, a Canadian sports scientist, whom the National Hockey League considered a radical.
And a quarter of a century later, with a shocking 7-2 triumph at Montreal in the opener of the historic 1972 series with Team Canada, the Soviets taught the N.H.L. a lesson.


U.S. Policy on Loans To Israel Is Right
To the Editor:
In "It's Israel's Choice" (Op-Ed, Feb. 11), Senator Patrick Leahy would severely weaken the Administration's conditions for providing loan guarantees to Israel.
He argues that Israel will never accept a freeze on new housing in the occupied territories because "Israel deeply holds the position that Israelis have the right to settle anywhere in the territories."


Heir Apparent at Time Warner Is Out Amid Signs of Dissension
Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that N. J. Nicholas Jr., the designated successor to the company's chairman, Steven J. Ross, had resigned and would be replaced by Gerald M. Levin, the vice chairman.
Many in the company saw the unexpected resignation as a result of a clash between Mr.
Ross and Mr.
Nicholas, whose total 1990 compensation of $96.4 million made them the nation's highest-paid executives.
But it also meant the collapse of a succession agreement central to the 1990 merger of two corporate empires, Warner Communications and Time Inc., to form the world's largest media company.


Knicks Make Deal But Can't Stop Cavs
The Knicks couldn't manage a last-minute victory last night, but they did manage to make a last-minute trade.
Moments after their 92-89 loss to the Cleveland Cavaliers, the Knicks announced they had acquired 7-foot-2-inch center James Donaldson from the Dallas Mavericks in exchange for forward Brian Quinnett.


Cholera Kills One and Fells Many on Flight
One person has died and at least five others have become sick with cholera after arriving here on a flight from Argentina and Peru, and health officials were searching today for other passengers on the flight to determine whether they had been infected.
The cases were reported among passengers who arrived on Feb. 14 on Aerolineas Argentinas Flight 386 from Buenos Aires with a stop in Lima, Peru.


December Trade Gap Widened
Dwindling exports resulted in a sharp widening of the nation's merchandise trade deficit in December, but for 1991 as a whole, the deficit narrowed to $66.20 billion, the smallest shortfall in eight years.
The Bush Administration hailed the full-year results as a sign of renewed American competitiveness, and members of Congress from both parties said that the improvement last year would be more important in the national debate over protectionism than December's poor showing.


Corrections
An Education Page listing of children's books about prejudice on Wednesday misidentified the author of "The Endless Steppe." She is Esther Hautzig.


Corrections
An article yesterday about an A.F.L.-C.I.O. meeting misidentified one of three unions there that said they would support Gov.
Bill Clinton for President.
It is the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union, not the Hotel and Restaurant Employees Union, which has remained neutral.
The article also misstated the number of unions not yet committed to a Presidential candidate.
Fifteen of the 32 at the meeting remain uncommitted.


De Klerk's Job on the Line in White Vote
Reacting to his party's humiliating defeat in a local parliamentary election, President F. W. de Klerk announced today that he would hold a referendum to ask whites whether they support his efforts to negotiate a democratic future without apartheid.
If he loses the referendum, Mr. de Klerk said, he and his National Party, which has governed South Africa since 1948, would resign, forcing new parliamentary elections among whites.


Sheraton to Pay $160 Million In Hotel Deal With Marriot
The ITT Sheraton Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to buy six hotels and lease two from the Marriott Corporation for $160 million.
Among the hotels Sheraton will buy is the Prince de Galles, a 170-room operation in Paris, which will be Sheraton's first hotel in that city.


Massachusetts Wins Census Fight And Will Retain 11 House Seats
Massachusetts won an initial round today in its fight to retain its 11-member Congressional delegation, which had been scheduled to lose one member because of population losses in the 1990 census.
A special panel of three Federal judges ruled that the Secretary of Commerce, who has overall responsibility for the Census Bureau, was "arbitrary and capricious" in deciding to include Federal employees stationed overseas in the 1990 census count.
Under a formula that divides the 435 seats in the House of Representatives, Massachusetts lost one seat to the State of Washington when such personnel were included in the census count.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Henneman, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with David Howard, shortstop, and Mike Magnante, pitcher, on one-year contracts.


Eugene R. Black Dies at 93; Ex-President of World Bank
Eugene Robert Black, a courtly Georgian who became one of the world's most influential figures as president of the World Bank from 1949 to 1962, died in his sleep early yesterday at his home in Southampton, L.I.
He was 93 years old.
Mr.
Black probably died of heart failure and had suffered kidney failure, said his son William H. Black.


Bill Set for Mild Curb on Car Imports
The chairman of the Senate subcommittee on trade says he will announce legislation on Friday calling for mild restrictions on sales of Japanese cars, in part to head off stronger protectionist bills now being proposed.
Senator Max S. Baucus, the Montana Democrat and free-trade advocate who heads the Subcommittee on International Trade, said in an interview that he considered the passage of some restrictions likely.


New Rift May Halt McCarthy-Vincent Meeting
A late-developing rift between Daniel McCarthy and Commissioner Fay Vincent posed a serious threat last night to McCarthy's bid to secure approval as managing partner of the Yankees.
According to a lawyer familiar with the situation, Vincent insisted that a court reporter be present at a meeting scheduled today with McCarthy at the commissioner's office in Manhattan.
McCarthy has balked at the request, the lawyer said last night, even though Vincent has made it clear that if the meeting was canceled, McCarthy's quest for Vincent's needed approval "is over."


A Cable Visionary at Time Warner's Helm
Gerald M. Levin, who was named co-chief executive and heir apparent for the top spot at Time Warner Inc. yesterday, helped invent the cable television business in 1975.
Cable television had existed before then, but it was not much of a business.
Mr.
Levin, who ran a small Time Inc. unit called Home Box Office Inc., which sold a monthly selection of movies to fewer than 100,000 subscribers, set a revolution in motion when he persuaded his superiors at Time to invest $6.5 million to rent space on a new satellite.


Andrew Schenck, 51, A Music Director, Dies
Andrew Schenck, the music director of two New York ensembles, the Nassau Symphony Orchestra and the Atlantic Sinfonietta, died on Wednesday at his home in Baltimore.
He was 51 years old.
He died of melanoma, said Marvin Schofer, his former manager.


North Korean Leader's Statement Renews Doubts on Nuclear Issue
Once again dismissing Western reports that North Korea is close to making a nuclear bomb, President Kim Il Sung said today that it is the South Koreans who cannot be trusted on nuclear matters and repeated Pyongyang's demands for the withdrawal of "foreign forces" from the Korean Peninsula.
The tough new comments of President Kim, the 79-year-old North Korean leader, came at a meeting with the South Korean Prime Minister, Chung Won Shik, at the end of two days of talks in the North Korean capital.
The harsh tone of the statement raised new doubts about North Korean intentions on allowing international inspection of his country's nuclear installations.


U.S. Tracks a Korean Ship Taking Missile to Syria
United States intelligence agencies are tracking a North Korean cargo ship that is believed headed for Syria with advanced missiles and missile manufacturing equipment, senior Administration officials said today.
Such a shipment, while not violating any of North Korea's international pledges, would be prohibited under the Missile Technology Control Regime, which North Korea has not signed.
The shipment also indicates the difficulty Washington faces in trying to halt the spread of missiles to the Middle East, particularly when faced with a tenacious provider like North Korea.


A Seasoned Executive Is Heading Air Canada
Air Canada yesterday named Hollis L. Harris, a former top executive at both Delta and Continental, as vice chairman, president and chief executive.
The 60-year-old Mr.
Harris, who was not available for comment, will face several challenges in managing Air Canada, the former state-owned airline that is now a publicly traded corporation.


Manila Plan To Cut Debt
The Government of the Philippines and its commercial bank lenders yesterday announced an agreement on a foreign debt package that would give the Philippines lower interest rates and the opportunity to buy back some of its outstanding debt at a discount.
The Philippines has about $5 billion in medium- and long-term debt from commercial banks worldwide.
Since 1986, the Government has reduced its debt by $4 billion with other proposals, including a $1.3 billion repurchase of bank debt at a discount in 1990.
But at the same time, the Government has taken on about $9 billion in new debt since the ouster of former President Ferdinand Marcos in 1986.


Cold War's End Hits Cray Computer
The end of the cold war may have claimed an unlikely victim: Seymour Cray cannot sell his new supercomputer.
The father of the supercomputer, Mr.
Cray has been an icon of American high technology for three decades.
But last week, the Cray Computer Corporation, based in Colorado Springs, said it was halting development of its $30 million machine for lack of a buyer.


Full-Court Press
If all the latest legal talk in Las Vegas, Nev., leads to legal action, JERRY TARKANIAN may be suing the University of Nevada-Las Vegas to remain as basketball coach and his players may be suing Tarkanian along with the university and the National Collegiate Athletic Association to play in this season's N.C.A.A. tournament.
Tarkanian, claiming through his lawyer that U.N.L.V had violated an agreement not to criticize him in public, said he was considering withdrawing his resignation.


Wounded Man Held in Shooting
After doctors treated a gunshot wound, they reported it to the police, and a 23-year-old man who had checked himself into a Bronx hospital on Sunday now faces charges in two robberies in New York and the shooting of two police officers in Chicago.
Investigators sorting through complex police reports and statements by the suspect, Jason Francis of 60 East 196th Street in the Bedford Park section of the Bronx, say he received the wound in a shootout in Chicago, where he and two friends from New York had gone last week.
Routine Hospital Report
"They came in to town to visit them and do some robberies," said Lieut.
Richard Stevens of the Chicago police.
One of those friends drove the three men back to New York after the shooting, he said.


Pope Extends Friendship to African Muslims


Reporter's Notebook; In Quest of a Brighter Labor Climate
Even when Presidents are Republicans, trade unions usually find grounds for getting along with secretaries of labor on some issues, even if agreeing to disagree on others.
But union leaders meeting here this week to plan policies find the current incumbent, Lynn Martin, as hostile as they come.
Like previous labor secretaries, Mrs.
Martin, who has been in office a year, appeared at a closed session of the 35-member executive council of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations.
Participants at the annual gathering said she noted at least twice that a mere 16.1 percent of American workers belonged to unions.
Unions attribute the decline in part to Republican policies that discourage people from joining unions, and they interpreted her remarks as a way of saying that unions do not matter.


2 Gunmen Posing as Guards Rob a Bank
Two gunmen who passed themselves off as security guards held up a bank in a Bronx nursing home yesterday, making off with $245,000 in cash that had just been delivered, the police said.
The president of the nursing home, the Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged, said the robbers appeared familiar with the bank's routine.


Islanders Stay Hot Because Domi Loses His Cool
In an analysis of the Islanders' 6-2 decision over the Rangers tonight, it would be an oversimplification to say that Pierre Turgeon should be credited with the victory and that Tie Domi should be blamed for the defeat.
Nevertheless, it is a fact that Turgeon scored three goals and assisted on two others for the Islanders to raise his goal total to 33 and extend his point-scoring streak to 17 games.


A Dubious Battle in Lebanon
Smashing through United Nations barricades, an Israeli armored force has mounted a search-and-destroy operation against Shiite guerrilla bases in southern Lebanon.
The Israeli Government insists this is a limited operation for a limited time.
But the timing is deplorable, the circumstances murky and the serious wounding of two U.N. peacekeepers indefensible.
The provocations were real, but this overreaction blurs the difference between Israel and Shiite extremists in Lebanon.
Yesterday's incursion followed weeks of random shelling of Israeli settlements by Shiite militias from the 10-mile "security zone" instituted by Israel.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 587 money market mutual funds declined by $16.01 billion, to $497.61 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 216 institutional funds decreased by $17.55 billion, to $165.72 billion.
The assets of the 280 general-purpose funds were up by $1.44 billion, to $181.77 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds increased by $96.8 million, to $150.11 billion, the institute said.
The revisions reflect a change in the number of funds reporting.


U.S., Low Key After Israeli Raid, Tries to Prevent Spread of Combat
The United States offered a restrained public response today to the Israeli raid in Lebanon.
But Administration officials said they were privately seeking to insure that the fighting does not spread and were persuaded that Israel did not intend a larger-scale operation.
Administration officials said the United States had been in contact with Syria, Israel and Lebanon to warn leaders in those countries to be, as one official put it, "careful about any potential of an escalation."


Topics of The Times; Whale's Whiskers
An avuncular New Yorker went the other day to a young friend's new class for 5- and 6-year-olds.
The topic was: "Is the Whale a Mammal?"
He was impressed by the discourse.
They began by defining a mammal.
An animal that was born alive, said one.
An animal that fed on its mother's milk, added another.
Then a student said his father had told him a mammal had hair, fur or whiskers.
Whales, it was agreed, are born alive, fed on mother's milk but don't have fur or hair.
What about whiskers?


Review/Film; If Two Sides Of a Triangle Are Siblings
Contemporary London, as depicted in Stephen Poliakoff's "Close My Eyes," is gripped by a feverish malaise.
Construction cranes scar the skyline for as far as the eye can see, and the weather is so hot that people have begun to mutter about the end of the world.
There is also grim talk about the AIDS epidemic.
And when one of the characters makes a date in the sleazier part of town, his first stop is at a vending machine dispensing condoms.
In this parched, overheated atmosphere, an incestuous affair between Natalie (Saskia Reeves), a restless young woman who drifts from job to job, and her slightly younger brother Richard (Clive Owen) almost makes sense.
In a world where nature seems to have slipped out of balance, it is a way of unconsciously affirming the general state of disorder.


Art in Review
John Newman  Barbara Mathes Gallery 851 Madison Avenue (at 70th Street) Manhattan Through March 7
Although John Newman's large drawings have strong connections with sculpture, they are intended as independent works.
Done in China marker, colored pencil and chalk on large sheets of paper, they are composed of curving shapes that seem like a cross between technological and intestinal forms.
In one, a pinkish-red tube twists into a circle, its two ends joined by a mysterious ice-blue cylinder that seems to be generating vapor.
In another, a ribbon-shaped tube, highlighted with touches of yellow, orange, red and blue, disgorges smaller versions of itself from a funnel-shaped opening.
What is most striking about the forms is the torment to which Mr.
Newman subjects them.
They are kinked and squeezed where they bend; their ends are tied and stretched, and in general they enact a kind of monumental, rubbery version of sadomasochistic posturing.
This vision is mollified somewhat by the delicacy of Mr.
Newman's draftsmanship; his line is unusually elegant and firm, and he works his highlighting to a handsome burnish.
One suspects that the faint grids against which he sets his literally painstaking forms are intended to cushion their psychological eccentricities.
If so, the device works only in part.
In his sculptures seen elsewhere, which correspond closely to these drawings, Mr.
Newman strikes a successful balance between the mechanical and the anatomical, and the results are both buoyant and crisp.
In the drawings, however, despite their high technical accomplishment, an unappealing cartoonlike freakishness prevails.


First, February Fever; Then, March Madness
Remember when the whispers said that John Thompson looked bored?
The challenge of coaching at Georgetown supposedly no longer seemed to light his fire.
Could that be the same John Thompson who raced off the court at the Capital Centre Wednesday night after a last-second basket against Connecticut, both fists pumping toward the ceiling as he disappeared?
Remember when Lou Carnesecca was beginning to look old?
When those same whispers said that St.
John's would be looking for a successor any time now?
Could that be the same Lou Carnesecca who said, after the last-second miss by Syracuse on Wednesday night, that he would not dare wash his new, green, 5-0 sweater?
Carnesecca would put perfume on it -- "froufrou water," he said -- and run it out once more.


Funeral Is Held for Youth Strangled as He Prayed
Hundreds of people turned out today for the funeral of a 17-year-old who the police say was strangled with an electrical cord on Sunday night by supposed friends as they sat in his car reciting the final words of the "Hail Mary."
At the same time, four of the five teen-agers accused in the murder -- two 14-year-olds and two 17-year-olds -- appeared in Superior Court in Paterson, where their lawyers waived a hearing on whether there was probable cause to hold them.
Investigators, still baffled about a motive, said they were considering charging the youths as adults in the killing, which was apparently planned over months during weekly prayer meetings at the home of the fifth suspect, 18-year-old Frank Castaldo.


EXPERTS SUGGEST U.S. SHARPLY LIMIT BREAST IMPLANTS
A panel of experts appointed by the Food and Drug Administration recommended today that the use of silicone gel breast implants be substantially restricted, in effect transforming the gel implant business into a huge medical experiment that would help determine the risks of implants.
Only women enrolled in experimental trials would be eligible to get the implants.
The panel said all women getting reconstruction after breast cancer surgery would be eligible, as would all women with serious breast deformities.


People
*
Kenneth E. Krom, a group creative director at Leo Burnett Co., Chicago, has been named an executive vice president. *
Terry Barich, a creative director, and Patricia O'Neill, a broadcast production manager, have been promoted to senior vice presidents from vice presidents at Campbell-Mithun-Esty in Chicago.


Silver Streaks: U.S. Short-Track Relay Team Captures a Medal
The United States's women's 3,000-meter relay team in short track skating produced a wholly unexpected medal in the Albertville Olympics tonight, the silver, and missed the gold that Canada won in a world record time of 4 minutes 36.62 seconds by 1.23 seconds.
It was the eighth medal won by the American team at these Games, matching the total of eight years ago in Sarajevo, Yugoslavia.
At the 1988 Calgary Games, the United States won just six medals.


Restaurants
Getting the average geocentric Manhattanite to cross the East River to dine in Queens can be as challenging as luring Avery Fisher Hall patrons to CBGB with half-price drink coupons.
The sprawling outer borough is considered too far, too complicated and, gastronomically speaking, too risky.
Yet people like Marika and Stuart Somerstein, the owners of Water's Edge, on the East River in Long Island City, are in the vanguard of changing that image.
Water's Edge, a rather formal and romantic spot boasting a ship captain's view of midtown Manhattan, attracts a dressy local crowd, including many tables of celebrants.
The staff's demeanor, from the greeting to the exiting coat check, is highly amicable and professional.


Review/Television; A Young Lawyer Fighting the Mob
When the title of a television movie is changed from "Shades of Gray" to "For I Have Sinned" to "What She Doesn't Know," the producers are obviously shaky about the point of the enterprise.
No matter.
"What She Doesn't Know," to be shown Sunday at 9 P.M. on NBC, is, more than anything else, a vehicle for Valerie Bertinelli, once a sitcom child ("One Day at a Time") and now an established star in television films.
Her performance in last year's "In a Child's Name" was widely praised, deservedly so.
This time around, still tough and feisty, Ms.
Bertinelli plays Molly Kilcoin, daughter of a New York City police detective, Jack Kilcoin (George Dzundza).
Attending Molly's graduation from Harvard Law School, Jack positively beams as she praises him warmly in her valedictory speech.
He becomes furious, though, when Molly tells him that instead of going to work for a prestigious Manhattan law firm, she is joining the District Attorney's office as an assistant.


Resurgent D'Amato Runs Against Spectrum of Foes
Emerging from the two-year-long shadow of a Senate ethics investigation, a newly confident Alfonse M. D'Amato is running hard for re-election, campaigning against a stable of incumbent villains that sometimes even includes his fellow Republican, President Bush.
Anticipating a far-tougher battle than in 1986, Mr.
D'Amato is embracing a typically in-your-face strategy as he travels the state on an ever-quickening campaign schedule.
With recessionary anxiety as his weapon, he is seeking to turn his political liabilities into political strengths to show that he can be both consummate politician and consummate independent operator at the same time.


Review/Film; Being Both Monstrous and Charming
Making her directorial debut with "This Is My Life," Nora Ephron does exactly what she did on the page.
She shapes every detail of this witty, picture-perfect slice of New York life to fit a single vision, one that even at its most generous and funny manages to retain a penetrating clarity.
The results are a memorable portrait of Dottie Ingels (Julie Kavner), a driven, unstoppable creature who is half-mother and half-star, and a look at the problems that Dottie's career causes for her children.
Despite an obvious affection for her heroine, Ms.
Ephron must point out that Dottie, in hopes of someday making it to "The Tonight Show," willingly taught her young daughters to imitate Ed and Johnny.
Dottie's vague monstrousness does nothing to diminish her charm.
"This Is My Life" is much too knowing about show business and ambition to regard monstrousness as a character flaw.
First seen at the cosmetics counter at Macy's, where she turns every sales pitch into an opportunity to hone her comic potential, Dottie has always been ready to joke about anything, no matter how grim.
Even the death of a beloved aunt becomes funny when Dottie explains that the deceased collapsed in her underwear in the dressing room at Loehmann's and had to be given new clothes before she could be taken away.
"And when they carried Aunt Harriet out, she set off all the store alarms -- really!" Dottie says.


Philadelphia Mayor Proposes Bailout
Edward G. Rendell, who was elected Mayor in November with 68 percent of the vote on a promise to curtail the city's labor costs and overhaul management, today presented his first proposal to try to rescue the city from its 18-month-old fiscal crisis.
His proposal, a five-year budget plan to take the city through 1996, calls for $1.1 billion in savings by cutting labor costs and improving efficiency.
It throws down the gauntlet for negotiations with the city's 24,500 employees, whose contracts expire June 30.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY GOTTI ON TAPE: A GENEROUS BOSS
Prosecutors played a tape of the reputed Mafia boss talking about his philosophy of life -- and death.
"I would be a billionaire if I was looking to be a selfish boss," Mr.
Gotti said in recordings that make up the bulk of the prosecution's case.
"That's not me." B2.
REFINANCING ADDS TO CITY AID
New York City officials will have more money to bicker over now that the state Municipal Assistance Corporation has decided to refinance some of its old bonds.
The decision will raise $100 million and will bring to $1 billion the total amount the city might be able to tap from the assistance corporation in the coming years.
B3.


Review/Dance; Music Is Implied in Feld's 'Endsong'
The estate of Richard Strauss did not grant the rights for the composer's "Four Last Songs" to Eliot Feld for a new ballet, "Endsong." More's the pity, for Mr.
Feld has choreographed nothing short of a masterpiece, with or without music.
"Endsong" had its official premiere Wednesday night with Feld Ballets/NY, and the dancers performed the work in silence, as they are scheduled to do throughout the season at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street).
On Wednesday afternoon, however, a small invited audience, including critics, was able to see "Endsong" performed to a tape of Strauss's music, as originally intended.


Dispute Over Pay at Champion Goes Public
The $3.5 million pay package recieved in 1990 by Andrew C. Sigler, chief executive of Champion International, drew more controversy yesterday as letters written by a company adviser to a critic of the package became public.
The incident cast more light on the difficulties many top company executives are having in dealing with accusations that they are vastly overpaid.


When Up Is Down, Does It Sell?
If the world seems especially topsy-turvy now, if everything appears to be upside down, perhaps you are reading too many advertisements.
In the latest effort to capture the attention of ad-weary consumers, a spate of print ads are employing a new gimmick: The top half is printed right side up, while the bottom half is printed upside down.


Corrections
A front-page headline yesterday about Joseph Doherty, an Irish Republican Army guerrilla, referred incorrectly in some editions to the action taken against him.
He was deported from the United States, not extradited.


U.S. to Push for Logging in Owls' Forest
In anticipation of a Federal report that will require the Government to preserve thousands of acres of ancient forests in the Pacific Northwest to save the spotted owl, Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. said today that Congress should waive the key requirement of one of the country's strictest environmental laws, the Endangered Species Act.
Mr.
Lujan proposed an exception to the law that would allow the northern spotted owl to remain close to extinction in order to save jobs and permit logging in the bird's only habitat, the last great stands of Douglas fir and spruce in Washington state, Oregon, and California.


Bay Banks to Help People Misled on Loans
In the first settlement of its kind, a large Boston banking company, Bay Banks Inc., has agreed to increase its lending in low-income neighborhoods and make reparations to homeowners who were misled by home-improvement contractors operating with Bay Banks' approval.
Various home-improvement schemes have been reported in a number of cities around the country.
In the Boston area they worked this way: contractors put pressure on homeowners in low-income neighborhoods to borrow money from Bay Banks for home repairs and sign loan documents the homeowners had not read or did not understand.
The contractors are accused of quoting amounts that homeowners would have to repay, without explaining how interest charges would greatly increase the total that would have to be paid.
Elderly and minority homeowners were the most common victims.


Review/Opera; An Avant-Garde Composer Produces a Sentimental Beauty and the Beast
The idea must have been tempting: to commission an opera based on the tale of Beauty and the Beast from an avant-gardist whose specialty has been mythic-scaled performance art, and whose instrumentation has included 39 amplified car horns and 20 marching bands.
That is precisely what David Gockley, the general director of Houston Grand Opera, did in approaching the American composer Robert L. Moran.
In the last week, the results have been seen for the first time in the world-premiere production of "Desert of Roses," which Houston is sharing with the Bielefeld City Theater in Germany.
This is, in fact, a season for Moran premieres.
Another new opera, "From the Towers of the Moon," will be given its premiere by the Minnesota Opera next month. (Mr. Moran has previously written only one opera, the 1985 "Juniper Tree," in collaboration with Philip Glass.) And in May, a choral work for 250 voices and 130 instrumentalists is to make its debut in Bethlehem, Pa.
But until now, Mr.
Moran, who studied with Darius Milhaud and Luciano Berio, has been better known for his more avant-garde escapades in Europe: a "department store window opera," which featured him living for eight days in the central window of the Wertheim Department Store in Berlin; a "Pachelbel Promenade," consisting of variations on the famed canon for every music group in the city of Graz, Austria, and a theater piece about Wagner, which pictured the composer as Jesus and scandalized Frankfurt.
Before then, in the United States, he had presented such events as "Make Room for Daddy" -- an "opera" written for 11 dogs.


Bond Swap Announced By M.A.C.
In a move that will produce more money for New York City officials to argue over as they seek to ease their fiscal problems, the state's Municipal Assistance Corporation said yesterday that it would raise $100 million by swapping some of its old bonds for new notes with lower interest rates.
The new refinancing will bring to $1 billion the total amount that the city might be able to tap from the assistance corporation over the next several years.
But its chairman, Felix G. Rohatyn, said it was too soon to say how and whether the money could be spent, adding that the M.A.C. would be reviewing the city's budget plans before approving any aid.


Senators Vow A Border War On a Tax Plan
Two New Jersey legislators who had stormed across the Hudson River to threaten retaliation for a proposed commuter-tax increase emerged angrily from a City Hall meeting with Dinkins administration officials yesterday and promised a border war.
The two Republican senators, John Scott and Louis Kosco, were hoping to dissuade Mayor David N. Dinkins from pressing forward with a proposal to raise the commuter tax on nonresidents who work in New York City.
Because of the way the Mayor has organized his proposal, the burden would fall on New Jersey and Connecticut commuters rather than on those from New York State.


Corrections
An article about gene therapy in Business Day on Feb. 14 referred incorrectly to the relationships of the parties in a clinical trial of the technology approved last week by the Recombinant Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health.
The trial will be run by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle.
The Targeted Genetics Corporation is providing financial support and collaborating with the center; the company received the approval from the Food and Drug Administration to test the genetic transfer mechanism used in the trial.


Publisher at New York
Richard Kinsler, the former publisher of Mademoiselle, has been named publisher of New York magazine.
He replaces Janice Grossman, who became publisher of Seventeen last month.
Mr.
Kinsler, 50 years old, was publisher of Mademoiselle from January 1987 to October 1991.
Most recently, he was corporate sales development director of Conde Nast Publications Inc.
New York is owned by K-III Magazines, a unit of Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company.


Perez's Arrival? On Time
Brace yourself.
There is a chance that Yankee pitcher Pascual Perez, who has turned his tardiness for spring training into an art form, might arrive on time this year.
General Manager Gene Michael and Manager Buck Showalter said today that Perez, late for each of his first two springs with the team, is expected for the first workout for pitchers and catchers Friday.
Showalter also said he believed that Perez had completed the necessary paperwork for acquiring a visa and a waiver to leave the Dominican Republic, where he lives.
But Michael, after saying earlier that he was hopeful Perez would be on time, later said he had no recourse if he wasn't.
"Why get upset?" he said.


Black Gang Movies Have Something to Teach
To the Editor:
"Curbing Urban Violence in Films" (editorial, Feb. 4) only perpetuates the myth that all films that deal with negative social behaviors are negative films.
Are we still laboring under the misconception that portrayals of violence are all alike, are all pandering to audience taste for blood and guts?


Quotations of the Day
"These are the last remains of a unique and irreplaceable resource. They represent a treasure house of potentially useful resources." -- MICHAEL BEAN, an environmental lawyer, arguing against the logging of ancient forests in the Pacific Northwest.  [ A12:1. ]
"I don't feel comfortable with losing 31,000 jobs." -- INTERIOR SECRETARY MANUEL LUJAN JR., offering a plan in support of the logging.  [ A12:1. ]


Bonaly, Sans Backflip, Has the Jump on Ito
As the leaders practiced their free-skate programs today, simulating what they hope will become medal-winning performances Friday night in the concluding round of the Olympic women's figure-skating competition, Surya Bonaly of France converted nine triple jumps, the most of any skater, but left out her backflip.
How critical was this, with the glamour event of the Albertville Games just a day away?


Art in Review
Jane Dickson  Brooke Alexander Gallery 59 Wooster Street SoHo Through Feb. 29
The streets and residents of Times Square, often as seen from her studio window, have been the subjects of Jane Dickson's paintings since the early 1980's.
Part of her current show consists of more than three dozen grisaille oil portraits of her neighbors and friends.
Executed broadly and apparently quickly (39 works in the show are dated 1992), the figures include a nude pregnant woman, a child sitting on Santa's knee, a grinning young man with a snake wound around his neck and genre tableaux of people chatting on a sidewalk.
This group portrait of a close-knit community of friends projects a positive, organic view of city living.
The darker side of this vision is an ever-present sense of menace that saturates other images in the show.
A few paintings of isolated New Year's Eve revelers are interspersed with densely packed images of riot police lighted by headlights, while each of six nocturnal paintings titled "Witness" consists of the image of a window with a single figure looking out -- a man peering fearfully from behind a shade, a child grasping a window guard and screaming.
The "Witness" paintings, composed mostly of silhouettes and subtle backlighting and featuring gritty surfaces that produce their own atmospheric haze, are the best in the show.
This is, in fact, Ms.
Dickson's best show in some time.
A certain cinematic staginess that marked her previous images is gone.
And her fundamentally conservative figurative mode begins to claim a place in the honorable tradition of a politically alert inner-city realism that had a revival in the last decade but now seems to be fading from view once again.


Subway Crime Fell in 1991, Officials Say
The total number of murders, rapes, robberies, assaults and other serious crimes committed in the New York City subway system declined 15 percent last year, to the lowest level since 1988, the transit police said yesterday.
The decline in felonies, transit officials said, was caused in part by the addition of about 200 officers patrolling the subways each day in 1991, as compared to 1990.


CHRONICLE
Two more engagements of note: In Delaware, the bachelor Governor, 52-year-old MICHAEL N. CASTLE, proposed to JANE DiSABATINO, 39, the vice president for business development of Ellerbe Becket, a Minneapolis architecture firm with offices in Washington.
Governor Castle, a Republican whose term expires in January, plans to run for Congress.
"She's just the right person," he said earlier this week.
"I'm very lucky and very happy that she is willing to marry me, considering how hectic my life is."


Wool Suit Quotas
To the Editor:
"As U.S. Urges Free Markets, Its Trade Barriers Are Many" (front page, Feb. 7) states that there is a cap of 1.2 million wool suits imported into the United States each year.
No.
Wool suit imports were 2.7 million in 1989, 2.3 million in 1990 and 2.4 million in the first 11 months of 1991.
We maintain wool suit quotas on 12 countries only, adding up to 1.4 million.
The biggest exporter of suits to the United States is Italy, with around half a million a year.
There is no quota on Italian suits.
G.
STEWART BOSWELL  President, American Apparel Manufacturers Association Arlington, Va., Feb. 7, 1992


Review/Art; Examining a Multi-Media Personality
Sean Landers's show at the Andrea Rosen Gallery in SoHo is like a studio visit in which the visitor, having been left alone for a moment, rummages through the artist's desk and encounters evidence of his innermost thoughts.
This idiosyncratic presentation of handwritten letters and sharp little art-world cartoons taped or pinned to the wall provides an extended look at a young artist whose many minor talents could add up to something major.
The exhibition highlights Mr.
Landers's skills as a letter writer, diarist, satirist, performer (and editor) and all-around guilt-ridden confessor.
Mr.
Landers also makes sculptures: smallish clay heads, displayed on tall pedestals, whose clumsy, anonymous faces are focused by titles like "Cop From Boston," "The Good Priest" and "The Unfortunate Son of an Irish Drunk." These characters often seem to have been inspired by the artist's Roman Catholic childhood in Palmer, Mass.


Movie Wizards Are Revealing Their Cyborgs' Secrets


Movie Wizards Tell Cyborgs' Secrets
"How'd they do that, anyway?" As Hollywood's special effects grow all the more dazzling, audiences surely ask that question more and more often.
A lot of the answers can be had at the Walter Reade Theater, where the Film Society of Lincoln Center today begins an eight-day tribute to the foremost wizards in the field.
The Film Society's salute to two divisions of Lucas Arts, Industrial Light and Magic and Skywalker Sound, will include screenings of such special-effects landmarks as "Return of the Jedi" and "Terminator 2: Judgment Day." There will also be two special workshops at which experts explain tricks of this extraordinarily tricky trade.
Tonight at 9 and tomorrow at 4:30 P.M., Gary Rydstrom of Skywalker Sound will illustrate the ways in which multi-layered sound tracks are created.
Next weekend, Scott Ross will reveal the inner workings of some of the best-known visual effects of recent years.


Review/Art; Just What Is a Drawing? Definitions, Definitions
"Allegories of Modernism," the big and frustrating overview of drawing at the Museum of Modern Art, can leave a visitor with a sense of deja vu.
Aren't these the same artists and the same works of art that have been in one big survey show after another during the last decade?
At once fashionable and timid in its selection of artists, the exhibition rounds up the usual suspects, from Julian Schnabel and Sherrie Levine to Sigmar Polke and Brice Marden, as well as a handful of highly visible young artists like Stephen Prina and the Starn Twins.
Some of the works are stunning, Mr.
Polke's and Mr.
Marden's among them.
But even they seem diminished by an exhibition that tries to do too much at once and succeeds at nothing in particular.


Shamir Retains Grasp on Likud Reins
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir staved off challenges to his Likud Party primacy today, winning a mandate to carry on as leader for June elections against a Labor Party that hopes its exile in opposition is about to end under the guidance of a new chief, Yitzhak Rabin.
Mr.
Shamir won less than half the votes of some 2,800 members of the Central Committee as he defeated two prominent and ambitious Cabinet members who were less interested in unseating him this time than in establishing future claims on the leadership.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  ISRAELIS ATTACK IN SOUTH LEBANON
Breaking through barricades set up by U.N. peacekeepers in southern Lebanon, an Israeli armored force backed by helicopters and artillery mounted a drive to stop cross-border rocket attacks by Shiite Muslim guerrillas.
The advance went beyond the Israelis' self-proclaimed "security zone." A1  In the battle zone: tanks roll and helicopters nosedive.
A10  The United States' response to the raid is restrained.
A10  Prime Minister Shamir will lead the Likud Party in June elections.
A10  Mr.
Shamir's Labor opponent is admired as a dove and a hawk.
A10  VOTING ON SOUTH AFRICA'S FUTURE
After his party's humiliating defeat in a parliamentary election, President de Klerk of South Africa said he would hold a referendum to ask whites if they support his efforts to negotiate a future without apartheid.
He said would resign if he loses.
A3  A WORRISOME CARGO
United States intelligence agencies are tracking a North Korean ship that they believe is carrying missiles and missile manufacturing equipment to Syria.
A9  DOHERTY IMPRISONED IN BELFAST
Joseph Doherty, the I.R.A. guerrilla deported from the United States, returned to the Belfast prison he escaped from 11 years ago.
The convicted killer could face more charges linked to the escape.
A5  TOUGH TALK FROM NORTH KOREA
President Kim Il Sung dismissed reports that his country is close to making an atomic bomb and said it is South Korea that cannot be trusted on nuclear issues.
A9  CONCERN ON HAITI
Caribbean leaders meeting in Jamaica said they wanted nations to consider stronger measures to restore Haiti's elected leader.
They said they would seek a meeting of foreign ministers of the Organization of American States.
A6  DISCORD ON POLISH ECONOMY
The new blueprint for Poland's economic revival has come under attack from critics who say it makes costly concessions to an unhappy public.
A11  PENTAGON SCENARIOS PANNED
Several members of the Senate Armed Services Committee challenged the Defense Department's vision of what military conflicts might lie ahead.
A8  India's Congress Party wins Punjab elections boycotted by Sikhs.
A9  National A12-16  LIMITS ON BREAST IMPLANTS
A Federal panel of experts recommended that silicone gel breast implants be allowed only as part of experimental trials that would help determine the risks involved.
A1  U.S.
SPENDING ON RESEARCH SLIPS
American spending on research and development began to fall for the first time since the 1970's, even as other countries increased their investments in research, a Federal agency said.
A1  GUILTY PLEA IN H.U.D.
INQUIRY
In the first successful prosecution in the influence peddling inquiry at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, a New York State businessman close to former Secretary Samuel Pierce Jr. pleaded guilty to tax evasion.
A1  SHAKE-UP AT TIME WARNER
Time Warner Inc. said that N. J. Nicholas Jr., the potential successor to Steven Ross as the company's chairman, had resigned and would be replaced by Gerald Levin, the vice chairman.
A1  SAVING JOBS INSTEAD OF OWLS
The Interior Secretary said he would seek an exception to the Endangered Species Act that would allow the northern spotted owl to remain close to extinction in order to save logging jobs in the bird's only habitat.
A12  PROVING THE PUNDITS WRONG
Man in the News: With his victory in New Hampshire, Paul Tsongas again proved his talent for confounding the naysayers.
A14  WHAT CLINTON NEEDS TO WIN
Political Memo: It's voters like Pete and Henry Dionne -- young, male and alienated -- that Gov.
Bill Clinton sought in Florida to regain his footing in the Democratic Presidential race.
A14  Tsongas and Clinton dueled over a place on New York's ballot.
A15  Bush backers were told not to attack Patrick Buchanan.
A14  AT CONVENTION, AN UNHAPPY UNION
Reporter's Notebook: At the A.F.L.-C.I.O. meeting, the labor secretary seemed as hostile as they come.
A13  TRYING TO RESCUE PHILADELPHIA
Mayor Edward Rendell of Philadelphia presented a five-year budget plan that would take something from almost every city service and employee to rescue the city from its fiscal crisis.
A12  TROUBLE FOR SPECTER
The recession, the Thomas hearings and the movie "J.F.K." could hinder the re-election of Pennsylvania's two-term Republican Senator, Arlen Specter.
A15  CHOLERA AFTER AIRLINE FLIGHT
Health officials searched for passengers of a flight from Latin America to Los Angeles after one passenger died and at least five others became sick with cholera.
A12  Massachusetts won a round in keeping its Congressional strength.
A16  Law Page A18  The furor over a controversial date rape trial -- in Canada.
A look at the prosecutors' strategy in the Tyson trial.
At the Bar  Metropolitan Digest, B1 D'AMATO BACK ON THE TRAIL
Emerging from the two-year-long shadow of a Senate ethics investigation, a newly confident Alfonse M. D'Amato is running hard for re-election, campaigning against a stable of incumbent villains that sometimes even includes his fellow Republican, President Bush.
Anticipating a far-tougher battle than in 1986, Mr.
D'Amato is embracing a typically in-your-face strategy.
A1  CLASHING OVER CANCER PATIENTS
Plans by Memorial Sloan-Kettering Center to open a satellite branch in Danbury, Conn., have doctors there up in arms, charging that the New York hospital is trying to funnel off well-to-do patients.
A1  Business Digest, D1 Weekend C1-32  Winter golf that's in the mind.
C1  Novelists look into the future.
C1  Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31  Editorials A30
Where's the rest of him?
A dubious battle in Lebanon.
Corrections and a scandal.
Topics: Local hero.
Letters A30  A. M. Rosenthal: Buchanan's free ride.
A31  Leslie H. Gelb: What peace dividend?
A31  Molly Ivins: Confederacy of fools?
A31  Richard W. Murphy: Give Mideast talks a boost.
A31  Sports B6-14


Accounts
*
The Pittsburgh Brewing Co., Pittsburgh, is narrowing the field in a review of its advertising account that does not include the incumbent agency, Della Femina, McNamee Inc., New York.
A decision on a new agency, to handle all advertising for the company's three brands -- Iron City, I. C. Light and Classic Draft -- is expected by mid-March.


Walker Runs Sideline Route but U.S. Is Still Too Slow
The American four-man bobsleds finished 12th and 14th today at La Plagne in the final training runs before competition begins Friday.
Of the 32 sleds on the course today, USA I, driven by Randy Will of Endwell, N.Y., placed 12th.
Its combined times for the two runs down the almost-mile-long course was 1 minute 59.25 seconds.
USA II, driven by Chuck Leonowicz of Clifton Park, N.Y., was 14th in 1:59.42.
The fastest time was 1:58.08 by Austria I, driven by Ingo Appelt.


It Doesn't Hurt to Be Confident
Can the United States beat the Unified Team? Don't make Kjell Larsson laugh.
"They have absolutely no chance," said Larsson, coach of the French Olympic hockey team.
"The Russians are too technically good. No. No. No. No. How many ways can I say it?"


Loss of 'Heart' In Trademarks
Heart, super and pure are faltering; ultra, plus and quality are gaining strength.
Those are some of the findings of an annual study of applications for brand-name trademark registration by lawyers at Dechert Price &amp; Rhoads in Philadelphia.
Among the more noteworthy trends found in the study are declines in applications using the words "heart," "fresh" and "pure," by 40 percent, 18 percent and 23 percent, respectively.
That followed complaints over the use of those words by Federal regulators and health-issue advocates.


The Long Odds and Big Dreams of the Goat
"I was the basketball matador and all the bulls came to kick my . . . ." Earl Manigault's words were lost in a chuckle, which was smothered by a phlegmy cough that rattled his frail body.
He began to arrange the home fries on his breakfast plate.
We were in the coffee shop at Bellevue Hospital yesterday.
"The story you always hear, the Goat was a great high school player but he failed, didn't make college, didn't make the pros. That was jealousy. I didn't have to go anywhere to make it."
He pushed the plate toward me.
It was a diorama now, one crusty brown scrap of potato surrounded by congealing lumps.
"The Goat in the middle, that's Brooklyn, Bronx . . . ." His voice disappeared again.
I held my breath to hear him.
"The game came looking for me."


BRIEFS
*
Baxter Healthcare Corp., Deerfield, Ill., said its Hyland division had signed a three-year $105 million agreement to supply plasma-derived products to American Healthcare Systems. *
Boeing Co., Seattle, said its defense and space group division in Huntsville, Ala., had been awarded a $436 million missile contract by the Army Missile Command.


Montreal Journal; A Sovereign Quebec, He Says, Needn't Be Separe
As he preaches the independence of Quebec from Wall Street to the run-down districts of Montreal's East End, Jacques Parizeau likes to say that the French-speaking province has been a "pain in the neck" for Canada, and that he wishes the nine English-speaking provinces well after the break.
All the same, he takes comfort from English-speaking Canada's problems in reaching a new constitutional formula to keep Quebec from making the split.


Assault by Land and Air Creates No Man's Land
Mohammed Hajj rushed to rescue his elderly parents in this village in southern Lebanon today but found his way suddenly blocked by an Israeli helicopter gunship.
Mr.
Hajj bolted from his car and rolled behind a nearby rock at the entrance to the village, 50 miles south of Beirut.
He then frantically crawled toward a concrete fortification for the United Nations peacekeeping force and found four reporters huddled inside.
They had had the same encounter with the helicopter only few minutes before.


Taking the Wrong Road To Judicial Diversity
To the Editor:
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's Task Force on Judicial Diversity has taken the wrong road to increasing the women and members of minorities on the New York State Supreme Court to avoid challenge under the Voting Rights Act (news article, Feb. 12).
Downsizing districts, nonpartisan elections and giving total control over judicial elections to the State Legislature might increase diversity, but would more likely raise the cost of elections, lessen voter participation and strengthen political factions that can raise funds and turn out voters.


Critics' Choices; A Film Epic On an Artist Seeking God
"Andrei Rublev" returns.
The celebrated Andrei Tarkovsky epic, first reviewed when it was shown at the 1973 New York Film Festival, opens today at the Film Forum (209 West Houston Street, Manhattan) in something approximating its original form.
The film, about the revered 15th-century Russian icon painter, now runs 185 minutes, compared to the 146-minute version presented at the festival.
When Tarkovsky made "Andrei Rublev," he conceived it as a boldly free-form consideration of the responsibility of the artist (any artist) to himself and to the world that gave him life.
It was thus almost inevitable that the completed film would go on to illustrate everything that can happen to an artist, in this case Tarkovsky, when he refuses to mind the strictures of authoritarian rule.


Prices of Treasuries Unchanged
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed in extremely sluggish trading yesterday.
With auctions of new two-year and five-year notes next week, and many traders seeing the prospect of another reduction in short-term interest rates by the Federal Reserve Board dimming, there was some light selling of shorter-term bills and notes, and purchases of longer-term notes and bonds.
But trading volume was very light.


Contracts Under Investigation at Housing Agency
The New York City Department of Investigation said yesterday that it was looking into allegations that Laura D. Blackburne, the chairwoman of the city's Housing Authority, improperly awarded contracts to renovate the authority's executive offices.
The allegations were made by two members of the Housing Authority's procurement staff and were reported in an article in The Daily News yesterday.
Jack Marcus, a senior buyer who left the agency last March, said in the article that Ms.
Blackburne was in such a hurry to redo the offices that she avoided the competitive bidding process by having the agency solicit price quotes over the phone.


Terreri Unbeaten in 10 but Devil Winning Streak Ends
Despite playing without Scott Stevens, their all-star defenseman, for the majority of the game because of an injury to his right knee, the Devils salvaged a 4-4 tie with the Blackhawks tonight at Chicago Stadium.
Claude Lemieux's 35th goal of the season tied the score with 36 seconds left for the Devils, who got two goals from Stephane Richer and one from Valery Zelepukin.


Corrections and an Old Scandal
New York City's leaderless Department of Correction urgently needs a competent, credible new commissioner.
Why then consider a candidate whose career remains shadowed by scandal?
Arnett Gaston, who now manages one of the city's largest jailhouses on Rikers Island, apparently heads the Dinkins administration's short list to succeed Allyn Sielaff.
He presents impressive credentials: a Ph.D. in clinical psychology, a visiting fellowship at the National Institute of Justice, a variety of senior administrative jobs over the course of a long career in the city jails.


Topics of The Times; Local Hero
Sullivan Street, between Broome and Spring, is a very fine street on which to live.
Not because it's fancy.
It isn't.
Not because it's in New York City's SoHo.
The neighborhood on a weekend is a zoo.
But because it's Anthony Iannacone's home.
In the 28 years since Mr.
Iannacone arrived on Sullivan Street (he was an infant at the time), it had become a monument to dog droppings, debris, weeds and graffiti.
It isn't now.


Students Use Very Civil Disobedience Against SUNY Cuts
Most of the students at the State University College here had not been born when campus protest was in its glory in the 1960's, so perhaps they didn't know any better.
How else can you explain a takeover of the administration building where the college president holds a joint news conference with the student body president?
Or where the campus public relations staff helps publicize the protest?


Mistake Disturbs Graves At Black Burial Ground
As many as 20 graves in a colonial-era cemetery for black New Yorkers have been uprooted by construction workers, notwithstanding repeated assurances by Federal officials that this critical archeological site in lower Manhattan would be spared such destruction.
A new 34-story Federal Building is to rise on a portion of the cemetery, bounded by Broadway and Elk, Reade and Duane Streets, where graves had survived undisturbed since the 1700's.
The regional administrator of the General Services Administration, William J. Diamond, has said repeatedly that construction would take second place to careful archeological excavation and that no remains or artifacts would be endangered.


Gorbachev to Write For Times Co. Unit
Mikhail S. Gorbachev is to write a monthly newspaper column for a unit of The New York Times Company, with distribution starting on Monday, John C. Brewer, president of The New York Times Syndication Sales Corporation, said yesterday.
The first four of the former Soviet President's 1,000-word columns will address the future of Communism, the Persian Gulf war, relations between the Kremlin and the Pope and Mr.
Gorbachev's relationship with Boris N. Yeltsin, the President of Russia.
Columns by Mr.
Gorbachev have already appeared in La Stampa, a newspaper in Turin, Italy.


Principal Admits Misusing School Funds
The principal of a Queens public school for handicapped youngsters pleaded guilty yesterday to misusing school funds after law-enforcement authorities accused him of stealing more than $20,000 by faking bills for goods that he never ordered and skimming money from cake sales and other fund-raisers.
Just hours after he surrendered to the Queens District Attorney's office, the principal, Dennis Durkin of the Queens School for Career Development, at 142-10 Linden Boulevard in Jamaica, pleaded guilty to filing a false instrument -- a forged $200 voucher.
As part of his plea agreement, he has agreed to reimburse the Board of Education $20,000 and to resign after the school year ends.


Yitzhak Rabin: A Hawk Clasping an Olive Branch
Although the terms are overworked and tend in Israel to lose precise meaning, former Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin is admired by supporters as both dove and hawk.
The dovish side of the man who today recaptured the leadership of the opposition Labor Party would yield large parcels of Israeli-held territory in exchange for peace with the Palestinians and neighboring Arab countries.


Economic Scene; Australia's Angst On U.S. Behavior
AUSTRALIANS consider themselves among the staunchest friends and allies of the United States, having fought beside Americans in World War I, World War II, Korea, Vietnam and the Persian Gulf.
But during a swing from Melbourne to Sydney to Brisbane and Cairns, this reporter found Australians giving vent to their worries and frustrations about America's political and economic behavior.
Australians' anxieties about the United States are intensified by Australia's own recession -- the deepest in 60 years.
Unemployment rose to a postwar rate of more than 10 percent in recent months.
Business investment has fallen sharply, as the roaring boom of the 80's went bust.


Tyson Accuser Details Offer to Drop Charges
The woman Mike Tyson was convicted of raping says that she was offered more than $1 million to drop the charges against the former heavyweight champion before his trial opened in Indianapolis last month.
The woman, Desiree Washington, made the assertion in an interview to be broadcast tonight on the ABC News program "20/20."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN Man in the News: Paul Ethemios Tsongas; A Politician Who Thought He Could
For Paul E. Tsongas, the defining moment of his victory in the New Hampshire primary didn't come on election night, nor in the sudden outpouring of support from Greek-Americans who had largely ignored him but at a rally Wednesday at Hopkins' Plaza in Baltimore.
"To walk onto that plaza and see all those people was not just another event," Mr.
Tsongas said today in an interview.
"This was a memory being made." The big turnout was special because Mr.
Tsongas had campaigned in Maryland for only five days.


Inquiry Into Abuses At H.U.D. Produces Its First Guilty Plea
In the first successful prosecution in the inquiry into influence peddling at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, a New York State businessman close to former Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr. pleaded guilty today to attempting to evade taxes on income he received from a consulting firm that had a grant from the housing agency.
The businessman, Samuel P. Singletary of Pleasantville, entered his plea before Judge Stanley S. Harris of United States District Court for the District of Columbia.
He admitted that he gave the Internal Revenue Service false information about his earnings in 1985.


For Children
'A First Look' Metropolitan Museum of Art Uris Center for Education (212) 570-3932 Recommended ages: 6 to 12 Through May 24
The Met's free weekend education programs for children extend to studying current and permanent exhibitions through discussions, sketching and art projects that take place in the Uris Center for Education and in the galleries.
In addition, "A First Look" welcomes parents.
The 90-minute programs tomorrow and Sunday, led by Lena Masari Sawyer, a museum educator, will examine the art found in Benin palaces through a new exhibition (until Sept. 13), "Royal Art of Benin From the Perls Collection: Treasures From an African Kingdom." The program will start with a Nigerian (Benin is in southern Nigeria) storyteller, who is part Benin.
The storyteller, Sonala Olumhense, can speak Edo, the Benin language, which he will use with English to tell stories.
As a young boy, he competed in festivals as a storyteller; in this program, he will pepper his tales with instruments (drums, bells, a thumb piano) to relate the histories of the rich Benin kings and their iconography.
After Mr.
Olumhense's 20-minute performance, the entourage will go to the gallery and, using three or four Benin artworks, like a brass king's head (called an oba), Ms.
Sawyer will encourage a discussion between the children and herself.
A 15-minute sketching period will then begin (all materials are provided); the work the children draw will be based on the Benin art.
Finally, the group will reconvene in the Uris Center where they will embark on an art project; this weekend they'll be given pastels to do coloring in a gallery guide describing the Benin works.
The program, which does not require reservations, is at 11 A.M. and 2:30 P.M tomorrow and at 11 A.M. on Sunday.
Ms.
Sawyer, who conducts the tour, said older children (the predominate age of participants being 7 and 8) are welcome to bring their younger siblings.
This weekend's art project is simple because there will be a storyteller, which is not part of the usual routine.
Admission to the museum is $6 for adults and free for children with an adult.
Future programs will take a look at, among other subjects, the Abstract Expressionists and French and English period rooms.  'Fiesta Mexicana'  Museum of American Folk Art 2 Lincoln Square Manhattan (212) 595-9533 Recommended for all ages Tomorrow
Argentina Palacios, a storyteller, may be from Panama but she knows her Mexican folk tales.
Miss Palacios will tell Mexican tales, sprinkled with Spanish and English (she often influences the English-speaking children to learn Spanish), at this 2 P.M. program, which is part of the Museum of American Folk Art's current exhibition "Patterns of Prestige: The Development and Influence of Saltillo Sarapes." Afterward, there will be a pinata party, where children can give the colorful pinatas a bash or two, upon which fruit and nuts will spill out.
In addition, there will be refreshments (soda and juice) and a mariachi band.
The museum is open daily from 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
Admission to the party, storytelling and museum is free. 'Peter Pan'  Museum of Television and Radio 25 West 52d Street Manhattan (212) 621-6600 Recommended ages: 3 to 7 Through Feb. 29
In 1954, Mary Martin created the definitive Peter Pan on Broadway; in 1955, NBC produced a television adaptation with the spry actress (and choreography by Jerome Robbins).
In 1960, a color version was made.
Now children (and adults) who can't get enough of the defiant Peter can watch him in the color rendition at the Museum of Television and Radio, which is screening the 100-minute show in its theater, where the seats are soft and the screen is large.
The television adaptation was produced with actors on a stage, giving the story more of an edge and a stronger sense of Peter's personality than, say, the Walt Disney animated version.
Martin is a powerful presence, with her short muscular legs, cropped hair and pixie face.
Her Peter is so forceful, you believe everything he says, including, "No one must ever touch me." Even Peter's conceited side and pursuit of his shadow ("It's mine!") is touchingly neurotic.
Children seem to like this version for its tart dialogue (Tinkerbell calls Wendy a "great ugly girl"), pools of color in the Neverland scenes (where the crocodile is an actor in costume but is still threatening) and Captain Hook, who seems as concerned with his looks (his fuchsia hat is adorned with a black ostrich feather) as he is with killing Peter.
Captain Hook also dances the tango, and even a tarantella, to keep the crew impressed.
When Peter and his friends sing "I Won't Grow Up," their attitude makes absolute sense.
And when Wendy asks Peter what his exact feelings are for her ("a devoted son"), the story offers moments of quaintness missing from more recent adaptations.
Tickets to the 1 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday programs are $5 for adults and $3 for children.
Strollers may be taken into the theater.  'Heidi'  Theaterworks/USA Promenade Theater 2162 Broadway (at 76th Street) (212) 677-5959 Recommended ages: 5 and up Through March 8
In its newest musical, "Heidi," Theaterworks shows off its gifts: fine acting and clear presentations.
"Heidi" works on a small stage even though the story is set in two European countries: a Swiss mountain village (the mountain backdrop moves and is pink and dotted with evergreen trees) and in a bourgeois Frankfurt home.
Heidi, played by a young-faced Marti McGoldrick, is dressed in a dirndl and wears short, tight braids; the male Swiss characters wear lederhosen-like garments.
When Heidi arrives at her grandfather's scruffy home, she's nervous.
And why wouldn't she be?
Grandfather acts and looks as if he has been in the Alps too long: his gray goatish beard is unruly, his wild-eyed face is haunting, he has only one stool to sit on, and he lives on hard cheese and hard bread, all enough to make an edelweiss droop.
But Heidi, with the help of a goatherd (and a lively yodeling scene), decides she can best ruffle her grandfather's stoic feathers by talking a lot.
Unfortunately, fate -- in the form of Heidi's selfish aunt -- intercedes and Heidi is suddenly in Frankfurt, dealing with another difficult person, Clara.
Clara is Heidi's age, but is all curls (she fingers them obsessively), orange froufrou clothes and is in a wheelchair.
The scenes with Clara appeal to young theatergoers, who find her churlish, spoiled character something to revel in.
When Clara first meets Heidi, she says, "Heidi's not a name." Heidi replies, "You don't look sick to me."
Heidi may be parentless but she's practical, making her a heroine children respect and like.
The play leans on songs, dialogue and the odd characters.
But for children, this production shows how a lovely book can be turned into a play.
Tickets are $15; shows are tomorrow, Sunday and March 1, 7 and 8 at 12:30 P.M.
Children under 5 years old are not permitted in the theater.
KEEP IN MIND
"UNDERWATER CITIES: THE WORLD OF THE CORAL REEF," an exhibition through March 31 of 60 varieties of coral, tropical fish and invertebrates filling 11 aquarium tanks, including angelfish, lionfish, hard and soft corals and clams.
Presented by the New York Aquarium, Wildlife Conservation International and the World Financial Center, with daily talks by marine biologists at 12:30 P.M.
At the Courtyard Gallery of the World Financial Center, West Street south of Vesey Street, Manhattan.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Mondays through Fridays and noon to 5 P.M.
Saturdays and Sundays.
Free.
Information: (212) 945-0505.
"THE LITTLEST CLOWN," a musical about a circus family going broke; with a lion tamer, romance and a bearded lady.
Presented by the Pixie Judy Troupe.
Tomorrow and Sunday 1 P.M., at Theater East, 211 East 60th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $14.95 for the show and a party afterward with clowns; $19.95 for the show and pre-show lunch (drinks are $1 extra) served at 12:30 P.M.
Reservations: (212) 838-8528.
"RE-CREATING RADIO," a workshop for children ages 8 to 13, who will read radio scripts and operate sound effects in the tradition of classic radio shows.
Tomorrow from 10 to 11:30 A.M. at the Museum of Television and Radio, 25 West 52d Street, Manhattan.
The theme: mystery.
Tickets, $5 (includes a mailed audiocassette).
Reservations: (212) 621-6600.
"ART BEYOND SIGHT," an exhibition of sculptures (many of which can be touched) and paintings by visually impaired artists.
Through March 29 at the Queens Museum of Art, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
Family drop-in workshops on Sundays, 1 P.M. (fee: $2 plus admission).
Museum hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission, $2 for adults and $1 for children 5 and up.
Information: (718) 592-9700.
"KEYS TO THE CITY, KIDS WEEK," a weeklong program, ending today, of hundreds of events for public school children on recess.
For information on today's activities, call (718) 935-5300 (English) or (718) 935-5303 (Spanish) or tune into WNYE-TV, Channel 25, or WNYE-FM (91.5).
The A.T.&amp;T.
Infoquest Center, 550 Madison Avenue, at 56th Street, is participating with its technology exhibit: about 40 interactive displays that explain photonics, microelectronics and computer software.
Free.
Hours: Tuesdays, 10 A.M. to 9 P.M., Wednesdays through Sundays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 605-5555.


Real-Life Tough Guys and Silver-Screen Gangsters
"He didn't rob nothin'. You know why he's dying? He's gonna die because he refused to come in when I called."
Did Marlon Brando mumble those words in "The Godfather"?
Or was it Paul Sorvino in "Goodfellas"?
Robert De Niro in "The Untouchables"?


Racing With a Shadow


Doctors in Connecticut Resist Cancer Center Satellite Plans
There may be no bigger name in cancer treatment than Sloan-Kettering, but doctors in Danbury, Conn., are far from pleased about a plan by the Manhattan hospital to build its first satellite treatment center there.
The issue, ostensibly, is how best to serve cancer patients in southern New England.
Officials at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center say the area needs a new outpatient center to provide radiation therapy.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Clinton Task: Making Message Heard
Standing together just out of reach of the handshake of Gov.
Bill Clinton, the Dionne brothers came to the town park here today looking for answers.
None of the three young men, ages 18 to 22, have any health insurance, and two are taking courses at Polk Community College here in the hope that it will help them find other jobs.
Because of their economic circumstances, all three still live at home.


Art in Review
Nicole Carstens  Souyun Yi Gallery 249 Centre Street (at Broome Street) SoHo Through tomorrow
The work of Nicole Carstens, a young Dutch artist now living in the United States, offers a low-key extension of Surrealist sculpture in which everyday materials are assigned strange and ambiguous new functions.
A hanging curtain made entirely of opaque rubber gloves joined at the fingertips and wrists evokes both trusting encounters and flayed skin; a quiltlike wall piece titled "Great Drain" is made of 50 wax-coated paper napkins patterned with dark amber stains.
They are only tea stains, although here as elsewhere the artist makes the ingredients of her objects appear enticingly repellent at first glance.
If eliciting double takes is one of Ms.
Carstens's preoccupations, another is her inclination -- one often associated with childhood -- to re imagine ordinary things into grander uses.
Sometimes the results are simplistic, as in the big wads of gray steel wool locked up in a cage and called "Cloud-2"; sometimes, as in "On a Fence," they fail to register.
A piece like "Onderbeit," however, presents an image to come back to.
A pink ceramic bathroom sink, its edges lined with paraffin-filled glasses, suggests the lower jaw and teeth of the "underbite" in the title.
By raising the sink so we cannot see over its edge, Ms.
Carstens also creates a mysterious altar with offerings of milky-looking candles waiting to be lighted.
Like almost everything else in the show, it looks as if it could disintegrate back into the throwaway world it came from in an instant, and this impression of evanescence accounts for much of the attraction of this artist's work.


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, the Poetry Project, St.
Mark's Church, Second Avenue and 10th Street, Manhattan.
Readings by writers from the project's workshops like Dean Kostos, Kristen Prevallet, Miriam Solan and others.
Today at 10:30 P.M.
Suggested admission: $5.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
LECTURES AND PLAYS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Family Matters: An Immigrant Memoir," a dramatization of the lives of an immigrant family, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "House of Heritage," a slide show and lecture on the history of the museum's building, and at 2 P.M. by "Searching for Your Roots?," a genealogy workshop.
Separate admission is required for each event.
Lecture tickets are $4; dramatization tickets, $10 ($8 for the elderly; $5 for students); workshop tickets, $4.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
LECTURE AND PHOTOGRAPHY SHOW, Sephardic House, 8 West 70th Street, Manhattan.
"Sephardim in the Mediterranean Today," a lecture by Yale Strom, a photographer whose exhibition "The Expulsion of the Jews: 500 Years of Exile," is on view through March 12.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Admission: $7 ($5 for students and seniors).
Information: (212) 873-0300.
FILM AND DISCUSSION, Association for the Advancement of Psychoanalysis, 329 East 62d Street, Manhattan.
"Room at the Top," (1959), followed by a discussion of the film.
Today at 7:30 P.M.
Admission: $7 ($4 for the elderly and students).
Information: (212) 838-8044.
GALLERY TALKS, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
"The Photographer's Craft," by Amelia Arenas, today at noon; "Looking at Modern Art: Abstraction," by Jill Snyder, today at 1 P.M.; "Portraits," by Ms.
Snyder, today at 3 P.M.; "The Paley Collection," by Matthew Armstrong, tomorrow at 1 and 3 P.M. and Sunday at 1 P.M., by Gail Stavitsky; "Primitivism in Modern Art," by Ms.
Stavitsky, Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free under age 16).
Information: (212) 708-9480.


Art in Review
Brian Wood  Lieberman &amp; Saul Gallery 155 Spring Street SoHo Through March 14
Given their great detail and consistently rendered space, it's hard to combine photographs with other media.
In a striking group of work, Brian Wood circumvents the medium's recalcitrance by using ambiguous photographs in which formal qualities of texture and line predominate.
He takes small black-and-white images of subjects like a faceted rock face or fingers clutching a length of rope, mounts them on sheets of plastic, then draws around them with diluted black ink.
Often, Mr.
Wood will extend the shapes of the photograph onto the plastic sheet, using thick black strokes or thin gray washes to jump across the edge of the frame and create new, essentially abstract forms.
The resulting images are richly suggestive, with the drawings' loose, abstract forms playing off the photographs' more definite, though obliquely presented, subjects.
The photograph in one work here shows what looks like a swarm of bees on a tree limb, seen in shallow focus; extending out from the photo are looming black shapes that suggest the pupae of some ominous insect.
In several other pictures, Mr.
Wood uses a skeletal motif, in one case surrounding a photograph of bare branches jutting out from a tree trunk with a drawing of striped forms.
At times, the links between photographs and drawings in these pieces seem forced.
But, for the most part, the pairings work exceptionally well, with each element providing a level of suggestion and expression unavailable to the other.
The results are provocative and involving, uncovering complex layers of allusion and emotional nuance.


Review/Film; Take His Mother, Please
How soon we forget.
"Stop! Or My Mom Will Shoot" is a Sylvester Stallone comedy to make one yearn to relive the pleasures of "Rhinestone," in which Mr.
Stallone appeared with Dolly Parton without ever seeming to be in the same frame with her.
This time his co-star is Estelle Getty, the dynamite doll from television's "Golden Girls" and an actress whose presence is no more easily ignored than Miss Parton's.
Not that Mr.
Stallone seems to be trying.
The pint-size Miss Getty is an engaging trouper to whom he responds with suitable mock outrage, but their material is bottom-drawer.
It is terrible.
"Stop! Or My Mom Will Shoot" plays as if it were a pilot for a sitcom that wasn't sold in 1975.


Delinquent Parents Lose Windfall to New Jersey
Scores of New Jersey residents who thought they had come into a windfall from a class-action discrimination suit against the USX Corporation are in for a surprise.
The state has grabbed their money for child-support payments.
State officials, who called the action precedent-setting, have intercepted $1.2 million intended for New Jerseyans who are delinquent in paying child support.


Critics' Choices; Renaissance Music Man
Early-music fans who collected records in the late 1960's will remember seeing the name Antoine Busnois, sometimes spelled Busnoys, on many a disk of French Renaissance songs and sacred works.
Since then, the early-music movement has largely abandoned the Renaissance, and even the Baroque, and has plowed into the 19th century, letting Busnois (along with Binchois, Dufay, Ockeghem and even, astonishingly, Josquin Desprez) fade into the mists of history.
One group that has steadfastly stuck to its Renaissance roots all these years is the Waverly Consort.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M. at Town Hall (123 West 43d Street, Manhattan), the group will present a homage to Busnois, both to commemorate the 500th anniversary of his death (his birth year, around 1430, has never been established), and to serve as a reminder of how innovative and influential his music was.


REGIONAL LEADERS SEEK HAITI MEETING
Caribbean leaders gathered here for regional summit talks said today that they would seek a meeting of foreign ministers of the Organization of American States in Washington to consider stronger measures to restore Haiti's democratically elected Government.
Among the measures are an economic blockade and joint military intervention, leaders at the Caribbean Community meeting said.


Krabbe's Barcelona Plans
Expressing confidence that her four-year ban from competition would be overturned on appeal, KATRIN KRABBE said she expected to represent Germanyat the Barcelona Olympic Games.
The 22-year-old world sprint champion was suspended along with her trainer and two teammates after German track authorities concluded that the athletes had submitted identical urine samples last month for a drug test.
She repeated her denials that she had taken part in a scheme to submit false samples.


Chief at Orion Pictures Is Joining Paramount
William Bernstein, president and chief executive of the Orion Pictures Corporation, plans to join the Paramount Pictures Corporation, effective March 2.
Orion's Oscar-nominated hits like "Silence of the Lambs" have been overshadowed by the financial troubles that plunged the company into Chapter 11 bankruptcy last year.
Mr.
Bernstein, 58, will become a Paramount executive vice president in charge of business affairs and legal and administrative matters, with jurisdiction over filmed entertainment, music publishing and several chains of movie theaters with more than 950 screens in the United States, Canada and Europe.


Governor of Arizona Challenges S.&amp; L. Case
Gov.
J.
Fife Symington 3d of Arizona today accused the Resolution Trust Corporation, the news media and Congress of "a public hanging," blaming them for what he called distortions and lies about his role in one of the nation's largest savings and loan failures.
Governor Symington, a Republican, was recently sued by the Government and accused of improperly using his influence to obtain millions of dollars in loans for a troubled real estate project that ultimately sank the Southwest Savings and Loan Association in Phoenix.


At the Bar
Even in a recessionary economy, jury awards in personal injury cases continue to climb.
According to the biweekly newsletter for trial lawyers, Lawyers Alert, last year's 10 top awards to plaintiffs amounted to "an eye-popping" $673 million.
The biggest award of them all -- $127 million -- went to an Illinois man whose ophthalmologist missed in administering a crucial injection.
But to the Federation of Insurance and Corporate Counsel, the point is clear: something must be done to tame runaway, bleeding-heart juries, so profligate with their clients' money.


Another Grim Night on the Streets


On My Mind; Buchanan's Free Ride
They did not create Patrick Buchanan's victory in New Hampshire -- the recession and the Administration's long lost-weekend case of economic staggers did that.
But suddenly stricken with pusillanimous paralysis the press, politicians and President gave Mr.
Buchanan a nice, comfortable, free ride on his way.
Wait, stay with this, even if you loathe the man.
I have good news toward the end about fighting him.


CHRONICLE
Love, your magic spell is everywhere. Well, almost.
President Bush's daughter, DOROTHY BUSH LeBLOND, will cross party lines to marry a top aide to one of her father's most vocal critics in the Democratic Party, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri.


Tyson's Prosecutors Tell of Strategy
When a jury in Indianapolis convicted Mike Tyson of raping Desiree Washington last week, the case instantly became the nation's leading example of a date rape prosecution.
But because Indiana, like New York, is among the few states that prohibit televised coverage of trials, other prosecutors were unable to tune in the Cable News Network or Court TV to monitor the successful efforts of Barbara J. Trathen, a lawyer with no experience in trying a sexual assault case, and J. Gregory Garrison, a lawyer with practically no experience in the area.


Foreign Affairs; What Peace Dividend?
As campaign '92 heads south, Republicans and Democrats will no longer be able to ignore perhaps their most telling point of conflict: Democratic Presidential hopefuls propose cuts in U.S. military spending roughly three times greater than now projected by President Bush.
Mr.
Bush's peace dividend -- or savings on previously planned defense outlays -- would total about $66 billion by 1997.


POLISH FISCAL PLAN INSPIRES CRITICISM
Poland's new economic blueprint, unveiled with fanfare this week, has been attacked as an inflationary plan that makes too many costly concessions to a restive public.
Once the country with Eastern Europe's boldest plan for dismantling the Communist economy, Poland has been struggling in recent months to come up with some mid-course corrections that would retain a measure of austerity but restore popular confidence in the nation's leadership.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.75
6.54
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.87
3.83
5.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.99
3.95
5.92
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.00
6.99
7.77
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.90
7.90
8.06
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.95
8.95
9.24
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.80
6.80
7.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Roberto d'Aubuisson, 48, Far-Rightist in Salvador
Roberto d'Aubuisson, a rightist leader and former national guard officer who was widely believed to be a principal proponent of assassinations by "death squads" during El Salvador's civil war, died yesterday in San Salvador, his doctor reported.
Mr. d'Aubuisson was 48 years old.
He had been suffering from throat cancer since April 1991 and had made several trips to the United States for medical treatment.
During the years of civil war, many wealthy landowners viewed Mr. d'Aubuisson as a relentless crusader against what they saw as threats to their existence from those demanding land redistribution and political reforms.


On Stage, and Off
'Jelly's Last Jam' at Home
The future has certainly been knocking at Broadway's door recently, with flexible ticket discounts making their debut at Bloomingdale's Ticketmaster and the Theater Development Fund's TKTS booths grudgingly following suit.
Now come music videos and the dreaded pay-per-view performance, which Broadway sages say will ruin the theater by "cannibalizing" its audience.
The fear is that if people see the show on television, they won't go to see it live.
Producers still remember how Joseph Papp's production of "Much Ado About Nothing" in the early 1970's died at the box office after being televised.
But times do change.
The show in question now is "Jelly's Last Jam," the musical based on the life of the legendary jazz pianist and composer Jelly Roll Morton, starring Gregory Hines, with libretto and direction by George C. Wolfe.
Scheduled to open at the Virginia Theater on April 26, at a cost of $5 million, it is being produced by Margo Lion and Pamela Koslow-Hines.
Jujamcyn Theaters, which owns the Virginia, is a co-producer and a major investor in the show, as is Polygram Diversified Entertainment.
Because a successful album is practically guaranteed, and because the music is a natural for a video on VH-1 and Black Entertainment Television, Polygram considers the show a good bet.
And a pay-per-view performance could provide a fast way to recoup an investment.
John Scher, the president of Polygram Diversified Entertainment, says he will soon begin negotiating with the traditionally conservative Broadway unions.
He says the pay-per-view performance will not be geographically limited, and he allows that half the transmissions will not be scrambled, permitting the show to be taped.
"We think the pay-per-view can be the biggest, longest commercial for the play possible," Mr.
Scher says.
"If you enjoy it on TV, it only whets your appetite to see it live."
"Jelly's Last Jam" would cost $24.95 a viewing on television, Mr.
Scher says, rather than the $60 a seat it would be on Broadway.
He estimates the number of potential participating households could reach 90,000.
That would mean a gross of $4,491,000, of which roughly $2 million would be profit.
Many Broadway producers and union officials refused to be quoted about pay-per-view.
In what may be one of the smartest marketing decisions of this crowded Broadway season, the producers of "Redwood Curtain," the new play by the Pulitzer Prize winner Lanford Wilson, have decided to postpone the opening from April 9 until the fall.
The three-character drama, directed by Marshall Mason, about an Amerasian girl whose search for her lost father takes her to the redwood forest in California and a disturbing encounter with a mysterious Vietnam veteran, features David Morse (best known for the television series "St. Elsewhere"), Debra Monk and Kamiko Cazanov.
About the same time "Redwood Curtain" was scheduled, plays will be opening on Broadway that star, among others, Glenn Close, Richard Dreyfuss and Gene Hackman ("Death and the Maiden"), Alec Baldwin and Jessica Lange ("A Streetcar Named Desire"), Gregory Hines ("Jelly's Last Jam"), Judd Hirsch ("Conversations With My Father") and Alan Alda ("Jake's Women").
Even if "Redwood Curtain" received rave reviews, it would be a terribly hard sell.
"Redwood Curtain" is now playing its world premiere engagement at the Seattle Repertory Theater and has a run scheduled in Philadelphia.
The Broadway production is budgeted at $800,000, and the producers say they are still at least $100,000 short.
And because the play's biggest investor is the Nederlander Organization, the play is obliged to go to a Nederlander-owned theater.
The only one available now is the Nederlander Theater on 41st Street, which is held in low regard, being south of 42d Street and on a rundown block.
Ben Mordecai, the play's executive producer, says, "Lanford and Marshall deserve to have everything in their court when they open." Tanya Berezin, the artistic director of the Circle Repertory Company, which is producing the play, says an interim production is being discussed.
Benefits to Fight AIDS
Want to see Carol Channing close up and personal, singing "Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend"?
Go to Steve McGraw's on March 8, when she will appear in "Forbidden Broadway's 10th-Anniversary Gala Benefit for Equity Fights AIDS," which will also kick off the show's 10th-anniversary "Best of" edition, beginning performances at Theater East on March 26.
Andrea McArdle will perform the show's spoof on "Annie," with the lyrics "I'm 30 years old tomorrow/And I haven't worked since I played Annie/When I was 10."
Another benefit at Steve McGraw's for Equity Fights AIDS on March 5 will feature Marni Nixon, perhaps best known for singing Eliza Doolittle's songs for Audrey Hepburn in the film "My Fair Lady." She will perform "Dub Me," to the tune of "Show Me." Gerard Alessandrini, the creator of "Forbidden Broadway," will also try out two spoofs for the new edition, of Raul Julia in "Man of La Mancha" and Cyd Charisse in "Grand Hotel."
Tickets are $25 and reservations are required.
Information: (212) 595-7400.
Bunraku Is Back
For the first time in 20 years, Bunraku, the National Puppet Theater of Japan, will appear in New York, at City Center from March 10 through March 14.
The company will present "The Love Suicides at Sonezaki," a play that has been called a Japanese "Romeo and Juliet." Based on an actual incident of tragic love in Osaka in 1703, the piece had its premiere within two months of the events that inspired it and has remained a classic.
The hand-sculptured Bunraku puppets are one-half to two-thirds life size, and each requires three puppeteers to handle it.
The production will be performed in Japanese, although a full libretto and a detailed synopsis of the play wil be available.


Palmeiro Wins His Case And $3.85 Million Salary
The Texas Rangers suffered their second major economic blow in two days yesterday when RAFAEL PALMEIRO won his salary arbitration case and a $3.85 million salary, extending the most significant stretch players ever have had in arbitration.
Palmeiro's salary is the third largest gained in an arbitration hearing, and all three were determined in the space of three days.
GILBERT VERNON, who heard arguments Wednesday, chose Palmeiro's figure over the Rangers' $2.35 million, placing the Texas first baseman behind his outfielder teammate RUBEN SIERRA ($5 million) and Mets pitcher DAVID CONE ($4.25 million).
The difference between the winning and losing salaries in the three cases totaled $3.95 million.


Carbajal Off Barkley Card
A cut over MICHAEL CARBAJAL's left eye will keep him from fighting on the IRAN BARKLEY -THOMAS HEARNS undercard March 20 in Las Vegas, Nev.
Carbajal (23-0), the International Boxing Federation's champion in the 108-pound division, needed five stitches to close the cut after a punch or butt by MARCOS PACHECO of Mexico in the final seconds of their fight Saturday in Phoenix. (AP)


Canada Moves to Strengthen Sexual Assault Law
While headlines were being made by the William Kennedy Smith and Mike Tyson rape trials in the United States, a case involving many of the same complex and controversial issues was unfolding in the quiet town of Kingston in eastern Ontario.
Last December, as in the case of Mr.
Smith, the Kingston trial ended in acquittal, angering some women's groups.
They saw the outcome as further supporting their argument that Canadian rape laws do not adequately protect the rights of women.
The previous August, Canada's Supreme Court voided some protections for accusers under the nation's rape-shield law.


U.N. Given Cambodia Troop Proposal
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Ghali, has presented Security Council members with plans for a peacekeeping operation in Cambodia later this year that would cost close to $1.9 billion, officials said today.
Under the Secretary General's plan, the United Nations would send 16,000 soldiers to Cambodia -- 12 infantry battalions of about 875 soldiers each, 10 aircraft and 26 helicopters, 3,600 police monitors and up to 2,400 civilian administrators and electoral officers.


A School's 'Organizer Extraordinaire'
IT'S probably the fault of Nan Haavik's parents.
They were always so darned involved, speaking out and writing mayors and Congressmen as if individual citizens mattered and had a responsibility to contribute a little something to their community.
We now realize that's old-fashioned and silly, of course, like knowing everyone in your neighborhood and keeping an eye out for one another.
What possible difference could one person make in the face of overpowering urban realities? (It might even be dangerous.) Today's silent common wisdom recognizes decay as virtually inevitable in cities, especially in an age when budgets are cut before they're assembled.
Who needs the frustration?
Who has the time?


Corrections
A table in Business Day yesterday summarizing the provisions of the energy bill passed by the Senate on Wednesday included one provision erroneously.
The measure giving American gas producers preferential treatment in rate competition with Canadian producers was stricken from the bill before passage.


CHRONICLE
HAROLD ROBBINS, the 75-year-old author of 20 steamy novels, did not let the fact that he had already been married five times deter him.
On Valentine's Day, in a spur-of-the-moment decision, he and JANN STAPP, 40, were married on the veranda of his home in Palm Springs, Calif.
Mrs.
Robbins was a partner in an Oklahoma City advertising and public-relations agency before moving to Los Angeles 10 years ago and going to work as Mr.
Robbins's assistant.


Japan's U.S. Investing Cut
Japanese investment in United States real estate tumbled to $5 billion last year, according to a report released yesterday by the accounting firm of Kenneth Leventhal &amp; Company.
Within the context of earlier Leventhal reports, the 1991 investment figure represents a 61 percent decline from the 1990 level of $13 billion.


Dispute Over Investigation Splits Appeals Court Where Thomas Sat
The Federal Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, widely regarded as second in importance to the Supreme Court, is embroiled in an unusual dispute between the court's liberal and conservative factions.
Chief Judge Abner J. Mikva today complained strongly about an effort by six of his fellow judges to start a formal investigation into who may have provided a draft of an opinion written by Judge Clarence Thomas during hearings last fall on his nomination to the Supreme Court.
Judge Mikva said in a statement that an investigation would only harm the court's reputation.


Kraft Plans To Cut Prices To Grocers
Kraft General Foods Inc., the nation's largest food company, said yesterday that it planned to cut the prices it charges grocers for some products and reduce spending on promotional campaigns to bring consistently lower prices to consumers.
The move follows a similar action by the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, which, since last fall, has cut prices to grocers on 40 percent of its products and has slashed spending on coupons and promotional allowances paid to grocers.
Among the Procter products affected are Folger's coffee and Ivory dishwashing soap.
Too Much Spending


From New Zealand To a Medal, on Skis
To wind up with an Olympic silver medal in women's slalom, Annelise Coberger had to come from way behind and out of nowhere.
She was in eighth place after the first run and she is from New Zealand, which is nowhere on the Alpine skiing map.
At an Olympics Games where some of the biggest Alpine names have fallen flat on their face, if not their skis, Coberger is another new name but one with a startling passport.
No athlete from New Zealand -- or anywhere in the Southern Hemisphere, for that matter -- had won a Winter Olympics medal until today.


Sounds Around Town
Stephen Scott on Piano
Stephen Scott, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Manhattan, (212) 228-6440.
Here's a chance to hear one of the more fluid young pianists working out on a decent piano.
Stephen Scott knows the modern mainstream tradition as well as any young musician, and he is working with one of the best rhythm sections in jazz, the bassist Ray Drummond and the drummer Ben Riley.
Sets tonight and tomorrow are at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.
There is a $12 cover, plus an $8 minimum.
Irma Thomas at Tramps
Irma Thomas, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 727-7788.
Irma Thomas, the great and understated soul singer from New Orleans, can get New York audiences waving handkerchiefs as if they were second-lining in New Orleans.
She'll be closing a three-day Grammy-week engagement on Sunday night, joined by Charlie Musselwhite and Charles Brown.
Tonight's show the blues and soul singer Mighty Sam McLean; tomorrow, Tracy Nelson returns, backed by the Uptown Horns.
The cover is $10 for today and tomorrow, and $12.50 for Sunday.
Sets start at 8 P.M.
Punta From Belize
Andy Palacio, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, Manhattan, (212) 243-4940.
Punta, the black pop music from the Central American coast, is inching its way toward importance in the Caribbean.
The music, shiny and modern on the surface, percolates and rocks over jumpy drumming that's only a few generations removed from ritual, and it's built for dancing.
Andy Palacio, a singer from Belize, comes in tonight and tomorrow for sets at 11:30 P.M. and 1:30 A.M.
The cover is $17.


Diner's Journal
Ribs and 1982 Prices
One of the questions most frequently asked of a restaurant critic is, Where can I get good ribs?
I have not done a comparison of every rib place in town, but upon noticing that Tennessee Mountain in SoHo was having a 10th-anniversary bash, including price rollbacks to 1982 levels from Monday to Thursday, I felt compelled to check it out.
Housed in an 1807 farmhouse, Tennessee Mountain is a rollicking place done mostly in natural wood with butcher block tables.
Early on a weekend evening without reservations, we were dispatched to the bar for 15 minutes, then to a half-empty dining room upstairs.
We started with a bowl of tame but tasty beef chili that was filled with big balls of ground beef, red beans and onions ($6.50).
For a main course we had the rib sampler, which includes baby back pork ribs and beef ribs ($11.95 lunch, $14.95 dinner).
The baby back ribs were succulent and had more flavor than the meaty but nondescript beef, but both were drenched in a sweet-edged barbecue sauce that smothered all sensations.
The sauce should come on the side.
Cole slaw is very good, light and not mired in mayonnaise; fried potatoes are better than average, too.
We also tried the barbecued half chicken, which was dry and humdrum ($7.50 lunch, $8.95 dinner).
During the price rollback, the restaurant will offer barbecued ribs for $10.95, beef ribs for $9.59 and a combination of baby back ribs and chicken for $9.95.
Tennessee Mountain, 143 Spring Street, serves lunch from 11:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. daily, dinner from 4:30 to 11 P.M.
Monday to Wednesday, from 4 P.M. to midnight Thursday to Saturday and from 4:30 to 10 P.M.
Sunday.
All major cards are accepted.
Telephone: (212) 431-3993.
The Changing Scene
NEW OWNERS: The Post House, 28 East 63d Street in Manhattan, has been sold by Alan Stillman to the owners of the Lowell Hotel at the same address.
Mr.
Stillman, who is also the principal owner of Smith &amp; Wollensky, the Manhattan Ocean Club, Cite and Park Avenue Cafe, said he had a five-year management contract to run the 10-year-old Post House.
"There should be no changes evident to the customers," he said.


Regulators Approve Nynex Reorganization
The New York State Public Service Commission yesterday accepted Nynex's plan to reorganize itself in the wake of 1990 allegations of overcharging for equipment and services.
Although Nynex has said its own investigation found the charges groundless, state regulators have continued to study the matter.
The company began carrying out the reorganization plan last July.


Market Place; A Mixed Outlook For Blockbuster
LIKE movie critics bickering over the merits of the latest Oliver Stone film, Wall Street analysts are sharply divided on the prospects for the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation.
Blockbuster's profits rose 36 percent in 1991.
Many who follow the company say its rapid growth will continue as the company expands overseas and puts more emphasis on selling tapes.


City College in Final Tonight
City College's surprising run through the CUNY Conference men's basketball tournament will end tonight when the Beavers take on Hunter College in the championship at 7:30 at York College in Queens.
City College, 8-19 over all, entered the CUNY tournament seeded No. 7 and knocked off No. 2 John Jay, 85-81, Monday in the first round.
The Beavers advanced to the final by beating No. 6 Baruch, 72-67, Wednesday in the semifinals.


Why Lose Central Park Band Shell at All?
To the Editor:
To your snide editorial last year urging the destruction of the designated (and now destroyed) Dvorak House in Manhattan, you have added another bias-related crime against landmarks.
"The Band Shell Cannot Play On" (editorial, Feb. 8) is your churlish requiem to the Naumburg Bandshell in Manhattan's landmarked Central Park, a structure in danger of razing or relocation.


Review/Theater; Everett Quinton as Myriad Characters
"The Bells" was one of Henry Irving's greatest theatrical successes, a melodrama that the Victorian actor seemed doomed to perform forever.
He played Mathias, a rich Alsatian innkeeper tormented by a guilty secret.
In the Everett Quinton version of "The Bells," Mr.
Quinton outlaughs Irving by playing all the characters -- male, female, heroic and villainous -- as well as sight and sound effects.
His ringing adaptation of this vintage thriller sweeps the stage at the Charles Ludlam Theater.
The Ridiculous Theatrical approach is akin to that of Mr.
Ludlam and Mr.
Quinton in the two-man tour de force "The Mystery of Irma Vep." In that Gothic horror comedy, the actors darted in and out of a lonely cottage, each time emerging in a strange new guise.
With "The Bells," Mr.
Quinton never leaves the stage or changes his costume.
He simply swings with heightening flair from one role to another.


Dow Surges by 50.32, to a Record 3,280.64
Surprising investors and traders alike, the stock market rallied sharply yesterday amid a barrage of program trades and speculation that weak numbers on jobless claims and merchandise trade will put pressure on the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates again.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 50.32 points to a new closing record of 3,280.64, surpassing the Feb. 12 mark of 3,276.83.


The Art Market
Holbein Sale
Christie's announcement last week that it plans to sell Hans Holbein's "Lady With a Squirrel and a Starling" on April 15 in London has become the focus of a debate about how Britain can protect its national treasures without undermining free trade.
The issue is urgent because of the closer economic integration the European Community is to adopt at the end of the year.
The sale has revived a drive to establish a list of national treasures that may not be removed from the country, a procedure similar to those in other countries, like France.
Experts say the painting could bring a record auction price for a Holbein, about $25 million.
It is a 21-by-15-inch portrait of an Englishwoman painted during Holbein's first stay in England, from 1526 to 1528.
Directors of England's national museums say that it is a national treasure and that they were not given a chance to buy it before it was consigned to Christie's.
Meanwhile, the Marquess of Cholmondeley, who is selling the Holbein, maintains that the price is way beyond any of the English museums' budgets anyway.
Lord Cholmondeley inherited a fortune estimated at more than $170 million in 1990, but he says his income is not enough to maintain his two estates, Cholmondeley in Cheshire and Houghton Hall in Norfolk, where the painting has hung since 1780.
He says the proceeds from the sale will be used for that purpose.
In last week's announcement, Christie's also said that in the same auction it would sell "The Old Horse Guards From St. James's Park," by Canaletto, which is estimated to bring about $5 million, and "Daniel and Cyrus Before the Idol of Bel," dated 1633, by Rembrandt, which may fetch about $13 million.
These rare artworks coming up for sale simultaneously has only increased the outcry by people in the English art world who are worried that owners of stately homes are rushing to sell their prized possessions before the Government can issue a list of works that may not be exported.
"There's a certain nervousness," said Lord Gowrie, a former Arts Minister who is the chairman of Sotheby's in London.
"The changing of the European Community rules, the upcoming elections and a big drop in agricultural income are all reasons people are thinking of selling art right now. It's only natural they want to sell before any changes are announced."
What the British art world fears most is that the rich J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., or a private collector from outside Britain will buy the Holbein.
Museum experts in the United States refused to talk for attribution, saying only that bidding on the painting might be more trouble than the work is worth.
They fear that the British Government's review Committee on Export Works of Art would prevent the painting from leaving London and that if the Holbein does leave England, the bad publicity could bring changes in Britain's export laws.
Neil MacGregor, director of the National Gallery in London, refused to talk to the press about the Holbein but issued a statement calling it "one of the greatest of Holbein's works of this kind" and saying, "Its retention in this country is therefore of great importance." Mr.
MacGregor went on to write that Lord Cholmondeley made clear that unless $25 million "could be produced at once, the sale would go ahead in April." The sum is well beyond the museum's annual purchase grant from the Government, which is less than $5 million.
While Lord Cholmondeley refused to be interviewed, he wrote a letter published last week in The Daily Telegraph in response to Mr.
MacGregor.
Timothy Clifford, director of the National Gallery in Edinburgh, said: "In the end I don't think the British will let it out of the country. But I can understand Lord Cholmondeley's point of view. He wants as much money as possible." The National Gallery in Edinburgh has an unparalleled collection of works by Titian and Poussin on loan from the Duke of Sutherland, and Mr.
Clifford is concerned that what happens to the Holbein may set a precedent for what could happen to the Duke's paintings if the Duke ever considers selling them.
Mr.
Clifford suggested that several national museums in Britain buy the painting together and share it.
Christie's was prepared for the uproar.
Predictably, it is trying to divorce itself from the debate.
"We knew it would attract a lot of attention," said Noel Annesley, deputy chairman of Christie's International "The auction house is only acting as agents not advisers. Lord Cholmondeley has been debating about the sale of the Holbein for two years and decided to push the button now."
Lord Gowrie said: "It's important that the Government should step in. But as a nation we're prone to crying wolf, to say that everything's important and a national treasure. The only problem is that this time I think it's true."  Fakes Are Everywhere
"Of course we have fakes: every museum does," said Marian Burleigh-Motley, who runs the education division at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
"People should be more aware of what fakes mean and know what to look for." As a result, Ms.
Burleigh-Motley has organized a series of eight lectures on Tuesday nights using fakes from the Metropolitan's collections.
The series, called "Understanding Fakes," runs from March 10 to April 28.
Each week different members of the museum's curatorial and conservation staff will explore such subjects as the definition of a fake, motives for producing fakes and changing tastes in fakery.
"We will also be showing new techniques for determining that things are not original," Ms.
Burleigh-Motley said.
The series costs $70; individual lectures are $10.
Information: (212) 570-3949.
Recession in London
London art dealers have been as hard hit by the recession as those in New York City.
Fischer Fine Art Ltd., the 30-year-old King Street gallery, is closing at the end of April.
The gallery handled such artists as Henry Moore, Gustav Klimt and Egon Schiele, as well as Viennese Secession Art and Design and German Expressionism.
"If the landlord had reduced the rent, we might have been able to ride out the recession," said Wolfgang Fischer, the owner.
The Odette Gilbert, a gallery that has been on Cork Street nine years, has already closed.
It specialized in modern and contemporary British artists like Lucian Freud, Eurbach Kossof, Tom Edwards and Sandra Fisher.
"It's been so quiet, it wasn't worth being open," said Odette Gilbert.
"Lots of other contemporary galleries are closing too."


Senators Challenge Pentagon's War Scenarios
Several members of the Senate Armed Services Committee today challenged some of the potential foreign conflicts that the Defense Department has envisioned to help the military services plan their budgets through the end of the decade.
After a hearing with Adm.
David E. Jeremiah, who is the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, several senators cast doubt on the likelihood of United States involvement in the seven possible wars outlined in internal Pentagon planning documents.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Lamson &amp; Sessions Co., Cleveland, a maker of industrial products, arranged a $45 million line of credit and a $20 million term loan with GE Capital, a unit of the General Electric Company.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL Duke Barely Wins Antonio Lang's basket with 22 seconds left last night to lift No. 1 Duke past Maryland, 91-89, in a Atlantic Coast Conference game in Durham, N.C.
The Blue Devils are 21-1 over all and 11-1 in the conference.
The Terrapins are 10-12 and 3-9. (AP) N.B.A.
Jagr Leads Penguin Tie Jaromir Jagr, just back from a 10-game suspension, had a goal and assist in the third period as the Pittsburgh Penguins rallied at home to tie Quebec, 4-4, last night. (AP) Red Wings 3, Maple Leafs 2: Sheldon Kennedy's third-period goal gave Detroit the home victory. (AP) GOLF Watson in Lead The scoreboard shows Tom Watson, Robert Wrenn and Brad Faxon at 63 and in a tie for the first-round lead of the $1 million Buick Invitational of California, being played in San Diego.
The nine-under-par effort was his best in a decade. (AP) TENNIS One Up, and One Down Aaron Krickstein, seeded 10th, defeated Rodolphe Gilbert, 3-6, 7-6 (7-3), 7-5, to advance to the quarterfinals at the United States Pro Indoor tournament at Philadelphia.
Top-seeded Michael Stich lost to 16th-seeded Amos Mansdorf, 7-6 (7-5), 7-5. (AP) Becker and Lendl Lose: Jim Courier and Stefan Edberg, the top-seeded players, advanced but third-seeded Boris Becker lost to Jan Siemerink and No. 4 Ivan Lendl lost to Aleksandr Volkov in the Eurocard Classic at Stuttgart, Germany. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD 3,000-Meter Record Set Moses Kiptanui of Kenya set a world indoor record in the 3,000 meters yesterday, winning in 7 minutes 37.31 seconds at a meet in Seville, Spain.
Kiptanui broke the record of 7:39.2, set in 1973 in Berlin by Emiel Puttemans of Belgium. (AP) SWIMMING New Backstroke Mark Mark Tewksbury broke his own world record in the men's 100-meter backstroke last night, finishing in 52.52 seconds at the Canadian Winter Nationals championships in Calgary.
His previous mark was 52.58. (AP) YACHTING Top Challengers Win The four top challenge yachts in the America's Cup selection trials each won their matches yesterday to further cement their leading scores.
Italy defeated Spirit of Australia by 7 minutes 48 seconds.
Japan beat Spain by 4:12; New Zealand beat Sweden by 5:37; and France beat Challenge Australia by 7:18.


I.R.A. Guerrilla Is Back in a Familiar Belfast Jail
Joseph Doherty, returned early this morning to the Belfast prison that he and seven other I.R.A. guerrillas escaped from 11 years ago, could have his 30-year sentence reduced by the eight and three-quarter years he spent in United States jails fighting extradition and deportation, British officials said today.
But Mr.
Doherty, who is 37 years old, could also be charged with additional offenses connected with his escape, according to a spokesman for the Director of Public Prosecutions in Belfast, who said no decision had been made on either question.


Give Mideast Talks a Boost
The fighting in southern Lebanon between Israel and Hezbollah, reviving memories of the warfare that began after Israel's invasion of Lebanon in 1982, points up the urgency of diplomacy on that front.
The fragile Mideast peace process needs tangible success to keep the parties engaged.
Until now, hopes have been pinned on the Israeli-Palestinian talks, but when the parties reconvene Monday, they apparently will bring no new positions to the table.
Only the Lebanon-Israel talks may have the potential for significant movement.
The Lebanon front presents the possibilities of early diplomatic moves and military redeployment.
It does not confront Israel with the choice of land for peace vs. peace for peace, as the other fronts do.
Likud and Labor leaders stress that Israel has no territorial ambitions in Lebanon and that it respects the border.


Joseph Fisher, 78, Economic Adviser to Presidents
Joseph L. Fisher, an expert on natural resources and an economist who advised two Presidents, served in Congress and was a local and state official in Virginia, died on Wednesday at his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 78 years old.
He died of a brain tumor, his family said.


Construction Workers Uproot Graves in Colonial-Era Black Cemetery


Where's the Rest of Him?
Patrick Buchanan calls his showing in New Hampshire the beginning of a "middle-class revolution" with himself starring in the role once played by Ronald Reagan.
He thus grandiosely misconstrues voter anger over tough times as a mandate for his eccentric brand of conservatism.
That's fanciful thinking, made possible because Mr.
Buchanan put only some of himself on display.
"Where's the Rest of Me?" is how his paragon, Ronald Reagan, titled his autobiography, quoting some famous movie dialogue.
It's a question Pat Buchanan now needs to answer about himself.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Bush Allies Told Not to Attack Buchanan in Georgia, the Next Battleground
President Bush's re-election strategists told the campaign's supporters in Georgia today to refrain from attacking Patrick J. Buchanan, the insurgent Republican in this spring's primary races, even as the White House signaled that it would make Mr.
Buchanan's record a campaign issue.
The move in Georgia hinted at indecision among the strategists as to whether Mr.
Bush can secure his party's nomination quickly without using negative political tactics that would anger Mr.
Buchanan's conservative backers.


Sutton Has Chest Pains
Oklahoma State Coach EDDIE SUTTON suffered chest pains Wednesday night, hours after his team lost its third straight game, to Oklahoma.
He was taken to a hospital in Tulsa, where yesterday he was reported in good condition with an arterial problem. (AP)


Jury Hears Gotti Tape: 'He's Gonna Die'
John Gotti's voice dominated the courtroom yesterday as the prosecution played a tape of the reputed Mafia boss talking about his philosophy of life -- and death.
"I would be a billionaire if I was looking to be a selfish boss," Mr.
Gotti said to Frank Locascio, referring to him as the underboss of their organization.
"That's not me."


Plan Is Outlined to Avoid Limiting Aid at Columbia
Little more than a week after angry students at Columbia University barricaded faculty members and administrators inside a building to protest a planned change in financial aid policy, a university committee has drawn up a plan to continue meeting, at least temporarily, the financial aid needs of all incoming undergraduate students.
The plan relies on substantial gifts from wealthy alumni, as well as financial sacrifices by faculty and students, to allow the level of financial aid to rise high enough to meet the needs of all 850 new students who will be enrolled in September.


Art in Review
Ikebana  Jack Tilton Gallery 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Feb. 29
For this quirky and uneven cross-cultural group show, the gallery invited 10 interesting artists to compose work based on the Japanese art of flower-arranging, called ikebana.
Not surprisingly, the two Japanese participants honed closest to a traditional discipline.
Tetsunori Kawana's room-size installation of a circular arrangement similar to a rock garden, with its plan drawn in chalk on the gallery floor and its photocopied drawings of stones taped to walls and ceiling as if floating overhead, comments wryly on the physical calculation and the cosmic symbolism of ikebana itself.
Things become more problematic with the work of the other eight artists.
A few of them have something incisive to say about their model.
Leo Copers's 13 silk flowers stuck to the wall with knives, for example, make a neat point about what the process of manipulating nature into art may actually imply.
Other responses take up a floral motif only to make a joke of it (Donald Moffett's insertion of fake white roses in a bowling ball) or go for the easy ironic take (Dike Blair's application of the heaven-earth-human hierarchies of the traditional ikebana arrangement to a painting of cigarette packs and a Coca-Cola can).
The general impression is one of Western artists approaching a tradition-laden aspect of another culture with a gratuitous cynicism.
One wishes they had dug a little deeper for their responses, especially since some of the ikebana being created in Japan today is visually imaginative and conceptually challenging beyond almost anything seen in this exhibition.


At the Movies
New From Diane Kurys
April 15 may represent the income tax deadline for most people, but for the film maker Diane Kurys, it is the date her latest film, "After Love" ("Apres l'Amour"), is to be released in France.
So these days she is busy in Paris editing the film, which stars Isabelle Huppert and Hippolyte Girardot in a story by Miss Kurys and Antoine Lacomblez that examines the lives of people in Miss Kurys's generation.
She is 40 years old.
"I decided that I had enough with memories and the past and my childhood or my parents and that it was time for me to deal with the present," said Miss Kurys, whose often autobiographical films include "Peppermint Soda" and "Entre Nous."
"I just started to consider not only my life, but the life of the people around me, the people who are between 30 and 40, and what they go through -- to be or not to be in love, or to have multiple lives with children and families.


Turner Posts Record Profit
Turner Broadcasting System Inc. yesterday reported record net income for the fourth quarter of $43.4 million, or 16 cents a share, a nearly sixfold increase from $7.3 million in the comparable quarter a year earlier.
Revenues rose to $402.4 million, from $357.3 million in the comparable period last year.
For the year, net income rose 93 percent, to $85.9 million, or 23 cents a share, from $44.6 million in 1990.


Review/Film; 2 Young Brothers Hoping for Happiness
Richard Donner's "Radio Flyer" is one of those infrequent and embarrassing efforts of a perfectly adequate Hollywood director to make the kind of offbeat movie for which he has no aptitude at all.
That's the only way to explain why this tale of childhood magic winds up being so bleak and gross.
"Radio Flyer" is a memory film, a story told on a sunny afternoon to two small boys to illustrate why it's important that promises be kept.
By the end, though, the story can just as easily be read as a metaphor about a child's suicide, which doesn't seem to have been anybody's intention.


INSIDE
Gamble by South African
President F. W. de Klerk said he would hold a vote to ask whites whether they back his effort to negotiate an end to apartheid.
If he loses the vote, he said, he and the long-ruling National Party will resign.
Page A3.
Choosing Jobs Over Owls
The Interior Secretary plans to seek an exception to law that would leave the northern spotted owl nearly extinct but save logging jobs.
Page A12.
Decline in Subway Crime
Violence in New York subways fell 15 percent last year, to the lowest level since 1988, officials say.
Page B1.
Ex-World Bank Chief Is Dead
Eugene Robert Black, who embodied American postwar confidence as head of the World Bank from 1949 to 1962, died at the age of 93.
Page A19.
Salvadoran Rightist Dies
Roberto d'Aubuisson, a former army officer believed to be a proponent of death squads during the Salvadoran civil war, died of cancer.
Page A19.


Art in Review
Hiroshi Sugimoto  Sonnabend Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through March 7
Hiroshi Sugimoto's black-and-white seascapes, photographed in the South Pacific, the Irish Sea, the English Channel and the Mediterranean, among other sites, have a Minimalist simplicity.
The top half of every horizontal frame is the sky, the bottom the ocean -- not that the two parts can always be made out; mist or fog obscures the scene in a number of pictures.
Within this simple format, Mr.
Sugimoto, a Japanese artist who lives in New York City, records a surprisingly varied range of effects, from streaks of pale clouds in the sky to subdued ripples in the water.
In the back gallery, Mr.
Sugimoto is showing a series of night shots, with both sky and ocean black, and only an occasional wave or wisp of cloud to disturb the image's rich, dark tones.
The systematic nature of Mr.
Sugimoto's project recalls a work from a decade ago by the Conceptual artist Sol LeWitt, in which he photographed sunrises and sunsets over the ocean off Priano, Italy, on the Amalfi coast.
But where Mr.
LeWitt's seascapes were dramatic and gloriously colorful, Mr.
Sugimoto's are marked by a calm intensity.
In an earlier series, he photographed movie theaters using extremely long exposures, so that the screen on which the film was being projected was reduced to a glowing white rectangle.
The seascapes have a similarly meditative sense.
With their delicately modulated expanses of gray, these finely printed images seem to be as much about the achingly luscious tones that can be achieved in black-and-white photographs as about the scenes they record.


Can of Corniness? It's Torborg's Brand
The philosophy is a mixture of piety and positivism.
The ethic can seem, by the manager's own characterization, to be "all that old cliche junk." The police handbook of rules and regulations was outlined without a smile.
With his debut as manager of the Mets less than 24 hours away, Jeff Torborg offered his formula today without apology, without embarrassment and evidently with the belief that his approach would be met with enthusiasm instead of suspicion and that it would produce results and not revolt.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York; 2 Democrats Struggle to Push Each Other Off April 7 Ballot
Dropping all previous restraint or reservations, the two leading Democratic Presidential candidates yesterday bitterly challenged each other's right to appear on New York's primary ballot on April 7.
"We didn't start this and we didn't want it," said Harold Ickes Jr., the state campaign chairman for Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
"But now we have to defend ourselves, and believe me, we will."


Critic's Notebook; Making a Literary Lunge Into the Future
AS this century and millennium slouch wearily toward their end, novelists -- like sociologists, historians and journalistic pundits -- have been busy, making their own prognostications about the future.
To some, the future will indeed witness the end of history, the end of time, the death of God and the novel.
The future, as they see it, will be a post-nuclear wasteland, inhabited by rag-tag bands of refugees, bereft of language and memory, and thrown back on primitive skills of survival.
Other writers -- a minority, it must be said -- envision a more utopian future, in which science and human wisdom serve as midwives to a brave new world of global harmony and hope.
In Julian May's new novel, "Jack the Bodiless" (Alfred A. Knopf), the 21st century witnesses, at least temporarily, a new era of peace throughout the universe, in which earthlings develop amazing new metapsychic abilities under the watchful eye of solemn, green-skinned guardians.
If the novel's galactic vision owes something to "Star Wars" and "Star Trek," Marge Piercy's new novel, "He, She and It" (Knopf), takes its cue from cyberpunk fiction, as well as such movies as "Blade Runner," "2001: A Space Odyssey" and "The Terminator." The book depicts a 21st-century America in which anthropomorphic cyborgs (robotlike creatures made of computer components with "human implants") can mingle and make love with human beings, and threaten to develop minds of their own.


Albertville
AUSTRIAN WINS SLALOM
Petra Kronberger's margin of Olympic success will be measured in hundredths of a second and gold medals.
She is the first Alpine skier at these Winter Games to win two events.
Julie Parisien of Maine, the leader after the first run, missed a medal by .05 seconds.
SportsFriday, page B7.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Pennsylvania; Trouble Shadows Specter in Senate Race
Last November, when for the first time in 30 years Pennsylvanians elected a Democrat to the United States Senate, politicians across the country took note.
Now, with the political landscape here still rumbling from Senator Harris Wofford's landslide victory over former Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, the state's Republican Senator, Arlen Specter, is running for re-election to a third term.
While Mr.
Specter is way ahead of the pack of candidates jockeying for positions in the April 28 primaries here, political analysts say he is increasingly vulnerable because of the long recession, the voters' anti-incumbent mood and a ballot headed by a President whose re-election efforts are having serious problems.





American Loses Out by the Width of a Ski
What can one do in five one-hundredths of a second besides lose a race?
It would take Julie Parisien more time than that to construct a single thought about the margin that denied her an Olympic medal this afternoon in the women's slalom, longer to bat a teary eye.
One day after finishing fifth in the giant slalom and announcing she was thrilled, Parisien was crushed by finishing fourth, behind the gold medalist, Petra Kronberger of Austria, Annelise Coberger of New Zealand and Blanca Fernandez Ochoa of Spain.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon: Closing This Weekend
"UN BALLO IN MASCHERA," by Verdi.
Metropolitan Opera.
Last performance, tomorrow at 1:30 P.M.
The performance is sold out.
Standing room and returns information: (212) 362-6000.
"PARK YOUR CAR IN HARVARD YARD," Music Box Theater, 239 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
Jason Robards and Judith Ivey star in Israel Horovitz's play.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: today at 8 P.M. and tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30 to $42.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"CHIEFLY FEASTS: THE ENDURING KWAKIUTL POTLATCH," American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street, Manhattan.
An exhibition on the culture of the Northwest Coast Indians, including pottery, films and a carved totem pole.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.Museum admission: $5 ($2.50 for children) Information: (212) 769-5100.
Closing Next Weekend
ILSE BING, Houk Friedman Gallery, 1094 Madison Avenue, at 82d Street.
A collection of vintage photographs.
Through Feb. 29.
Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 628-5300.
ELLEN GREENE, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan.
The singer and actress will perform Broadway show songs.
Through Feb. 29.
Tuesdays through Saturdays at 9:15 and 11:15 P.M.
The cover charge is $15 Tuesdays to Thursdays and $20 Fridays and Saturdays.
Information; (212) 758-2272.
"LUCHINO VISCONTI: MAESTRO OF THE MOVIES," Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Washington Avenue, Crown Heights.
A retrospective of the works of the Italian film maker, including such works as "Sandra" (1965) and "The Damned" (1969).
Through Feb. 29.
Screenings on Saturdays and Sundays at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $6 ($4 for students and the elderly).
Information: (718) 638-5000.
"THE REAL LIVE BRADY BUNCH," Village Gate, 160 Bleecker Street, Manhattan.
Jill and Faith Soloway's re-creation of the television series, by the Annoyance Theater Company of Chicago.
Through Feb. 29.
Shows: Tuesdays through Thursdays at 8 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays at 7 and 9:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25 on weekends and $20 on weekdays.
Information: (212) 307-7171.
"ALEXIS SMITH," Whitney Museum of American Art, Madison Avenue at 75th Street.
Seventy of the artist's multi-media works.
Through March 1.
Hours: Tuesdays, 1 to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays through Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3676.
"A LITTLE HOTEL ON THE SIDE," Belasco Theater, 111 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Georges Feydeau's play performed by Tony Randall's National Actors Theater.
Through March 1.
Show times: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 8 P.M.; Wednesdays, Saturdays and Sundays, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $40.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"THE MIND KING," St.
Mark's Church, Second Avenue at 10th Street, Manhattan.
A series of stories written and directed for the theater by Richard Foreman.
Through March 1.
Tuesdays and Thursdays through Sundays at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Information: (212) 533-4650.
"THE VISIT," Roundabout Theater, Broadway at 45th Street, Manhattan.
A revival of Friedrich Durrenmatt's play, directed by Edwin Sherin.
Through March 1.
Show times: Tuesdays through Fridays, 8 P.M.; Saturdays, 2 and 8 P.M.; Sundays, 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $39.
Information: (212) 869-8400.


New York Starts Inquiry On End of Racing Times
The New York State Attorney General's Office is investigating possible antitrust violations in connection with the closing of The Racing Times, a newspaper for horse-racing fans, and the purchase of some of the paper's assets by its chief rival, The Daily Racing Form.
Edward Barbini, a spokesman for Attorney General Robert Abrams, said yesterday that the inquiry was in its early stages.
"We issued subpoenas last week to corporations and individuals affiliated with The Racing Times and The Racing Form," he said.
"We are examining possible anti-competitive aspects regarding the closing of The Racing Times."


Acting President of Rockefeller U. to Stay at Least 3 More Years
Seeking to nurture the sense of calm that has settled over the campus since its besieged president resigned last fall, Rockefeller University in Manhattan has appointed its acting president, Dr.
Torsten Wiesel, to remain in the office for at least three more years.
In November, Dr.
Wiesel took over the university from Dr.
David Baltimore, who had been caught up in a ferocious debate over his role in a scientific paper containing data found to be fraudulent.


The Clock Strikes 12 Years for Heroes of '80
It's not the same.
Herb Brooks knows it.
Jim Craig, who draped himself in the flag, knows it.
Mike Eruzione and Ken Morrow are enthralled, but they, too, know it.


History With Opera
The American Chamber Opera Company is to present two performances of "Aural Histories," an operatic triple bill, tonight and tomorrow night at 8 at the Marymount Manhattan Theater, 221 East 71st Street.
The program consists of Judith Weir's "King Harald's Saga," a one-woman opera about the unsuccessful invasion of England in 1066 by Harald Hardradi, the Norwegian King; Dominick Argento's "Andree Expedition," based on an abortive 1897 expedition to the North Pole, and Rimsky-Korsakov's "Mozart and Salieri," based on the Pushkin play of the same name.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 781-0857.


Just This Once, Button Makes Call From Couch
The dinner party, with a dozen guests' eyes trained on women's figure skating from the Winter Olympics, had just started when Dick Button was asked, "If we turn the sound off on the television, can you call this for us?"
Button stared straight ahead and smiled.
He kept listening to CBS's Verne Lundquist and Scott Hamilton.
The volume was up.


Sounds Around Town
Joyce From Brazil
Joyce, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Manhattan, (212) 244-3005.
Joyce, the latest and one of the most impressive performers in the club's annual winter Brazilian series, is a spirited young singer, composer and guitarist who resembles a more vocally robust and sophisticated Astrud Gilberto.
Singing material that suggests a jazzy refinement of the airier bossa nova hits of the 1960's, Joyce projects a winning humor and buoyancy.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11:15.
Tickets are $15 ($25 ringside), and there is a two-drink minimum.
Clooney at Rainbow
Rosemary Clooney, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th floor, (212) 632-5000.
In her third engagement at the club in three years, Rosemary Clooney's singing sounds softer and warmer than it has in years.
Always direct, down-to-earth and gently swinging, she interprets classic love songs like "More Than You Know," "Spring Is Here" and "The Best Is Yet to Come" with a mature understanding.
Early shows are sold out, but there are still tickets for the 11:15 shows tonight and tomorrow.
There is $35 cover charge with no minimum.
From South Africa
Thuli Dumakude with Thokoza and Tu Nokwe, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-8719.
A concert of South African songs presented by the World Music Institute stars Thuli Dumakude, a South African-born singer and actress who established her reputation in several plays, including "Poppie Nongena," and was later the vocal coach for the Broadway musical "Sarafina!" The concert will feature the South African choral sound popularized by Ladysmith Black Mambazo, with additional guitar accompaniment.
With the vocal group Thokoza and the South African performer Tu Nokwe, she will perform Zulu, Venda and Shangaan work, as well as contemporary songs that speak of the need for social change in South Africa.
Show time is tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $15.


Nerves of Steel Precede Women's Medal of Gold
More striking than their styles, their jumps or their success is their calm.
As roommates at the Winter Olympics, Kristi Yamaguchi and Nancy Kerrigan have left the impression they are more intense rivals trying to out-calm each other than out-skate each other.
With the singles title in women's figure skating to be decided Friday night, that's quite an accomplishment.
Both skated sublime original programs Wednesday night to hold the top two positions among 29 women.
It was almost expected of Yamaguchi, the 20-year-old world and national champion from Fremont, Calif., who won the leading scores from all nine judges.
It was not so of Kerrigan, a 22-year-old skater from Stoneham, Mass., whose placement helped keep Yamaguchi a safe distance from the woman regarded as her most serious challenger, Midori Ito of Japan.


RESEARCH SPENDING IS DECLINING IN U.S. AS IT RISES ABROAD
American spending on research and development has begun to fall for the first time since the 1970's, even as foreign rivals increase their investments in research, a Federal science agency said yesterday.
The amounts spent on research by the Federal Government and private industry each fell, worrying many analysts.
They fear that the nation is losing its edge in the international race for discoveries and innovations that can form the basis for new goods and services.


Greg Brown


Man Held in 6 Robberies
The police arrested a Manhattan man yesterday and charged him with luring at least six homosexual men he met in bars to their apartments and then robbing them of money and property.
The man brandished both a gun and a stun gun in the robberies, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman, who added that none of the victims were harmed.
The man was identified as Juan Cuevas, 24 years old, of 667 Riverside Drive, near 144th Street, in Manhattan.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Ashland Oil Inc., Ashland, Ky., appointed G. Thomas Wilkinson senior vice president.
He remains president of Ashland Exploration. *
Columbia Pictures Television, Burbank, Calif., a unit of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., named Richard Frankie senior vice president for business affairs.


Earle Palmer Brown Gets J. &amp; J. Account
Johnson &amp; Johnson has added another agency to its roster, naming Earle Palmer Brown/New York to handle the introduction of a line of products in the growing children's toiletries market.
The account, awarded by the company's Johnson &amp; Johnson Consumer Products subsidiary, has billings estimated at $8 million to $12 million.
Sometime before the end of March, Earle Palmer Brown/New York will introduce an extensive television and print advertising campaign for the new products, called Johnson's Bathtime Buddies Featuring Winnie the Pooh &amp; Pals.


Bootleg Recording Ring Smashed


Don Gussow, 84, Dies; Publisher and Editor
Don Gussow, a publisher who founded several trade magazines and wrote four books, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 84 years old.
He died of natural causes, his family said.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day yesterday misidentified Duane L. Burnham.
He is the chairman and chief executive of Abbott Laboratories.


Review/Theater: Private Lives; For the Ardent Fans Of Collins and Coward
FOR those of us who never warmed to her latter-day incarnation in "Dynasty," Joan Collins will always be the very sexy young actress who took the trashy parts Elizabeth Taylor rejected in the Technicolor B movies of the 1950's.
So there's a certain rough justice in the fact that the revival of Noel Coward's "Private Lives" that has brought Miss Collins to the Broadhurst towers over the production that Miss Taylor and Richard Burton visited upon Broadway in 1983.
Is it rude to point out that nearly every other play seen on Broadway in the last decade or so, with the possible exception of "Moose Murders," also towered over the Taylor-Burton "Private Lives"?


Yawkey Suffers Stroke
JEAN YAWKEY, majority owner of the Boston Red Sox, suffered a stroke last night at the Four Seasons Hotel in Boston and was rushed to the Massachusetts General Hospital.
Yawkey, 83 years old, was being treated in the hospital's trauma center, a spokesman, MARTIN BANDER, said.
Bander said she was in serious condition. (AP)


Tokyo Stocks Stronger
Stock prices gained in Tokyo today, as hopes of lower interest rates spurred a late rally.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues rose 519.89 points, or 2.5 percent, to 21,291.81.
At midday, the index was up 207.69 points.
On Thursday, the Nikkei fell 253.73 points.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The designated successor as chairman of Time Warner, N. J. Nicholas Jr., resigned and will be replaced as president and co-chief executive by Gerald M. Levin, the vice chairman.
Many saw the resignation as a result of friction between Mr.
Nicholas and the chairman, Steven J. Ross.  [ Page A1. ]
Experts appointed by the F.D.A. recommended that the entire breast implant business be transformed into a huge medical experiment to determine risk.  [ A1. ]


Barnes Art Official Quits, Saying She Was Forced Out
The educational director of the Barnes Foundation, the art institution in Merion, Pa., resigned yesterday, charging that she had been forced out of her job.
In a letter to Richard H. Glanton, president of the Barnes, the educational director, Esther van Sant said: "I do not consider this a resignation because you have made my position as director of education untenable. I feel that I have been forced out."


Ito Takes a Big Chance And Makes History
It was part determination, part self-confidence, part stubbornness and part toughness.
Midori Ito of Japan won the silver medal in the Winter Olympic women's figure skating tonight because she insisted on doing a difficult triple axel jump after she had messed up one.
It was a night of mixed blessings for Ito.
She was the 1989 world champion.
She came here as the gold-medal favorite, or at least the co-favorite with Kristi Yamaguchi of Fremont, Calif.


Riverhead Students Appear in Police Lineup, Spurring Complaints
Told by their assistant principal that it would be an easy way to earn $15 in a few minutes, seven black high school students here agreed to be in a police lineup two weeks ago, and were picked up after school by officers who drove them to the town's police headquarters, school officials say.
There, one of the students said today, they changed into different shirts, put on hats turned backward, held up numbers and stood in the lineup with a robbery suspect.


Stillwell Now a Padre
Free-agent shortstop KURT STILLWELL and the San Diego Padres agreed yesterday on a $3.5 million, two-year contract, three days before the team was set to start spring training.
Stillwell, who spent the last four seasons with the Kansas City Royals, will be paid $1.75 million for each of the next two years.


GUIDEPOST
A Woman's Own Credit For a married woman to build and maintain a credit history on charge accounts and credit cards, it is important for her to have credit in her own name or in joint accounts.
But confusion often arises when marital status changes.
Here is some advice on the effect that these life changes can have on your credit status.


Miss Scott Wed To S. A. Harris
Carolyn Anne Scott, the daughter of Alfred L. Scott of New York and the late Anne Alexander Scott, was married last evening to Shawn Armand Harris, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Harris of Tulsa, Okla.
The Rev.
Dr.
David St.
George, an uncle of the bride, performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of the bride's father and stepmother, Elizabeth Jacks Scott.
The bride, 27 years old, is a human-resource manager for Prime Cable of Alaska in Anchorage.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is the president of Scott-Macon Ltd., a New York investment bank.
Her mother was an interior designer.


Classical Music in Review
Alban Berg Quartet
92d Street Y


Lloyd's Concludes Maxwell Was Suicide and Won't Pay
Lloyd's of London, the British underwriter of a $36 million accident insurance policy on Robert Maxwell, said today that it did not intend to pay because its investigators had concluded that he had probably committed suicide.
Mr.
Maxwell's body was found floating in the Atlantic near the Canary Islands last Nov. 5, about 12 hours after he is believed to have gone overboard from his yacht at a time when his media and publishing empire was collapsing under a burden of debt and apparent fraud.


Sequent President Picks Family Over Computers
Nine years ago, Casey Powell and Scott Gibson led a team of defectors from the Intel Corporation who founded Sequent Computer Systems Inc.
Earlier this week, Mr.
Gibson stepped down as president and co-chief executive to spend more time with his family.
While such a reason is often a euphemism in executive departures, Mr.
Powell said yesterday that in this instance his longtime friend and business partner really did intend to immerse himself in family life.


Tennstedt Cancellation
The new music director of the London Philharmonic, Franz Welser-Moest, will conduct the orchestra at its March 19 concert at Carnegie Hall, replacing Klaus Tennstedt, who withdrew, citing health reasons.
The program is unchanged: Beethoven's Symphonies Nos. 5 in C minor and 6 in F ("Pastorale").


Abu Dhabi Agrees to Give B.C.C.I. Creditors $2.2 Billion
The Government of Abu Dhabi, the main shareholder of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, agreed yesterday to pay up to $2.2 billion to creditors of the collapsed bank rather than face legal claims that might not be resolved for years.
The proposed settlement, along with the bank's remaining assets, would give 250,000 B.C.C.I. creditors and depositors 30 to 40 cents for each dollar they were owed by the bank.
The deal covers claims of about $10 billion in 40 nations.
In several other countries, including the United States, regulators have reached their own settlements with the liquidators representing B.C.C.I.


The Pope Urges Africa to Look to Africans


INSIDE
Drug Dealer's Release Urged
Prosecutors are supporting the release from prison of Leroy (Nicky) Barnes, a notorious drug dealer who helped supply much of New York City's heroin in the 1970's.
Page 25.
Dollar Dry Dock Is Closed
Regulators closed the Dollar Dry Dock Bank, and most of its customers' deposits were sold to the Emigrant Savings Bank.
Page 37.
No Payout on Maxwell Policy
Robert Maxwell's insurers do not intend to pay on his $36 million accident policy because investigators say he probably committed suicide.
Page 37.
Desperate Quest in Mexico
After four straight days of air-quality emergencies, Mexico City is examining a proposal to blow its infamous smog away with giant fans.
Page 2.


Uncovered Short Sales Decline on 2 Exchanges
Many traders who had hoped to profit by betting against stocks they thought were overvalued were forced to run for cover again this month as share prices continued to rise.
That trend was evident in figures released yesterday by the New York Stock Exchange and the American Stock Exchange on the total number of shares that were sold short and not yet covered in the month ended Friday, Feb. 14.
Though those "short interest" figures represent a tiny fraction of all the shares listed on those exchanges, they are an important measure of the overall bearishness of traders.


A Short Trip, but Long on Sentiment


CHRONICLE
"Shimada," a play by Jill Shearer that is to open on Broadway in April, deals with a topic of the moment: efforts by Japan to acquire some of the West's major assets.
It also delves into a painful chapter of the past.
A main character, to be played by BEN GAZZARA, is a former prisoner of war who runs a company that may be bought by the Japanese.
In the course of events, he becomes convinced that the head of the Japanese company is his former prison guard.
Those are hardly themes that the Japanese could be expected to promote on Broadway, but NOBUNAO FURUYAMA, a real-estate executive from Osaka, is the associate producer and has invested $360,000 in the production.


Chief Executive Quits At Chicago Ad Agency
Charlotte Beers, one of the highest-ranking women in American advertising, unexpectedly announced her resignation yesterday as chief executive of Tatham/RSCG in Chicago.
Under her direction, the agency grew robustly and joined a European agency network.
Ms.
Beers, who is 56 years old, has been the only woman to serve as the chairman of the American Association of Advertising Agencies, the trade group for ad agencies.
Colorful and plain-speaking, she has been one of Chicago's most prominent ad executives.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Poll; Tsongas Gains Substantially, Pulling Near Clinton in Poll
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts made a substantial gain in national recognition as a result of his victory in the New Hampshire primary and has drawn close to Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas among Democrats who have chosen a favorite for their party's nomination, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll.
But all five main Democratic candidates remain virtually unknown to half or more of the likely primary voters in their own party, the poll found.


De Klerk's Risk Is Whites' Ultimatum
Taking the kind of calculated risks that have become his hallmark, President F. W. de Klerk is trying to jolt South Africa's white minority into confronting the alternative offered by the right-wing Conservative Party, which opposes his moves to abandon apartheid.
Mr. de Klerk told a startled Parliament on Thursday that he would soon call a referendum to let white voters decide who will negotiate their future.
With the likelihood of a tough and divisive struggle, it was becoming apparent that Mr. de Klerk's own hopes and prospects in the referendum would rely heavily on the English-speaking whites, who account for nearly 40 percent of the white population of five million and include many business leaders, editors and other influential professionals.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY CITY HALL HITS THE ROAD


Art Is Stranger Than Truth


Dinkins to Study Homeless Proposals
On the day a commission he appointed officially released its report on homelessness, Mayor David N. Dinkins tentatively embraced its recommendations but created another panel to explore the practicality and political palatability of the sweeping proposals.
"I'm fully committed to examining whether or not we can go forward," Mr.
Dinkins declared, referring specifically to two of the proposals: a pilot program to give homeless people rent vouchers, and the establishment of a new government vehicle to drive the city's homeless policy in a new direction.


Man in Glacier Is Dated to Stone Age
Carbon dating tests show that the well-preserved body of a prehistoric human hunter found in an Alpine glacier last year is 5,000 to 5,500 years old, scientists reported yesterday.
The first scientifically established age for the frozen corpse is more than 1,000 years older than original estimates.
It means the man lived and presumably froze to death well before the Bronze Age replaced the late Stone Age in Europe.


Time to Fire Ms. Blackburne
Confronted with blatant examples of how the chairwoman of the Housing Authority, Laura Blackburne, violated the public trust, Mayor David Dinkins merely slapped her on the wrist.
He directed her to return public funds that she never should have taken in the first place, saying she had "exercised poor judgment."
So has Mr.
Dinkins, in letting her off the hook.
He need not wait on investigation findings to ask for her resignation.
She has already admitted to excesses that break faith with the public.


Plans for Huge Preservation Area Surprise and Anger Residents
A big new neighbor, the Federal Government, moved into the Black Creek valley two years ago, but the move was so quiet and Wilbur Van Dokkenburg was so busy with his cows anyway, that he and his neighbors only began hearing about the newcomer a few weeks ago.
The move came in January 1990, when Congress passed the 1990 Farm Bill, which was mostly about agricultural subsidies.
But Section 1244 directed the United States Forest Service to study ways to preserve "the long-term integrity and traditional uses" of the New York and New Jersey Highlands, a million acres of Appalachian piedmont stretching from the Delaware River across most of Northern New Jersey to the Hudson in New York.
It includes this valley with its north-flowing stream, and Mr.
Van Dokkenburg's dairy farm.


Killing of Sheik: Israel Waited for Months
The decision to kill the Lebanese Party of God leader, Sheik Abbas Musawi, slain on Sunday in an Israeli helicopter attack, was made months ago, Israeli officials say.
But they say action was postponed during a United Nations envoy's negotiations to trade Israeli-held Arab prisoners for information about missing Israeli servicemen and the Western hostages in Lebanon.
With the release of the last American hostage, Terry A. Anderson, in December, the subsequent breakdown of the talks mediated by the United Nations and a sharp increase in the number of clashes in Israel's "security zone" in southern Lebanon, Israeli officials decided it was time to target the Shiite cleric.
Violence Before Talks
"It has been evident for quite some time that we had to do something about this," said Yossi Olmert, the director of the Government Press Office.


Corrections
A brief article and headline yesterday about former President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's plans to write a monthly column misstated the terms of the arrangement.
He is writing the columns for La Stampa newspaper in Turin, Italy, which will distribute them in Europe.
They will be distributed outside Europe by The New York Times Syndication Sales Corporation, a unit of The New York Times Company.


Prisoners Dig a Tunnel to Escape in West Virginia


Long Day's Journey On Skis Ends With Italian Victorious
Stefania Belmondo of Italy led from the start today and won the women's 30-kilometer cross-country skiing race.
But the Unified Team skiers who finished next -- Lyubov Yegorova in second place and Yelina Valbe in third -- became the first women to win five medals in one Winter Olympics.
The 25-year-old Yegorova, skiing for the former Soviet Union, finished the five races here with three gold medals (one in the relay) and two silver.
The 23-year-old Valbe finished with one gold (in the relay) and four bronze.
The only man to win five medals in one Winter Olympics was Eric Heiden, the American who captured all five speed-skating races in 1980 in Lake Placid, N.Y.


Yamaguchi Has the Delicate and Golden Touch
Kristi Yamaguchi tonight completed a stunning and dramatic yearlong rise from runner-up national champion to become the first American since Dorothy Hamill in 1976 to win the Olympic title in women's figure skating.
With an impressive though less than brilliant free-skate program, she not only gave the United States a fourth gold medal for the Albertville Olympics, she symbolized just how much skating has not changed in the last eight years.
Like Katarina Witt of East Germany in 1984 and 1988, Yamaguchi crafted her title on a feathery vision of artistic precision and elegance, with near total disdain for the latest trends in acrobatic jumping.


Tunisia Acts Justly on Fundamentalists
To the Editor:
"Tunisia Cracks Down Harder on Muslim Militants" (news article, Jan. 20) contains a number of inaccurate statement and conclusions.


Nets Fritter Away Big Lead But Hang On to Nip Pacers
What was shaping up as a rare blowout for New Jersey came down to just another fright night in the life of the Nets tonight as they turned back the Indiana Pacers, 106-102, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Up by 17 points with 8 minutes 25 seconds to play in the fourth quarter, New Jersey saw its lead vanish when the Pacers' Detlef Schrempf hit a jump shot that tied the game at 101-101 with 41.8 seconds left.


Dear Pascual, Wherever You Are: Brien Looks Good
On the first day of spring training, the Yankees finally saw their future.
What they didn't see was Pascual Perez.
Brien Taylor, their 20-year-old millionaire pitcher, played catch in the outfield today, took part in some drills and conceded afterward that the Florida heat had wilted him.
But the manager and coaches were impressed.


U.S. Refuses To Supervise Newark Job
Saying that they are satisfied with steps to improve the Newark Housing Authority, Federal housing officials have refused to appoint a receiver to manage the agency's long-delayed construction projects.
Burton Bloomberg, the acting manager of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development in Newark, said he was denying the receiver because he was satisfied that Newark, state and Federal officials were taking steps to speed up housing construction -- including naming a task force to help reduce bureaucratic delays and developing a $60 million revolving loan fund to help developers who had been unable to obtain financing during the recession.


Patents; Crossing a Violin With Electric Guitar
Bob Schlink, professional rock guitarist and founder of Bob Schlink and the Ballistics, has invented a cross between an electric guitar and a violin that can be played on the shoulder with a bow.
"I really love the sound of the violin, the viola and the cello, but you can't run a bow over a regular guitar," said Mr.
Schlink, who lives in Providence, R.I., and uses the instrument in his act.
The problem, he continued, is that guitars have flat fingerboards instead of an arched one like a violin.
As a result, a musician has a choice between running the bow over all strings at once or the high string and low string individually.
It is impossible to hit individual strings in the middle.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
N.
J.
Nicholas Jr. will get a settlement of about $15 million as he leaves Time Warner, several executives said.
The stock market applauded the management change, as Time-Warner shares jumped $4.625 at the opening and closed $1.875 higher.  [ Page 37. ]  Time Warner executives have often been more concerned with extricating the company from mistakes and cultural mismatches than with executing a grand strategy.  [ 37. ]


New Publishers Are Named At Two Hearst Magazines
It was musical chairs yesterday at Hearst Magazines.
Anthony S. Hoyt, the publisher of House Beautiful, was named publisher of Redbook, succeeding Gregory W. Dunn, who was named director of special event marketing for Hearst Magazines.
Carole Ference, publisher of Connoisseur until it closed last month, will replace Mr.
Hoyt as publisher of House Beautiful.


Washington Talk; Reading Budget Lessons of Gulf War
The cold war is over and the Soviet threat is all but gone, but the Bush Administration is still battling with Congress over how low the military budget can safely go.
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney says his proposed $281 billion budget for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1 -- $10 billion less than this year -- is as low as safely possible.
Indeed, Pentagon planners, looking to the post-cold-war world, have seven outlines for conflicts that could draw the United States into combat in the next decade.


Fans of New Jersey's Third District Try to Keep It Intact
A long parade of witnesses and four busloads of supporters descended on Trenton today in a struggle to save New Jersey's Third Congressional District from dissolution and perhaps save the job of an incumbent Representative, Frank Pallone Jr.
The witnesses and supporters, most of them affiliated with a group called the Save Our Shore District Coalition, appeared before a panel appointed to devise a plan for congressional redistricting, an always fractious process made even messier this year by the fact that New Jersey will lose one of its 14 seats in the House of Representatives.


Aides Call Dinkins Irate At Housing Chairwoman
As new allegations emerge each day about lavish spending of government funds by the chairwoman of the New York City Housing Authority, Mayor David N. Dinkins is struggling to decide whether to keep Laura D. Blackburne, the chairwoman, in office, several top aides to the Mayor said yesterday.
The Mayoral aides, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said that Mr.
Dinkins was furious with Ms.
Blackburne, felt that she had betrayed him and was unhappy with both her spending and her explanations for it.
Some of his advisers, they say, are urging him to dismiss her.


CHRONICLE
PETER SCHICKELE had hoped to perform "A Work for Two Bassoons" with ITZHAK PERLMAN at a benefit concert for the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra at Carnegie Hall on April 1.
But he discovered recently that Mr.
Perlman "doesn't play the bassoon and won't learn it," he said.
Instead, the two will perform "A Newly Discovered Work for Two Violins and Orchestra," and never mind that Mr.
Schickele, the alter ego of P. D. Q. Bach, has never played the violin in public.
"I took cello lessons for one month in college and that is the closest I ever came to a string instrument," he said yesterday.


C.I.A. Director Announces Plan For More Access to Agency Files
Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, announced a plan today to speed the declassification of many Central Intelligence Agency archives, but he left unclear how much material would ultimately be made public.
The review process, which will be handled by C.I.A. officials, will include archives relating to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, the American-orchestrated coup in Guatemala in 1954, the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1961 and the Cuban missile crisis in 1962, Mr.
Gates said.


Few Items In Kraft Test
Kraft General Foods Inc. said yesterday that a new pricing strategy would involve only a handful of the company's products.
"Our fundamental pricing policy is unchanged and no one should expect broad-scale price reductions," Kraft said in a statement.


A Rescue From Asia, But It's Turned Down
Sir Run Run Shaw, the Asian tycoon who tried to help Macy avoid bankruptcy by offering a $250 million loan, was turned down in part because board members hardly know him.
Some members heard his name for the first time in March 1991, when he bought a 10.3 percent stake in Macy.
Yet in Hong Kong, where he has dominated the movie business for decades, Sir Run Run is a highly visible billionaire known to virtually every household.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Write-In; Cuomo Tells Presidential Draft Group to End Campaign
Three days after winning 4 percent of the vote in New Hampshire's Democratic Presidential primary, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo tried for the first time today to shut down efforts to draft him as a candidate.
Mr.
Cuomo, who implicitly encouraged a write-in effort in New Hampshire by refusing to disavow it, issued a brief statement asking the National Draft Cuomo for President Committee to end its campaign.


EXECUTIVES
*
GE Industrial and Power System, Schenectady, N.Y., a unit of General Electric Corp., named Donald M. Kusza president and regional executive of Asia operations. *
Kayser-Roth Direct, Inc., Greensboro, N.C., a hosiery unit of Wickes Cos., named Carol K. Burke vice president and general manager.


U.S. and Israel Still Fail To Resolve Loan Issues
Israeli and United States officials tried again today to resolve their differences over American demands that Israel halt building new settlements in the occupied territories as a condition for American loan guarantees, but the two sides did not make any progress.
Israel's Ambassador to Washington, Zalman Shoval, met with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d in their third negotiating session on the issue, but both sides said afterward that they were holding to their basic positions.


At Lincoln Center, a 'Black Box' for New Ideas
"This really is a black box," a visitor murmured as he peered at the stage and its surrounding black walls at the new Clark Studio Theater in the Samuel B. and David Rose Building on West 65th Street, the luxurious new headquarters for the School of American Ballet and other organizations affiliated with Lincoln Center, as well as the Walter Reade Theater and private apartments.
But while the new theater, which opened on Thursday, is recognizably in the simple "black box" style favored by experimentalists in the performing arts, it has technical appointments beyond the reach of most similar studio auditoriums.
The beneficiary of this theatrical windfall, paid for by the family of Edna McConnell Clark and W. Van Alan Clark, is the Lincoln Center Institute, a program of Lincoln Center Inc. that provides workshops and other activities for teachers and students in metropolitan-area elementary and secondary schools.
"We're about esthetic education," Mark Schubart, president of the institute, said yesterday.
"We work through the arts to open up the whole world of esthetics to kids, working through their teachers."


Classical Music in Review
Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra
Avery Fisher Hall


Patents; Way to Seal Leaky Tanks Underground
A serious source of ground water pollution is leaky underground tanks storing gasoline, petroleum and other chemicals.
The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that of at least 1.8 million underground tanks, not counting those on farms or in homes, at least 300,000 are leaking or will leak.
To address that problem, the E.P.A. has set deadlines for companies to use corrosion-resistant tanks and leak-detection systems over the next decade.
Now a small Connecticut company has invented a system that not only detects leaks but also uses a "curtain" of air pressure to patch holes when they occur.


Wolf Leaving New York
WARNER WOLF, a sportscaster for Channel 2 in New York since 1980, will be leaving the CBS station in June for Channel 9 in Washington.
Wolf, who has worked in the New York market for the last 16 years, said last night that a three-year contract he signed with CBS-TV will expire on June 9 and that he will be returning to WUSA, the station that employed him for 11 years before he came to New York.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


For Skateboard Fans, A New Way to Travel
The sport of skateboarding has spawned a new recreational device: the Snakeboard.
Unlike a skateboard, which is pushed along with one foot, the Snakeboard moves as the rider pivots both feet on two footrests.
But skateboarders may find the Snakeboard a bit more difficult to use.
The board gets its name from the snakelike fashion in which the rider weaves the board back and forth, twisting with the feet and shoulders at the same time.
It was developed by James Fisher, who was attending high school in South Africa when he began experimenting with the idea six years ago.
He and friends started out with a roller skate, plumbing pipe and pine blocks.
Adult Appeal
A San Diego company bought manufacturing rights from Mr.
Fisher and began marketing the board in North America this year.
Andrew Robertson, a vice president of the company, Snakeboard U.S.A., said the device is designed to appeal to the same 7- to 20-year-old youth group that is infatuated with skateboarding.


City Job Loss Called More Than Expected
New York City lost about 50,000 more jobs in 1991 than had been thought, according to revised statistics published yesterday by the New York State Department of Labor.
Previously, the city's job losses last year had been estimated at 160,000 jobs, but that figure has now been raised to 210,000, coming off a total non-agricultural employment base of 3.5 million.


Patents; Fungus That Helps Crops Fight Disease
Scientists at Michigan State University have invented a method of using fungus to help crops fight drought and disease.
The invention is one of a number of approaches based on insights about the way plants develop mutual-aid relationships with other organisms in the soil.
In this case, the organisms are a line of fungus called Vesicular Arbuscular Mycorrhizal, or VAM, that attach to the roots of most plants and form silk-like threads.
The fungus draws carbon from the plants, but in return its threads act like tiny pipettes that extend the plant's root system and allow it to draw up more nutrients.


O. Jack Mitchell, 60, Architecture Professor
O.
Jack Mitchell, a professor of architecture, died on Tuesday at his home in Houston.
He was 60 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his wife, Carolyn.


U.S. Pavilion at Seville Merits a Second Look
To the Editor:
I was astonished to see your editorial judging the United States Pavilion at Expo '92 three months before opening day ("World-Class Flop in Seville," Feb. 4).
Despite the many obstacles you cite, the pavilion will offer a world-class opportunity for visitors to rediscover America, our people, culture and values.


Helping Kids With Brain Tumors to Survive
To the Editor:
Hats off for your news article about young people with cancer (Jan. 31).
Those of us who share their suffering realize the value of support.
In New York, the Children's Brain Tumor Foundation is a leader in providing such services.


Sports of The Times; Old Hoya Is in Need of a New Challenge
John Thompson jumped for joy Wednesday night and the entire Capitol Centre seemed to shake.
With the score tied, 58-58, with seven seconds to play, Georgetown's Joey Brown picked up a loose ball that had caromed off the head of a Connecticut player.
Brown looked up at the clock, then streaked downcourt with his Hoya teammates waving him on as if he were a defensive back on his way to the winning touchdown.


Coach's Advice Is Zip Lips
Down on the ice, the final horn had just sounded and the United States captain, Clark Donatelli, was wasting no time venting the United States' displeasure against the Swedish referee, Sven Eric Sold.
About halfway up the stands, Dave King watched this post-game tirade begin to build and saw it for what it was.
"Any team that gets outshot, 55-18, should keep its mouths shut about the officiating," said King.
"When one team has the puck as much as the Russians did, you are going to wind up taking some penalties."


U.S. Hockey Team Tumbles And Uses Referee as Fall Guy
They lost stubbornly, badly, with great emotion and without grace.
It was the way the United States hockey players attacked both their semifinal match and the entire Winter Olympic extravaganza.
One after another following their 5-2 loss tonight to the gifted Unified Team, composed of former Soviet Union players, the American players and then their coach, Dave Peterson, found a target for their disappointment, for the reason the United States will play Czechoslovakia on Saturday night for the bronze medal instead of Canada on Sunday afternoon for the gold.


Kleinman Keeps Suit, but Loses Pin Stripes
Spring training began yesterday, but the Yankees were already in midseason form -- not with their pitching and hitting but with their bizarre front-office turbulence.
First, Daniel McCarthy, designated by the club's partnership as the managing partner, put his status in jeopardy by failing to appear for a meeting with Commissioner Fay Vincent.
Then, Leonard Kleinman was fired as the club's chief operating officer, leaving George Steinbrenner suspended in a twilight zone in his effort to return as managing partner.


Corrections
A "Man in the News" article yesterday about Paul E. Tsongas misstated his Congressional history.
He was elected to the House of Representatives in 1974; he was not a first-term Congressman 22 years ago.
The article also misstated the date when he met Niki Sauvage, his wife, and the length of their courtship.
They met in 1967 and were married in 1969, two and a half years -- not a month and a half -- later.
The article also had an erroneous dateline.
It was written in Sioux Falls, S.D.


Top Officials at Ceremony for Slain Japanese
Gov.
William F. Weld and Mayor Raymond L. Flynn attended a memorial service here today for Iwao Matsuda, the Japanese university president who was shot to death in his hotel room on Wednesday after arriving to sign an exchange agreement with the University of Massachusetts in Boston.
Several Japanese representatives, speaking to honor Mr.
Matsuda, the president of Chukyo University in Nagoya, sought to play down suggestions that his killing would add to tensions between the United States and Japan.


Penalties Sink Stars and Rally Rangers
Perhaps it is a sign of a potential champion, a team of destiny, that it can win when it is outplayed, that it can come from behind late in a game when the fans are booing and the players seem exhausted.
That's one explanation for the Rangers' stunning 5-4 victory over the Minnesota North Stars on Friday night at Madison Square Garden.
Trailing by 4-1 midway through the third period, the Rangers scored four goals in a span of 6 minutes 48 seconds.
The first two goals were on the power play.
The second two, at even strength, were by Mark Messier, the captain and spiritual leader.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
4.00
6.27
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.92
3.87
5.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.03
3.99
5.95
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.07
7.00
7.78
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.94
7.90
8.06
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
8.95
9.25
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.80
6.80
7.33
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Don't Draft Me, Cuomo Says
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who had implicitly encouraged a write-in campaign in New Hampshire, tried to shut down the effort.
Page 8.


How to Measure Excellence
Awesome.
The women skaters and skiers who have won eight of America's ten medals in Albertville.
The Norwegian men who took seven golds, having won none at all in 1988.
Finland's soaring 16-year-old, Toni Nieminen, whose ski jumps made him the youngest-ever gold-medal winner in a Winter Olympics men's event.
Champions all, but not the whole story of the winter games ending tomorrow in France's rugged Savoy Alps.
The true spirit of Olympic competition has infused thrills into every event.
Athletes from 19 of the 64 nations in this year's games have taken at least one medal.
Consider, for example, the excitement for fans back home in Seoul when Kim Yoon Man captured the first medal a South Korean has ever won in a Winter Olympics, a silver in speed skating.


Don't Stifle Democracy in Taiwan
Taiwan's impressive progress toward democracy confronts a critical test.
The main opposition party, the Democratic Progressives, may be dissolved Monday by a Government committee.
Its crime: advocating Taiwan's independence from mainland China in elections last year.
Both Taiwan's ruling Nationalist Party and the Communist Government in Beijing insist there is but one China, encompassing Taiwan and the mainland.
Taiwan's voters passed their own verdict when they dealt the Democratic Progressives a stinging electoral defeat.
For the Government now to dissolve the losing party would offend democratic values and chill political debate.


Quote of the Day
"The purpose for greater openness is to make C.I.A. and the intelligence process more visible and understandable. We must try to help people understand better what C.I.A. does and how we do it." -- ROBERT M. GATES, the Director of Central Intelligence.  [ 9:1. ]


Bashing Is Dangerous and Avoidable
In the last two months, U.S.-Japanese relations have declined more than at any time since the anti-American demonstrations in Tokyo in 1960.
Yet nothing fundamental has changed between the two nations to precipitate this shift.
It is the result of nothing more -- or less -- than a failure of leadership on both sides.
Each side has always had its protectionist politicians, businessmen and journalists who criticized the other nation, sometimes fairly, sometimes not.
But never before have the leaders of the two nations allowed themselves to become part of the problem by crossing the fine line dividing constructive criticism from demagogy.


Tsongas and Clinton End Dispute on Ballot
While Paul E. Tsongas's status on the New York Presidential primary ballot in April remains uncertain because of a legal challenge from a fringe political group, the mini-war that erupted between him and Bill Clinton over the issue appears to have fizzled to a close.
At least for now.
The New Alliance Party announced on Tuesday that it would seek to have the former Massachusetts Senator's name removed from the ballot because of what it said were his failures to meet technical requirements of New York's notoriously Byzantine election law.


SHIITES URGE END TO FIRING
Fearing an expansion of Israeli military activity in southern Lebanon, two senior Shiite leaders here called on their followers today to stop firing rockets into northern Israel.
Sheik Mohammed Hussein Fadlallah, spiritual mentor of the pro-Iranian Party of God, said in a sermon today that Muslim fighters had resorted to firing missiles into Israel only after Shiite villages had come under heavy artillery bombardment from Israeli troops and their militia ally, the South Lebanon Army.
He said members of the Party of God should stop using the weapons if the shelling of villages in southern Lebanon stopped.


Yew Trees Needn't Fall to Make Cancer Drug; No Waste of Bark
To the Editor:
"Trees That Yield a Drug for Cancer Are Wasted" (front page, Jan. 29) is wrong in its assessment of the Bureau of Land Management's management of the Pacific yew for the tree's production of the anticancer substance taxol.
You have been misled by those who, in their rush to fuel the fire of their attack on timber harvest in general, misinform by telling only part of the story.


Sports of The Times; Sour Whine Even Stains Bronze Bid
No gold medal, no silver medal.
All the United States Olympic hockey team can salvage now is the bronze medal.
But if it doesn't win today's game with Czechoslovakia, it will finish fourth.
For that, there's not even a tin medal.
Even before yesterday's 5-2 loss to the Unified Team from the former Soviet Union, the captain of America's "miracle on ice" gold-medal team, Mike Eruzione, now a CBS television analyst, was wondering if a fourth-place finish for this year's team would erase the memory of the excitement it had created.


100 Movies A Day Without Insanity
The Berlin International Film Festival is a multi-armed monster, with up to 100 films shown on each of its 11 days.
Even the most ardent film lover can quickly grow bleary-eyed; as an example, there are 16 Iranian films in the market division alone.
Buyers, who hope to obtain distribution rights, have their own agendas.
Big distributors bid on the big feature films, but others seek more fragile, tender or exotic fare.


Health Insurance for Nannies Urged as a Family Obligation
Health insurance for domestic help is an idea whose time has come, according to employment agencies and insurance experts.
And most families that employ nannies, baby sitters, housekeepers or other household workers are usually aware that they may have to withhold from their employee's pay checks funds for Social Security, Medicare and various income taxes.


Date Set for Calumet Auction
A Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday set March 26 as the date for the auction sale of Calumet Farm in Kentucky, and said that the highest bidder would acquire the 843-acre showplace of thoroughbred racing regardless of the amount of money offered.
Judge Joe Lee fixed the time of the sale after months of litigation involving dozens of creditors with claims of more than $100 million.
The farm, once the home of eight winners of the Kentucky Derby, fell into bankruptcy last year after a decade of losses and runaway debt.
Several offers have been made in recent months, but none came close to covering any significant part of the debt.


Louis Sobol, 72, Dies; Founded Caviarteria
Louis Sobol, who founded Caviarteria, a specialty foods business that supplies Americans with millions of dollars worth of caviar each year, died Thursday in the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
He was 72 years old.
He died of leukemia, his family said.


ISRAELI ARMY ENDS 24-HOUR INCURSION IN SOUTH LEBANON
Israeli forces withdrew from two villages in southern Lebanon today, ending a 24-hour thrust against Shiite Muslim guerrillas who had fired salvos of rockets into northern Israel.
Hours after the withdrawal, the villages were again filled with gunmen from the pro-Iranian Party of God, and fresh barrages of rockets were fired at Israeli border villages, killing a 5-year-old girl, the first Israeli civilian killed since the rocket attacks began early this week.


U.S. Lifts Its Sanctions on China Over High-Technology Transfers
The Bush Administration lifted sanctions against China's transfer of high technology today after accepting its promise to abide by restrictions on the sale of missiles and missile technology to the Middle East.
The decision was pushed by the White House and the State Department despite recent intelligence reports that China is continuing to sell missile technology to Syria, Iran and Pakistan and nuclear technology to Iran, according to some senior Administration officials and lawmakers.


The Pros and Cons of Using a Discount Broker
It's not just people who pump their own gas or buy groceries in bulk who are willing to make extra efforts to save money.
People with capital to invest in stocks and bonds like low prices, too.
More and more individual investors, twice the proportion of a decade ago, are flocking these days to discount brokers.
The discounters, born in 1975 when the Federal Government banned price-fixed commissions, now offer an increasing array of sophisticated products and services.


BRIEFS
*
Conseco Inc., Carmel, Ind., a holding company, agreed to acquire Bankers Life and Casualty Co. and its Certified Life Insurance Co. unit from I.C.H.
Corp., Louisville, Ky., also a holding company.
The price is about $600 million. *
Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co., Akron, Ohio, agreed to offer the shareholders of Goodyear Canada Inc., $48 a share in cash, in a deal that would make Goodyear Canada a wholly owned subsidiary of Goodyear.


Religion Notes
A Taxing Question
Religious organizations are expressing alarm over a budget proposal by the Bush Administration that would require churches and synagogues to report to the Internal Revenue Service each year the names of donors of more than $500.


Sudan Is Said to Force 400,000 People Into Desert
The Sudanese Government has driven more than 400,000 people displaced by drought and civil strife out of shelters around the capital and into the desert, an official of the United States Agency for International Development said today.
He called the action, carried out at gunpoint, "a death sentence."
The displaced people, who had been among 1.8 million squatters living around Khartoum, have been sent over the last few months into an area devoid of food and water, said the official, Andrew Natsios, head of the agency's office of foreign disaster assistance.


American Wins Gold in Women's Figure Skating


Ousted Haitian Leader Holds Talks With Premier-Designate
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's exiled President, met here today for the first substantive talks with the new Prime Minister-designate, the first break in months of political deadlock.
On Saturday, Father Aristide and the Prime Minister-designate, Rene Theodore, are expected to hold talks with leaders of the two houses of the Haitian Parliament, the first step in trying to reach a compromise that would allow Father Aristide, who was deposed in a coup on Sept. 30, to begin negotiating his return.


Woman, 28, Abducted in Bias Case, Police Say
A 28-year-old woman was abducted by two men and a woman from in front of Woodhull Hospital in Brooklyn early yesterday, beaten, sexually assaulted and kept tied up in a van for 17 hours before being released, the police said.
The police have classified the kidnapping as a bias crime because the victim, a light-skinned Hispanic woman, told them her abductors, whom she said were black, had called her racially derogatory names during her ordeal.


McDaniel Not Ready or Steady
The Knicks need more from Xavier McDaniel than they have gotten lately.
And no one had to tell that to McDaniel today after practice.
"I should've come in street clothes and sat in the stands," McDaniel said, talking about his lackluster 3-point effort in Thursday's 92-89 loss to the Cleveland Cavaliers.
"It was a waste of time. Maybe I wasn't ready to play."


Head of Endowment for the Arts Is Forced From His Post by Bush
John E. Frohnmayer, the chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, was forced out of his job yesterday, apparently a casualty of the political wars.
President Bush's decision to call for Mr.
Frohnmayer's resignation came amid reports that Patrick J. Buchanan, the President's conservative challenger, would make an issue of Mr.
Bush's support of the arts endowment as he campaigned in the South.
On Thursday, Mr.
Buchanan scathingly attacked President Bush for having increased the Government's support for the endowment, which he called "the upholstered playpen of the arts and crafts auxiliary of the Eastern liberal establishment." The same day, Mr.
Frohnmayer said in a statement released yesterday, he met with the White House staff and "determined that May 1, 1992 should be my departure date."


News Summary
International 2-5 ISRAELI FORCES PULL BACK
Israeli forces withdrew from two villages in southern Lebanon, ending a 24-hour thrust against Shiite Muslim guerrillas.
After the pullout, Shiite gunmen fired fresh barrages of rockets at Israeli border villages, killing a 5-year-old girl.  1


Gotti Lawyer Says Client Is No Orator
Defense lawyers took on the difficult task yesterday of defusing John Gotti's own words in secretly taped conversations, suggesting that he could often be misinterpreted because he did not speak with "Churchillian" clarity.
Trying to show that some of Mr.
Gotti's words were not as sinister as they sounded, the lawyers cross-examined an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who had told the jury that when Mr.
Gotti said "whacked" several times on the tapes, it meant that someone had been killed.


Breast-Implant Plan Upsets Surgeons
Confused and angered by an expert panel's recommendation of tight restrictions on the use of silicone-gel breast implants, plastic surgeons interviewed today said they would either use a different kind of implant or accept the new recommendations under which the gel implants would be treated as experiments.
None of the doctors interviewed said they would stop giving implants to patients who seek them, although some said they had postponed all implant operations pending a final ruling by the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, Dr.
David A. Kessler.


U.S. Attorney Seeks Release of Informer
Describing his help as an informer as historic in importance, Federal prosecutors moved yesterday to gain the release from prison of Leroy (Nicky) Barnes, one of the most notorious drug kingpins in New York City's history.
Once known as "Mr. Untouchable" because of his seeming invincibility from prosecution, Mr.
Barnes helped form a murderous drug syndicate in the 1970's that brought together the heads of the seven largest drug rings in the city, largely controlling heroin and other narcotics sales in Manhattan, the Bronx and Brooklyn.
The syndicate, called the Council, "employed hundreds of mill workers, distributors and street dealers," ordered a long string of murders and "inflicted incalculable damage on this city," prosecutors said at the time.


Dollar Dry Dock Bank Shut
New York State regulators closed the Dollar Dry Dock Bank yesterday and named the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation as receiver.
Most of its customers' deposits were sold to the Emigrant Savings Bank, a much stronger bank that has avoided the losses from real estate loans that have plagued Dollar Dry Dock.
Dollar Dry Dock, which is based in White Plains, had 21 branches in New York City and Westchester County.
It had $3.7 billion in deposits, which will continue to be insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, up to the limit of $100,000 for each depositor.
Dollar Dry Dock customers may continue to use automatic teller machines as usual, until the branches open for business on Monday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Write-In; Cuomo Tells Presidential Draft Group to End Campaign
Three days after winning 4 percent of the vote in New Hampshire's Democratic Presidential primary, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo tried for the first time today to shut down efforts to draft him as a candidate.
Mr.
Cuomo, who implicitly encouraged a write-in effort in New Hampshire by refusing to disavow it, issued a brief statement asking the National Draft Cuomo for President Committee to end its campaign.


Closing the Books in Hartford
It was perhaps inevitable, after 25 years in side-by-side offices poring over the same documents, that Leo V. Donohue and Henry J. Becker Jr. should start completing each other's sentences.
Mr. Becker: "I guess we knew each other ----"


A Waiting Room, Happy Patients and the Future
The waiting room of Soundview Health Center in the east Bronx was sprinkled with the usual potpourri of happy humanity.
Bertha Evan told of coming here for the first time last spring after not feeling well for a couple days.
Despite her protestations that it was nothing serious, she was whisked to a hospital and within a week was recovering from heart surgery.


Federal Official Apologizes For Remarks on Inner Cities
Dr.
Frederick K. Goodwin, the Bush Administration's top mental health official, today apologized for remarks that he said had been seen by some people as insensitive to blacks.
The comments were made on Feb. 11 at a meeting of the Advisory Council of the National Institutes of Mental Health, the panel that oversees policy of the National Institutes of Mental Health.


Texas Instruments Gets Chip-Case Ruling
The International Trade Commission today ordered five United States chip companies to stop using a computer-chip packaging technology patented by Texas Instruments Inc.
The order now goes to the President for review and signing.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Hits All Targets Except His Challenger
President Bush inveighed today against tax increases, socialized medicine, ambulance-chasing lawyers, the welfare system, Congress and big government.
But he barely gave a rhetorical nod to his most nettlesome problem, ensconced in a hotel meeting room a block away.
In a speech to the Southern Republican Leadership Conference here, Mr.
Bush all but ignored Patrick J. Buchanan, the rebellious opponent who cast a shadow over the President's primary-election debut this week.


Macy's 16 Fateful Days in January
For R. H. Macy &amp; Company, the bankruptcy filing it sought so desperately to avoid has brought it the time to rebuild its finances.
For it was the lack of time -- due mostly to a deadline Macy unwittingly imposed on itself -- that forced this proud company to seek the court's protection last month.
The beginning of the end came during a three-way telephone conversation a little more than two weeks before its bankruptcy filing on Jan. 27.
On the line from New York was Myron E. Ullman 3d, Macy's vice chairman and the point man for the giant retailer's day-to-day operations, and Mark S. Handler, Macy's president.
On the other end, in Barbados, was Edward S. Finkelstein, Macy's chairman and chief executive, who left for a vacation after a dismal Christmas sales season.


Your Taxes; Use of Preparers May Be Waning
Tax preparation is considered an increasingly complex task, one that nearly half of Americans turn over to accountants, tax lawyers or other specialists.
Yet figures suggest that reliance on professional preparation may have begun to wane, easing last filing season to 46.4 percent of returns from a 1988 peak of 47.7 percent.
A decade earlier the proportion was 37.9 percent.


Senate Votes to Expand Aid To Needy College Students
The Senate voted 93 to 1 today to boost Federal assistance to needy college students by increasing maximum annual grants from $2,400 to $3,600, while expanding the eligibility for such grants to more middle-class families.
Democrats and Republicans said the legislation would enable more middle-class students to go to college and increase the quality of future workers.


Dinkins's Youth Commissioner Under Fire for Contract Award
The head of the New York City agency that finances youth programs improperly awarded a $727,000 contract last year to a private foundation that he formerly led, city investigators have concluded.
The inquiry by the Department of Investigation found that the official, Richard L. Murphy, the Commissioner for Youth Services, was instrumental in directing the contract for the creation of after-school programs to the Rheedlen Center for Children and Family Services, a social-services agency on Manhattan's West Side.


Mexico City Journal; Is the Latest Idea for Curing Pollution Just Hot Air?
The annals of possible solutions to this city's infamous smog problem are full of strange dreams: big holes drilled through the surrounding mountains to let the pollutants out, perfume additives for car exhaust, gas masks for everyone.
Only now, however, have the authorities officially contemplated such an idea.
On orders from the Mayor, researchers and bureaucrats have embarked on what they say is serious study of a plan to blow the contamination away with giant fans.


Home's Only as Far Away As the Palm of Your Hand
Phone Home, an automatic dialing device, enables lost children and elderly or disabled people to call their homes even if they do not know their number.
The call can be made without money and on any phone.
The device will fit into a child's hand and can be clipped to clothing or a key chain.
It is held to the mouthpiece of a telephone and its "home" button pressed; that activates the phone company's tone-dialing system and gets an operator.
Phone Home can be programmed to dial up to a 16-digit number, and so can be set to place a collect call (0 for the operator plus a three-digit area code and seven-digit number).
Once a collect call is put through over Phone Home, the person being called must ask the operator for time and charges, and to trace the origin of the call..


Uncovered Short Sales Decline on 2 Exchanges
Many traders who had hoped to profit by betting against stocks they thought were overvalued were forced to run for cover again this month as share prices continued to rise.
That trend was evident in figures released yesterday by the New York Stock Exchange and the American Stock Exchange on the total number of shares that were sold short and not yet covered in the month ended Friday, Feb. 14.
Though those "short interest" figures represent a tiny fraction of all the shares listed on those exchanges, they are an important measure of the overall bearishness of traders.


U.N. Votes to Send Force to Yugoslavia
The United Nations Security Council voted unanimously tonight to start dispatching a 14,000-member peacekeeping force to Yugoslavia to monitor the cease-fire there and protect minority Serbs in Croatia until their future is settled.
The operation in Yugoslavia, which is already one of the biggest the United Nations has ever organized, will be followed by an even bigger and more complex one next week when the Council is expected to send military and civilian contingents to oversee the end of Cambodia's long civil war, disarm its rival factions, return refugees and organize nationwide free elections.


The Year No One Became President
Voters in the New Hampshire primary election seemed determined to repeal two long-valid laws of Presidential politics.
Democrats challenged Lippman's Law, named for one of its prominent promulgators, Theo Lippman Jr. of The Baltimore Sun.
It holds that:
The parties usually nominate for President only people who have been plausible candidates in prior campaigns.


Simi Valley Journal; Town, Too, Feels Eyes Of Nation For a Trial
Twenty years ago, this was a small town, and many residents commuted over the Santa Susana pass to blue-collar jobs at aerospace and automobile plants in the San Fernando Valley of Los Angeles.
In the 1970's and 80's, bulldozers pushed aside citrus groves to make way for thousands of cookie-cutter tract houses.
As housing prices, crime and crowding drove professionals farther from the urban center, the population here, 33 miles northwest of downtown Los Angeles, boomed to 100,000 and became more affluent.
Unlike more established communities in and around Los Angeles that oppose new construction and try to maintain remnants of the past, Simi Valley, with little history and many newcomers, celebrated growth.


Wounded Police Officer Leaves Hospital


New York City Considering Quarantine of TB Patients
A New York City Health Department task force is considering a "spectrum of strategies" to deal with tuberculosis patients who refuse to be treated, including the possibility of forced quarantine, Health Commissioner Margaret A. Hamburg said yesterday.
A report by the department's Tuberculosis Task Force for Non-Compliant Patients is to be issued within six weeks, but Dr.
Hamburg acknowledged yesterday that "at the end of the spectrum, the issue of mandatory treatment does emerge."


To Counter Iran, Saudis Seek Ties With Ex-Soviet Islamic Republics
Saudi Arabia has established diplomatic relations with Uzbekistan, one of the newly independent Central Asian republics that were once part of the Soviet Union, in a move to blunt Iran's diplomatic offensive to win influence in that Islamic region.
The development, announced here today, came as several pro-Western Islamic countries -- notably Pakistan, Turkey, Egypt and Saudi Arabia -- appeared to have begun significant efforts to establish ties with the Islamic republics of Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Azerbaijan, among others.


Sudan Is Said to Force 400,000 People Into Desert
The Sudanese Government has driven more than 400,000 people displaced by drought and civil strife out of shelters around the capital and into the desert, an official of the United States Agency for International Development said today.
He called the action, carried out at gunpoint, "a death sentence."
The displaced people, who had been among 1.8 million squatters living around Khartoum, have been sent over the last few months into an area devoid of food and water, said the official, Andrew Natsios, head of the agency's office of foreign disaster assistance.


It's Lunacy to Keep 'Star Wars' Alive
The U.S. and Soviet Union are heading toward arms reduction agreements that will cut nuclear missile arsenals dramatically.
That makes it all the more preposterous to go ahead with the "Star Wars" program.
The plan to establish a joint early warning center to detect ballistic missile firings from almost any point on the globe offers an effective and symbolic measure of the new Russian-American relations.
Other countries will be invited to join.
That doesn't go nearly far enough to control proliferation of missiles.
But it will be a good start in showing that major countries are prepared to act together against the techniques of aggression and blackmail they themselves invented.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Courier Falls in 3 Sets


Rivals Hope to Gain on Arazi By Taking Fountain of Youth
Arazi, the favorite for the Kentucky Derby and the international star of 3-year-old colts, is still in France wintering and preparing for his date with destiny 10 weeks hence.
But 11 of his rivals will take major steps on the road to Louisville on Saturday when they race in the $249,750 Fountain of Youth Stakes at Gulfstream Park.
The race carries unusual significance this year because no clear candidate has emerged yet to challenge Arazi, and the Fountain of Youth offers somebody the chance to seize the lead in the countdown to the Derby.
Another Lukas Hot Shot
As a result, three young stars from California were flown to Florida this week to confront the Eastern favorite, Pistols and Roses, a gray colt bred in Florida, who has won his last four races and five of the seven starts in his career.
He surfaced as a potential challenger to Arazi after his performance this winter at Hialeah Park, winning the Bahamas at seven furlongs and the Everglades and the Flamingo at a mile and an eighth.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; CONSERVATIVES GET WARNING BY QUAYLE TO STAND BY BUSH
In one of its most direct efforts to undermine Patrick J. Buchanan's insurgency, the White House today dispatched Vice President Dan Quayle to warn Republican conservatives that if they work against President Bush they "risk being out of power for a generation."
Mr.
Quayle argued that while the President was not "100 percent" conservative, to repudiate him would risk turning the Cabinet over to liberal jurists and advocates of abortion.
The Vice President, who has long suffered ridicule, used ridicule to paint a Republican nightmare of a "national condom-distribution campaign for grades 7 and up."


Bridge
Each year a handful of unusual endings are reported around the world.
The diagramed deal, played Sunday in Cromwell, Conn., is apparently the first of 1992 in this category.
It was played by Aaron Silverstein of Manhattan, and helped him win the Regional Swiss Teams title along with Art Crystal, Glenn Eisenstein, Jim Sampson, Roy Welland and Christal Henner, all of Manhattan.
In three no-trump a spade was led to the queen and king.
South tried a club to the nine, which was allowed to win.
He continued with the king, and when East took the ace he shifted to the heart jack.
This was covered by the queen and king, and West's return of the eight was covered by the nine, ten and ace.
A spade to the ace and a diamond to the ace left this ending:
The lead of the spade jack squeezed West for two overtricks, forcing that player to surrender two tricks in any of three suits. [ DIAGRAM ]


Hurl, Hurl, the Gang Is All Here for Mets
It is the corner of the clubhouse where the unofficial power elite for the Mets always congregated, where pitchers sat at their lockers in springtime and offered up arrogance, candor and controversy.
Today, the corner was loud and congested again as one by one the pitchers checked in for the first workout of spring training.
This time, though, the atmosphere's electricity was generated more by awkwardness than confidence, with spoken introductions consuming most of the conversation and unspoken doubts coloring the mood.


The Home of Hockey Gets a Shot At the Gold
The country best known for hockey clinched an Olympic medal tonight after a 24-year drought.
Scoring two decisive third-period goals, Canada advanced to Sunday's gold-medal game by defeating Czechoslovakia, 4-2.
Canada will play the Unified Team, to which it dropped a 5-4 decision last Sunday in what was the final game for each team in the qualifying round.
Czechoslovakia will play the United States for the bronze medal Saturday.


Yew Trees Needn't Fall to Make Cancer Drug
To the Editor:
"Trees That Yield a Drug for Cancer Are Wasted" (front page, Jan. 29) begins with the premise that yew bark can be processed to produce taxol, a drug to treat cancer.
True, but it is equally true that taxol can be produced from the leaves (needles) of nearly every species of yew tested.


Yew Trees Needn't Fall to Make Cancer Drug; Halt Clear-Cutting
To the Editor:
The clear-cutting of our national forests and other Federal forest lands is a national disgrace.
The wasteful burning of yew trees, source of the anticancer drug taxol, is only one part of this national scandal ("Trees That Yield a Drug for Cancer Are Wasted," front page, Jan. 29).


U.S. to Use Antitrust Law As Weapon in Trade Fights
Attorney General William P. Barr said today that he expected the Bush Administration to change its antitrust policy within weeks to allow the Justice Department to sue foreign trade groups that discriminate against American exporters.
Bush trade officials have said with increasing frequency in recent months that foreign business practices, rather than laws and regulations, are the biggest trade barriers still facing American companies overseas.


Krabbe Starts Appeal
The drug-tampering case of KATRIN KRABBE moved inexorably toward litigation as her lawyer announced yesterday that he had lodged an appeal with GUNTER EMIG, chairman of the legal committee of the German track and field federation.


Add One More Loss To Swindell's Name
The most significant winning stretch players have ever had in salary arbitration came to an end yesterday.
GREG SWINDELL, a pitcher who had a poor record with a dreadful team, was unable to sustain the streak, losing his bid for the fourth highest salary awarded by an arbitrator.
In the previous three days, players had gained the three highest salaries won in hearings, but REGINALD ALLEYNE denied Swindell's bid for a $3,675,000 salary.
The arbitrator ruled instead for the Cincinnati Reds' $2.5 million.
Swindell won a $2,025,000 salary in arbitration last year, then produced a 9-16 record and a 3.48 earned run average for the hapless Cleveland Indians.


Bond Prices Fall; Money Supply Data Cited
Short-term and long-term interest rates both moved higher yesterday, and prices of Treasury notes and bonds fell.
Traders said selling began in overnight trading in Asia, as market participants reacted to strong money supply figures released by the Federal Reserve Board on Thursday.


An Embattled City Hall Moves to Brooklyn
On Monday morning, Mayor David N. Dinkins and his top aides will transport the nerve center of New York City government to Brooklyn Borough Hall for a week of political theater aimed at putting the Mayor of all of the people in closer contact with some of them.
For five days -- at a time when New York's municipal bindings, and his own mayoralty, seem especially frayed -- Mr.
Dinkins will use an empty ceremonial office whose last mayoral occupant was Seth Low, Brooklyn's chief executive when the modern city came together in 1898.
He will visit neighborhoods so far from lower Manhattan that Mayors usually reach them only by helicopter, and then not too often these days.


Judge Bars Tylenol PM As Lookalike
Grabbing an advantage in a bruising market battle for combination pain-killers and sleeping pills, Bristol-Myers Squibb announced yesterday that a Federal judge had issued a temporary injunction barring sales of Johnson &amp; Johnson's hot-selling Tylenol PM.
Bristol-Myers, which makes Excedrin PM, quoted Judge Arthur D. Spatt of United States District Court in Manhattan as saying that Johnson &amp; Johnson's McNeil consumer products unit had "acted in bad faith." McNeil had named and packaged Tylenol PM in a manner that "would result in confusion" among aching consumers seeking Excedrin PM, Bristol-Myers quoted the judge as saying.


Review/Opera; Beauty and Beast in Age of Motels
Though Andre Gretry's opera "Zemire et Azor" was given its first American performances in 1794, its revival in a new production by the Houston Grand Opera in the Wortham Theater Center on Thursday night had no real precedent.
Billed as "Beauty and the Beast" (which is the story on which the original French libretto was based), this production included traveling salesmen jokes, references to "I Love Lucy" and Alfred Hitchcock, an Elvis-style rendition of a French Baroque aria and dance moves out of "Bye, Bye Birdie."


Review/Dance; The Human Battleground
Shapiro and Smith Dance is a troupe marked by the ingenuity and theatrical sense of its husband and wife team of choreographers, Danial Shapiro and JoanieSmith.
Social commentary, oblique and sardonic, is also their specialty, as seen again in an ambitious premiere, "Never Enough."
The work was presented on Thursday night by Dance Theater Workshop at the Bessie Schonberg Theater (219 West 19th Street) on a varied program that featured another premiere, "Dance With Two Blankets." There was also a musical interlude by the avant-garde equivalent of a barbershop quartet, the four singers who make up Toby Twining Music.


Moving to End a Battle For Time Warner's Soul
Time Warner Inc. was born of a vision that the future would belong to big, globally powerful companies capable of using their strengths to create new opportunities in the United States and abroad.
But since Time Inc. and Warner Communications Inc. completed their merger more than two years ago, their executives have often been more concerned with extricating the new company from a series of mistakes and cultural mismatches than with executing any sort of grand strategy.


Child Rescued From Blaze
A 3-year-old girl was rescued on Thursday from a second-floor bedroom in her burning house, where she had been left alone with her five young brothers and sisters.
The children's mother, Malinda Adger, 25, was charged with endangering the welfare of a child for leaving the children unsupervised.
A Rochester firefighter, Larry Janneck, said it was "just luck" that he heard the child, Latoya Riggs, scream when he reached the second floor of her home.
The fire department had not been told that anyone was trapped in the building by the blaze.


Dow Off 0.45 to End Week Up 34.22
Stocks finished lower in cautious but heavy trading yesterday, brought on by the expiration of equity options and of February major market index futures.
The Dow Jones industrial average slipped to 3,280.19, down 0.45 point for the day.
The average gained 34.22 for the week.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was a strong 261.7 million shares, but it was down from the 270.7 million traded on Thursday.
The Big Board composite index dropped 1.14 points, to 227.46.
There were 971 losing issues and 727 gaining ones.
Broader Indexes Mixed
The Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks fell 2.44 points, to 411.46, while the American Stock Exchange index ended virtually unchanged at 412.85, down a hundredth of a percentage point.


Few Gains Reported In 3-Way Trade Talks
The sixth major round of talks on a North American free-trade agreement ended today in Dallas with no breakthroughs on the most politically controversial differences among negotiators, further lengthening the odds against an agreement this year, Administration and Congressional officials said.
The biggest disputes among the United States, Canada and Mexico concern the energy, banking, automobile and textile industries.
The details of the negotations are being closely guarded by the Bush Administration, which is worried about political fallout in an election year, particularly the reaction to any agreement that would open American markets to Mexico, where industrial wages are as low as one-twentieth that of wages in the United States.
Disappointment and Frustation
The lack of significant compromises has produced frustration in all three Governments and mutual recriminations.
A senior American trade official, for example, said that while President Bush and President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico both wanted a broad pact that would dissolve many barriers, "somehow that hasn't gotten across to the individual Mexican negotiators."


The Pros and Cons of Using a Discount Broker
It's not just people who pump their own gas or buy groceries in bulk who are willing to make extra efforts to save money.
People with capital to invest in stocks and bonds like low prices, too.
More and more individual investors, twice the proportion of a decade ago, are flocking these days to discount brokers.
The discounters, born in 1975 when the Federal Government banned price-fixed commissions, now offer an increasing array of sophisticated products and services.


Nun, 64, Robbed in the Bronx In a Planned Attack by 3 Men
A 64-year-old nun wearing a veil and a habit was knocked down and robbed in what appears to have been a carefully planned attack by three young men after she left a funeral home in the Bronx yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The nun was carrying $800 she had just withdrawn from a convent bank account to pay bills for the retirement home where she works, said Sgt.
James Huvane.


Japan Defends a Deportation
Rejecting criticism by human rights groups, Japan said today that it acted properly last year in deporting a Chinese refugee seeking political asylum here, even though she was jailed upon her return to China.
The case of the refugee, Lin Guizhen, 25 years old, has drawn some attention in Japan and become the focus of criticism by human rights groups, which say Tokyo has tried to curry favor with China at the expense of the rights of Chinese dissidents.


3 Campaigns Received $550 From OTB
New York City's Offtrack Betting Corporation contributed a total of $550 to three political campaigns last year, state officials reported, prompting the Dinkins administration to advise independent city agencies yesterday that it was inappropriate for them to use public funds for political causes.
OTB officials defended the contributions, saying they had been spent for lobbying purposes to influence legislation beneficial for the agency and had not been donated for the purpose of electing the candidates.


William A. Arrowsmith, 67, Dies; Scholar and Critic of Universities
William A. Arrowsmith, a scholar and translator of the classics and modern literature who became a widely quoted critic of American higher education, died on Thursday at his home in Brookline, Mass.
He was 67 years old.
He died apparently of heart failure, an assistant said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Maine; A New England Contest That Is Hard to Predict
When it comes to the spring Presidential caucuses and primaries, a case can be made that as New Hampshire goes, so goes Maine.
That at least has been the political way of things in recent election years, particularly on the Democratic side.
But when Democrats and Republicans caucus all across Maine on Sunday to express their Presidential nominating preferences for 1992, the results seem at this point to be anything but inevitable, especially on the Democratic side.


Settlement From Time Warner
N.
J.
Nicholas Jr., who resigned as president and co-chief executive of Time Warner Inc., will get a settlement of about $15 million, several executives with ties to Time Warner said.
Although he received the sizable payout, Mr.
Nicholas's tenure was fraught with conflicts, not only with Time Warner's chairman, Steven J. Ross, but also with the rest of Time Warner's top management.


New York Rules Impede Mental-Health Delivery
To the Editor:
Last week, our county outpatient clinic was evaluated by the New York State Office of Mental Health for recertification, and some of the new regulations and interpretations were given to us.
Time-consuming recommendations were made about paperwork, but they will result in no improvement in the clinical delivery of services.
Some set up a standard of care impossible in a rural area.


Ms. Kugelman Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Lohman of New York have announced the engagement of her daughter, Sarah Dean Kugelman, to Irwin George Freydberg Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin G. Freydberg of Chappaqua, N.Y.
She is also the daughter of Arthur E. Kugelman of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kugelman, 28 years old, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and has an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a marketing consultant at Susan M. Rafaj Marketing Services, a New York marketing services organization for cosmetic companies.
Her father retired as creative director of Benton &amp; Bowles, the New York advertising agency.
Her mother, Harriet Walley Lohman, is the president of Harriet Walley Associates and her stepfather is president of the Lohman Organization Inc., both New York advertising agencies.


Spanish Police
To the Editor: As a part-time resident of Spain for many years, I would like to comment on Dorothea M. Morris's critical letter (Travel, Jan. 26).
Public safety is a major concern of Spanish voters and hence a hot political topic.
The average Spaniard and the seasoned foreigner are well aware of the lack of interest by the police interest in robbery reports.


Review/Pop; Mix of Styles and Languages In Show by Jose Feliciano
Long before the term world music was coined and before pop performers like Julio Iglesias were mounting campaigns to "cross over" from the Spanish-speaking pop market to the English-speaking one, Jose Feliciano was bridging the language barrier between musical cultures.
And on Wednesday evening at the Cafe Carlyle (Madison Avenue and 76th Street), where he is appearing through Saturday, the Puerto Rican guitarist and singer performed a bilingual program that ranged from "Malaguena" to "Light My Fire."
Although the 48-year-old singer's fiery tenor has coarsened considerably since his hit-making days, his style, which blends the fervor of American gospel with the ornate melismas of Spanish folk, is as striking as ever.
So is his emphatic, flashy guitar playing, in which skittering flamenco-style runs are inflected with blues and rockabilly flavors, all within a pop framework.


Psychotherapy Can Help Depressions
The statement  [ Letter to the Editor, Jan. 19 ]  that "there are only two successful treatments for medium to major depressions, electroconvulsive therapy and medication" cannot go unchallenged.
Consider these examples of depression.
After the birth of a sister, a first grader tells his mother: "I should be dead. I'm no good. I want to die." Which is indicated, electroconvulsive therapy or medication?
A teen-ager, rejected by her boyfriend, won't leave her room, cries constantly and has withdrawn from all social activities.
Which is indicated, electroconvulsive therapy or medication?
A 60-year-old successful advertising executive is replaced by a younger man.
He remains home, can't eat or sleep and loses interest in all pleasurable activities.
Which is indicated, electroconvulsive therapy or medication?
These are all examples of moderate to severe depressive illness and, sadly, not uncommon in our culture.
Psychotherapy is the initial treatment of choice.
Medication or electroconvulsive therapy may or may not provide symptomatic relief.
The patient (and the therapist) may feel better.
But is the patient really better?
No!


Marital Mystery


Jack Curry Wed To Miss Orbine
Pamela Ruth Orbine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Orbine of Pearl River, N.Y. was married yesterday to Jack Francis Curry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack R. Curry of Jersey City.
The Rev.
David Follansbee, a Methodist minister, officiated, and the Rev.
Frank Rocchi, a Roman Catholic priest, assisted at the Hillsdale (N.J.) United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Curry, 27 years old, is a training and development specialist for L &amp; F Products, a chemicals manufacturer in Montvale, N.J.
She graduated from Marist College.
Her father is an engineering technician with the Rockland County Highway Department in New City, N.Y.
Her mother, Joyce Orbine, is a foreign-language teacher at Clarkstown High School North in New City.


Making a Difference; Igniting Debates Through Ads
For the Benetton Group, the Italian clothing maker, advertising seems to have more to do with touching consumers deeply than with selling its colorful line of casual clothes.
The latest print ads, which are featured in the March issue of Vanity Fair magazine, are no exception: one shows a Christ-like image of a young man dying of AIDS, surrounded by his family.
Some organizations that act as advocates for people with AIDS have condemned the ad, calling it disrespectful to people who have the disease because Benetton is using it to help sell its products.
In addition, several British magazines have refused to run the ad because of its upsetting nature.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the engagement of Diana Lyn Glasberg to Daniel Leonard Sussman misstated Mr.
Sussman's age and education.
He is 25 years old, and has a master's degree in public policy from the University of Pennsylvania, where he is a candidate for a law degree.
The article also misstated the occupation of his mother, Arla Sussman.
She is the clinical coordinator of cardiac surgery at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.


Wedding Woes


Psychotherapy Can Help Depressions
The Letter to the Editor  [ Jan. 19 ]  by Debbi Honorof of the National Foundation for Depressive Illness Inc. contained misleading and false statements as to the successful treatments currently available for Major Depressive Disorder.
Medium depression, which she mentions, is not a recognized diagnostic category.
In her zeal to declare depression a biological illness, she has stated that electroconvulsive therapy and medication are the only two successful treatments.
This is false.
They are merely two, among many, of the successful treatments which are available.
Cognitive therapy, a type of psychotherapy, has been demonstrated for well over a decade to be an effective and efficient treatment.
In many therapy-outcome studies comparing cognitive therapy to medication for the alleviation of MDD, cognitive therapy teaches the tools, which extend beyond the therapy itself, necessary to cope with a stressful world.On the other hand, the effects of medication are limited to the time during which the drug is taken.
Treatments can be used in combinations such as psychotherapy with medication or ECT.
The benefits of medication include quick relief of symptoms, the control of psychotic processes or dangerous behavior and for use with disorders that do not respond to other treatments.
If one method of treatment is not working for an individual, the approach should be changed and a referral made to an appropriate and competent health professional.
Consumers of health services are consumers first, and can and should be actively involved in the choice and use of health treatments.


A Garden of Rodin
WHILE waiting for a tour to begin at the Rodin Sculpture Garden at Stanford University in Palo Alto, Calif., I watched a group of visitors photograph one another before Rodin's bronze portal, "The Gates of Hell." One of them had an arm around "Eve," another cozied up to "Adam." Across the garden, a blue jay alighted atop the headless figure of "The Walking Man." No museum officials stepped up to shoo the bird or shush the sightseers.
On the contrary, at this permanent open-air exhibit of 20 sculptures by Rodin, the setting invites touching.
The B. Gerald Cantor Rodin Sculpture Garden was completed in 1985 as an addition to the Stanford University Museum of Art.
Housing about 150 pieces by the French artist, the university has become known as one of the best places in the world to view Rodin's work.
Only the Musee Rodin in Paris has a larger collection.


Corrections
An article on page 29 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the Vienna Philharmonic contains outdated information in some copies about the orchestra's forthcoming concert tour.
The tour will begin with a performance at Carnegie Hall on Thursday evening.
The Paris portion of the tour was cancelled.


Technology; Plane Propellers Shed a Passe Image
Nowadays, propellers on airplanes may seem like anachronisms.
But far from fading away, propellers are making something of a comeback on new generations of large commuter aircraft because they are more fuel-efficient than pure jets and recent developments have increased their performance to near-jet range.
Using new materials and new designs, engineers are devising propellers with up to six blades to transmit the greater power needed by larger aircraft while reducing the noise reaching passengers and the ground.
And the curved multibladed fan, a specialized form of propeller, is the key to new, fuel-sipping jet engines for big transports.


Airlines Order Cleaner Engine
Two airlines have decided to pay more than originally budgeted for Airbus engines to insure that they cause less pollution.
Swissair and Austrian Airlines say they made reduced emissions a condition for placement of their orders from C.F.M.
International, a French and American consortium.
Swissair last year conducted an environmental audit to determine the impact of its operations on water and air, and says its new policy on engines is part of an environmental effort resulting from the study.
The new turbofan engine will emit 40 to 50 percent less nitrogen oxide than other engines in the same power class, officials of the carriers say.


Sweet on Yams
Everyone has a private dinner, at least everyone I know.
A friend whose husband is out of town talks about her baked-potato supper as if it were a secret rendezvous.
Another confesses to solitary evenings with Spam.
On his bachelor evenings, one of my brothers looks forward to a meal of Frosted Flakes.
Most private dinners are retro in origin and furtive in execution.
In her book "Serve It Forth," M. F. K. Fisher calls such meals "secret eatings."
My mother's private dinner was a quart-size chocolate milkshake, and when she'd "had it with cooking," she served shakes to all of us.
This happened perhaps five times in my entire life, but I remember each meal as an orgy, and I remember that she looked at once embarrassed and pleased.
In the winter, her moments of despair or abandon, whichever it was, yielded hot chocolate and cinnamon toast.
I adapted the menu during college: half a peck of popcorn, one tankard of instant hot chocolate.
The meal endured for nearly a decade.


Martyring A Shiite May Haunt Israelis
ISRAEL'S raids in southern Lebanon last week, while intended to punish and restrain the armed militias and terrorist cells known as the Party of God, may instead give the organization a new lease on life among its Arab and Iranian backers, Arab analysts are saying.
Israel's attack came at a time when much of the Arab world had come to shun the pro-Iranian group, which in Arabic is known as Hezbollah, and as many Arab governments were nudging Syria, the arbiter of power in Lebanon, to contain and eliminate it.
The group's fame derived from its terrorism in the 1980's, including the bombing of a United States Marine barracks in Beirut and the holding of scores of hostages.
But now Iran and Syria, the movement's mentors, appear to be seeking improved relations with the West, and at least until last week they seemed to be clipping the Party of God's wings.


Navy Steps Up Withdrawal From the Philippines


F.B.I. Looking Into Tyson-Trial Offer
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has confirmed that it is looking into whether anyone offered money to an 18-year-old woman to keep her from pursuing a rape charge against Mike Tyson.
Mr.
Tyson, a former heavyweight champion, was convicted in Indianapolis of rape and two related charges on Feb. 10 after a two-week trial.


Mutual Funds; Investing in the Managers
In 1991, investors who bought shares in a portfolio of the 12 leading publicly traded mutual-fund management companies would have come out far ahead of where they would have been on average if they had invested in a portfolio of the funds the management companies offer.
Analysts at Dalbar Financial Services Inc., a mutual fund research group based in Boston, built a hypothetical portfolio by dividing $10,000 equally among the 12 mutual fund companies.
In 1991, the portfolio rose 70.1 percent, more than doubling the average return for all stock funds and almost quadrupling the return of bond funds for the year.


Paris: Long and Strong
KARL LAGERFELD'S CHANEL COLLECTION unleashed a new silhouette that may well change the direction of world fashion.
Its clinging shape may also be the juggernaut that finally pushes fashionable hemlines down below the knee.
Claude Montana, in a brilliant tour de force for the house of Lanvin, showed that he could soften the sharp edges of his familiar shapes to create more feminine, completely modern clothes.
The moment the Chanel show ended, Lagerfeld began worrying about how to adapt his elaborately seamed, sinuous couture inventions for the wider world of ready-to-wear.
As Montana strode off the runway to triumphant applause, he also exited as Lanvin's couture designer. (While Montana's efforts had enriched the designer's artistic reputation, word was that the luster had not reflected back on the venerable name of Lanvin.)


Sports of The Times; The Women Of Winter Save U.S.
IF this United States Olympic team had a group picture taken, several of its female athletes would be front and center.
Of the five gold medals for the Americans, women won all five: two for speed skater Bonnie Blair, and one each for figure skater Kristi Yamaguchi, freestyle skier Donna Weinbrecht and short-track speed skater Cathy Turner.
Of 11 medals, American women won 9.


Mutual Funds; A Strategy for the Latecomers
People who missed the big increases in stock prices since early 1991 may worry that if they start buying stocks now, the market will soon slide.
But by staying away from stocks, they risk missing further gains.
One familiar piece of advice in such situations is to put money into stocks or mutual funds a little at a time through dollar-cost averaging.
Now a finance professor at Harvard Business School has come up with an innovation he calls "value averaging," which he says promises even higher payoffs.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 2 about sailing in Norway's fjords misstated the position of the Big Dipper.
In mid-September the constellation is close to the horizon, not directly overhead.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bay Shore 370,000
76 South Montgomery Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old colonial; great room, sun porch, 3 fireplaces, 1.2 acres, 2-car attached garage; taxes $9,444.
Levittown 113,500
276 Gardeners Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, aluminum siding; taxes $2,800.
Mineola 220,000
314 Walter Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, den, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600.
Sayville 175,000
22 Nancy Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 29-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,000.
Seaford 162,000
296 Knollwood Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; dining area, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $3,500.
Williston Park 157,000
40 Prospect Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, den, 2-car garage; taxes $2,500.
OTHER AREAS North Salem, N.Y. 427,000
Post Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old colonial; deck, eat-in kitchen, screened porch, family room; taxes $10,440.
East Haddam, Conn. 139,900
Old Colchester Turnpike
2-bedroom, 1-bath, new Cape Cod; formal dining room, unfinished basement, 1 acre; taxes not yet determined.
Jackson, N.J. 119,900
11 New Castle Court  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 18-year-old ranch; den, 2-car garage, deck, fenced yard; taxes $3,499.


Expect the Unexpected
Toss on a necktie.
Wear it with a spiffy jacket, mantailored pants, or maybe a sheer sexy skirt.
Try a cowboy hat with a soigne city suit.
Pair a ribbed tank sweater with a frothy tiered tulle skirt.
These are just a few of the quirky contrasts that signal style in New York, Paris and Milan this spring.
The pleasure will come from wearing these clothes or experimenting with similar touches to bring fresh fashion juice to what is already in your closet.


Networking; A Shortage of LAN Experts
The rapid increase in the number of computer networks in recent years is creating an unexpected problem: a lack of trained network administrators.
"I hate to use words like crisis, but that's what it is," said Shirley Hunt, a network analyst at Dataquest, a San Jose, Calif., market research firm.
Part of the problem is the sheer number of networks, especially local area networks (LAN's).
According to Dataquest, there were 7.5 million PC's connected to LAN's in 1989.
That number grew to 10.7 million in 1990 and 15.5 million last year.
The projection for 1992 is 21.1 million.


Extraordinary Works From Himalayas
WHILE one views "Art of the Himalayas" at the Newark Museum, it pays to think about the regions whence come these extraordinary paintings and sculptures.
A part of China that in size is halfway between Alaska and Texas, Tibet is a plateau 12,000 feet and up in elevation -- "up" particularly at its lower Himalayan edge.
Nepal, a country one-eighth the size, lies along this edge, sharing with Tibet Everest and other monster peaks.
The atmosphere in both territories beggars the imagination; so does its effect on life and the religions practiced there, not to mention the art.


Cardinals Sign Zeile
He led the Cardinals with 11 home runs and 80 runs batted in last year, a performance good enough to qualify third baseman-catcher TODD ZEILE for big major league money.
Alas, for the 26-year-old Zeile, who has only two and a half seasons under his belt, he's a half season short of qualifying for salary arbitration and had little leverage in negotiating a new contract.
As a result, he has settled for a $300,000 salary with a chance to get another $50,000 in performance bonuses, not to mention a chance to get some really big money in 1993: The contract is for one season. (AP)


Blue Sailors and Other Legendary Names
BLUE SAILORS grow along the roads.
They are often seen flowering with their companion, Queen Anne's lace, in one of the prettiest natural plant combinations that the summer months can provide.
Legend has it that this wild chicory was named blue sailors because a young maiden waited longingly by the roadside for her lover, who sailed away to sea and never returned.
She was so loyal in her waiting that the gods took pity and transformed her into a roadside plant with sailor blue flowers.


Cuttings; Don't Worry, the Bulbs'll Know What to Do
I've recently received a few letters like this: "The vegetable garden is roto-tilled and I've been reading flower books, but please, please write a column soon for completely terrified amateurs who don't even know what tools to buy. Even the 'basic' books assume you've been secretly gardening all your life."
The writer goes on to say that she planted bulbs this fall "not quite sure which was right side up." (Remember the time you tried to grow carrots without adding anything to the hard clay and they grew only an inch?)
Dear Reader: Everything is going to be fine.
The great thing about gardening is it doesn't break.
So what if you planted a few bulbs upside down?
They'll grow shoots that move away from the source of gravity.
They'll figure it out.


Quotation of the Day
"As to Toussaint -- certainly the guy was charitable, but he was also passive and servile. His biography doesn't exactly resonate with the mood of activism of black Catholics today." -- PROF.
ALBERT RABOTEAU, on Pierre Toussaint, candidate for sainthood.  [ 32:1. ]


Susan Joy Greenberg Is Married
Susan Joy Greenberg and Robert Neil Shwartz were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi Susan Schnur officiated at the Puck Building.
Ms.
Greenberg, 41 years old, is the director of social work for Lawyers for Children Inc., a nonprofit law firm in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University, where she also received a master's degree in social work.
She is the daughter of Frances Greenberg and the late Jacob Greenberg of Manchester-by-the Sea, Mass., where her father was a postmaster.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.


Norwegian Topples Tomba in Slalom
A man who likes challenges, among other things, Alberto Tomba now has more motivation for the 1994 Winter Olympics than he needs and probably wants.
It would seem that the fabled La Bomba has a genuine nemesis on his calloused hands in 25-year-old Finn Christian Jagge of Oslo, who proved today for the second time this winter that he can win the big one, the slalom, against Tomba on the road.


Cashmere, Yes. Sedate? No.
Poised somewhere between the new and the traditional, Valerie Louthan's fall sweaters bring a fresh slant to the luxury of cashmere.
"Women who love cashmere are not too aggressive about styling," said Ms.
Louthan, who made the knitted cape-stole a staple in the wardrobes of fashionable women.
"But even the standard cashmere twin set needs some updating."


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Philadelphia; School Revives Radio Building
A TWO-YEAR renovation is nearing completion at one of the first American buildings designed for a radio station.
Being restored are the building's Art Deco metal facade and the original exterior color scheme.
The WCAU Broadcast Building at 1622 Chestnut Street opened its doors 60 years ago for the Columbia Broadcasting System's flagship station.
In 1980, after much interior redesign, the building was bought by the Art Institute of Philadelphia, a two-year school emphasizing graphic arts and design.


Teetering Between Fame and Talent
Since leaping in a single bound to the pinnacle of the golf world, John Daly has found it hard to balance his larger-than-life persona on such a narrow peak.
More than once he has slipped and been scraped by fame's jagged edge.
It's still not certain if Daly fully understands what looms below, but he says he has improved his footing.
Now his challenge and goal is to maintain his awe-inspiring but often erratic game at a high plateau.


Business Diary/February 16-21
ECONOMY Waiting for the Economic Nitty-Gritty From the Buchanan Campaign


Gayle Pollack to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Pollack of East Northport, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Gayle Lynn Pollack, to Ivan Jay Dolowich, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Dolowich of Hauppauge, L.I.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Pollack, 25 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton and is pursuing a master's degree in nursing at Columbia University.
Mr.
Dolowich, 24, graduated from Washington University and is a law student at St.
John's University.


The Soothing Style of Baden
IN the summer of 1791, Constanze Mozart paid a return visit to the ancient spa of Baden, 16 miles south of Vienna, to take the thermal cure for her real or imaginary ailments, and her husband spent a few days with her and their sons.
The choirmaster of the parish church of St.
Stephen, Anton Stoll, asked his composer friend to write something for his singers.
Mozart went to the little garden pavilion of the house at 4 Renngasse where he had rented rooms for his family, and on the first piece of paper that came to hand wrote the "Ave Verum." Short as it is, it is a deeply moving classic.
A few months later Constanze received news in Baden that her husband was very ill, rushed to Vienna by carriage and found Mozart dying.


Wedding Plans For Jill Bloess
Mr. and Mrs.
Juergen J. Bloess of Corpus Christi, Tex., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jill Suzanne Bloess to Thomas Arthur Ruppel, a son of Irmgard Zarden Ruppel of New York and the late Richard Strauss Ruppel.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bloess, 31 years old, is a vice president in media planning at the advertising agency of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York.
She graduated from the University of Alabama.
Her father is a products control manager in Corpus Christi for the Koch Refining Company, an oil producer based in Wichita, Kan.


Bearding Berg


Review/Dance; Robbins's 'Faun'
It is hard to imagine an odder bit of new casting than that of Alexandre Proia and Helene Alexopoulos in "Afternoon of a Faun," a duet by Jerome Robbins that was presented by the New York City Ballet on Thursday night at the New York State Theater.
Each was seen in a role debut that might have been devised by Maurice Bejart, who pays a lot of attention to the physical beauty and theatricality of his dancers.
Mr.
Proia and Miss Alexopoulos are good-looking, and they make a handsome pair.
Miss Alexopoulos, one of the company's senior ballerinas, is adept at the creation of a subtle mood or ambiance on stage.
Mr.
Proia brings a kind of Gallic wit and distance to most of what he dances.
Neither is the kind of raw young thing one envisions in this small but potent piece about a chance meeting in a luminous ballet studio between two dancers in love with themselves, their world and, possibly, each other.
Given the startling simplicity of the ballet, a degree of raw youthfulness is helpful for the embodiment of that naked fixation with the allure of the stage, the audience and one's own beautiful self as glimpsed in studio mirrors.
These two experienced performers capably enacted innocence and attraction.


Perspectives: The Appraisal Profession; Gearing the Method to a Changing Market
APPRAISERS at their side, the opposing parties marched to the courthouse last year to hash out New York City's assessment of a handful of lots on Lexington Avenue that the late Sol Goldman bought in 1984.
Mr.
Goldman's estate hired James Levy of Appraisers &amp; Planners of Manhattan.
His determination of value was based on the income approach -- the old walk-ups, stores and offices at 85th and 86th Streets (and the land under them) should be assessed on the basis of what they earn in rent.


What's the Grand Design?
THE MIND OF GOD
The Scientific Basis for a Rational World.
By Paul Davies.
Illustrated. 254 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.


Yaddo Artist Colony Names New President
Michael G. Sundell, a professor of humanities at Cooper Union in Manhattan, has been appointed president of Yaddo, the artists' work community in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
The appointment was announced on Thursday by Donald S. Rice, Yaddo's board chairman.
Professor Sundell, who will assume his post on June 1, replaces Myra Sklarew, a writer who resigned last September after four years as president to return to a teaching position at the American University in Washington.
Mr.
Sundell becomes the fourth president in the colony's 66-year history.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
It's a most interesting problem that Carl A. Posey, a novelist and science writer, has conjured in BUSHMASTER FALL (Donald I. Fine, $19.95).
A highly radioactive meteorite, or something, hits an isolated section of Bolivia.
It lands plumb in the middle of a crop that accounts for the basic wealth of the South American drug lords.
The radioactivity is going to infect the plants that produce the drugs shipped to the United States.
It is also going to enter the ecosystem of the rain forest, killing the forest and the people who live and work there.
It will get into the water supply, into the agriculture, and work its way toward the big cities.


A Hero Who Forced Neapolitans to Pay Bills
When people here dubbed Eduardo Ieno the Norman Schwarzkopf of Naples, it was because, by this city's standards, he had achieved something as decisive, bold and gutsy as the American general did in Kuwait: He forced Neapolitans to pay their water bills.
Mr.
Ieno, the head of the municipal water utility, conducted his uncompromising offensive and press blitz in a city whose perils include organized crime and general resistance to authority -- as hazardous a place, some northern Italians might say, as the sands of Arabia's deserts.


Guns Fall Silent After a Violent Week in Mideast
Relative calm returned to southern Lebanon today after nearly a week of artillery and rocket exchanges as the two main groups of Shiite Muslim fighters agreed to halt rocket attacks against northern Israel, security officials said.
The officials said that after meeting today with Lebanese Government officials, the pro-Iranian Party of God and Amal, the Syrian-backed militia, began withdrawing gunmen from two villages north of the southern Lebanon strip that Israel calls its "security zone."


Mitchell in Scuffle
KEVIN MITCHELL, the former Mets slugger who was traded by the Giants to the Mariners in December, has gained a reputation for being a bit of a troublemaker both on and off the field.
Now the police in his hometown of San Diego have credited Mitchell as the chief instigator of a wide-ranging barroom brawl that left one patron with a split lip Friday night and led to the arrest of one of Mitchell's friends on a charge of assault with a deadly weapon.


Miss Charak to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Mason Thomas Charak of Bethesda, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Meredith Ann Charak, to Seth Menachem Beckhardt, a son of Clare and Fred T. Beckhardt of New York.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Charak, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Maryland, from which she has a master's degree in information and library science.
She is a systems administrator at the United States Patent and Trademark Office in Washington.
Mr.
Beckhardt, 33, graduated from the University of Miami and is an analyst at the Defense Department in Washington.


Heartfelt Verse
To the Editor:
Samuel G. Freedman made an appropriate reference to Salman Rushdie in his article on "Mississippi Masala"  [ "One People in Two Worlds," Feb. 2 ] .
So it is surprising that he didn't comment on the clumsiness of its English subtitles for the little Indian song compared to Mr.
Rushdie's beguiling translation of the same song on page 5 of "The Satanic Verses": "O, my shoes are Japanese,/ These trousers English, if you please./ On my head red Russian hat;/ My heart's Indian for all that." BEVERLY FIELDS Chicago


Blue Sailors and Other Legendary Names
BLUE SAILORS grow along the roads.
They are often seen flowering with their companion, Queen Anne's lace, in one of the prettiest natural plant combinations that the summer months can provide.
Legend has it that this wild chicory was named blue sailors because a young maiden waited longingly by the roadside for her lover, who sailed away to sea and never returned.
She was so loyal in her waiting that the gods took pity and transformed her into a roadside plant with sailor blue flowers.


Germany Gets a Boost From East
The nation that has won the most medals in these Olympic Winter Games did not exist the last times these Games were held.
In 1988 in Calgary, East Germany ranked second in medals with 25, and West Germany was fifth with 9.
In the current Olympics, which will end here Sunday in the French Alps, the strongest nation has been Germany with 26 medals.


SOVIET MINISTER TO CORPORATE CHIEF
As G. Bruce Knecht points out in his article "From Soviet Minister to Corporate Chief" (Jan. 26), Russia's new corporate chiefs operate as czars, responsible for all decision making.
There is effectively no delegation of authority.
Such centralization of power was favored under the planned economy but runs counter to the flexibility required to operate effectively in a competitive marketplace.
Logically, therefore, one would prescribe a broadening of the management base of these enterprises and a move toward collaborative decision making.
However, logic stumbles on another of the legacies of the Soviet regime.
A member of the Academy of National Economy in Moscow compares the functioning of most management groups to that of a dysfunctional family.
Unanimity is achieved in public without fundamental differences ever being resolved in private.


2 Gambinos Go on Trial, Very Quietly
The only ones who ever mention the Mafia in the Manhattan courtroom where the Gambino brothers are on trial are their defense lawyers, and then only to belittle it before the jury or to recoil in mock horror.
And, there has been no mention of any mob murders.
In fact, the evidence shows that Thomas and Joseph Gambino, whom the prosecution describe as gentleman mobsters with a stranglehold on truck deliveries in the garment industry, were ever so polite in making sure they did not encroach on truckers controlled by rival organized-crime families.


Noted With Pleasure
Our Bridge to the Past
At night in Manhattan the present seems to recede, and the past becomes almost tangible, according to Luc Sante in this excerpt from "Low Life: Lures and Snares of Old New York" (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux).


Three Savory Vegetable Casseroles as Winter Fare
WINTER is an excellent season for baking vegetable casseroles.
These savory dishes, which combine more than one vegetable and are sometimes layered or seasoned with cheese, are hardy enough to be the focus of a weekend supper.
A form of starch -- noodles or rice, for example -- is all that is needed alongside.
Once such casseroles have been assembled they can be set aside, then baked just before serving.
Or they can be baked and reheated, if that is more convenient.
And while the baking is time consuming, requiring up to two-and-a-half hours, it demands no particular attention from the cook.


Casino Raises Fears of Compulsive Gambling
MARVIN STEINBERG said he found it ironic when a recent study commissioned by the state recommended a widespread expansion of gambling in Connecticut while also noting that the state had the highest rate of compulsive gamblers in the Northeast and perhaps in the country.
Like some other experts in the field, Mr.
Steinberg, who is the founder and president of the Connecticut Council on Compulsive Gambling, said he saw a distinct correlation between the growing number of problem gamblers in the state and the variety of legalized gambling in Connecticut, which has more forms than any state except Nevada.


Susan Crater Has Wedding
Susan Kimberley Crater, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Quincy M. Crater 2d of Potomac, Md., was married yesterday to Walter Thomas York Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
York of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert I. Long 3d officiated at the Chevy Chase Presbyterian Church in Washington.
Mrs.
York, 32 years old, is the promotion director of HG magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
Her father retired as a senior vice president of Blue Cross/Blue Shield in the Washington area.


In Hockey, U.S. Gets No Medal For Trying
Diminish that good old American spunk, enervate the spirit and weaken the muscles, and you are left with a United States hockey team too tired and unskilled to win an Olympic medal of any element or alloy.
"They don't play hockey," Czechoslovakia's goaltender, Petr Briza, said.
"They just hurry around."


Pearls at a Price
Bold checks, dashing dots, pretty pastels, whirling skirts, jackets that go to every length.
The 'pearls' on these pages are under $500, and some of them are even real.


Cuomo Says Shelter Grant Is Legal, Even if Inadequate
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who has said that the state's shelter allowance for welfare recipients is "shamefully inadequate," has proposed legislation that could undermine efforts to raise the grant.
The legislative language, found on page 138 of Mr.
Cuomo's aid-to-localities budget bill, seems innocuous enough.
It is a single sentence declaring that the current shelter allowance, the portion of the welfare grant dedicated to housing, is "deemed in conformance" with state law.


Claudia Mesch Plans Wedding
Dr. and Mrs.
John C. Mesch of Albany have announced the engagement of their daughter, Claudia Anne Maidment Mesch, to Damon Hollinrake Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Damon B. Smith of New York.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Mesch, 23 years old, graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the chief of pulmonary diseases at St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany.
Her mother, Carol Mesch, is a broker at Robert's Real Estate in Albany.


Results Plus
TRACK AND FIELD Two Records Set Noureddine Morceli, the Algerian miler, broke the world indoor record for 1,000 meters yesterday at an international meet in Birmingham, England, and Liz McColgan of Scotland shattered the world mark for the women's 5,000 meters.
Morceli took the lead with two laps of the five-lap race to go and finished in 2 minutes 15.26 seconds.
He broke the record set four years ago by Rob Druppers of the Netherlands at 2:16.4 seconds.
McColgan, with a time of 15:03.17, shaved more than 10 seconds off German Uta Pippig's record.
McColgan, winner of the 1991 New York City Marathon, had never run five kilometers indoors.
Leroy Burrell edged Frankie Fredericks in the 60 meters in his fastest time of the indoor season, 6.51 seconds.
American Michelle Finn won the women's 60 meters in 7.17.(AP)


New Car Ferry From Seattle
After an 18-month hiatus in car ferry service between downtown Seattle and Victoria, British Columbia, a new high-speed ferry will begin year-round service in May, allowing motorists to make the trip to Victoria's Inner Harbor in two and a half hours.
Seacat Victoria, with spaces for 80 cars and operated by Sea Containers, will replace a vessel that was run by the Stena Line as a combined car ferry and floating casino.
That vessel, which made the trip in four and a half hours, was removed from service in November 1990 after the state of Washington banned gambling on waterways and Stena encountered financial difficulties.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
We who are pro-choice must come to grips with the fact that abortion is a battle line drawn by those who feel that the sexual revolution has gone much, much too far.
For many in the pro-life movement, outlawing abortion is a way to punish those women who exert little sexual discipline, and a warning to others.
For example, many parents who have sexually active teen-age girls are calling out for help.
ABE MARKMAN
New York, N.Y.


Charles H. Page, 82, Professor of Sociology
Charles H. Page, a noted sociologist and educator, died Feb. 9 at his home in Northhampton, Mass.
He was 82 years old.
He died of cancer, his wife said.


CAMPUS LIFE: Georgia; Films by Students Find an Audience Outside of Class
Mysterious, flickering images have been spotted at the University of Georgia lately: on walls at parties, in restaurants and in nightclubs.
The reason is an unusual film-making class taught at the university by James Herbert, a painter and film maker who has won Guggenheim awards in both media and has made music videos for the rock band R.E.M.
The class has become so popular that area nightclubs and restaurants are having special nights to show the students' films.


East End Art and 'Art' On Auction Block
WHEN is an art auction not just a sale, but also a grand and daring show?
When it is a first-ever, en masse celebration of Eastern Long Island's art colony, coupled with a chance to rediscover 100 years' worth of the region's unsung, overlooked or disappeared-from-view artists cheek-by-jowl with the world famous.
The Lexington Avenue Armory in Manhattan will be the scene this week of Artists of the Hamptons, starting with a benefit preview sale for the Peconic Land Trust on Tuesday.


Pentagon Study Cites Problems With Gulf Effort
In a disclosure that runs counter to the Pentagon image of a war that was run with extraordinary precision, a new Defense Department report says a failure to communicate target restrictions in the Persian Gulf air war resulted in heavier damage than was intended to Iraq's civilian infrastructure.
The breakdown in communicating the targeting guidelines to tactical air units led to greater damage than planned to Iraq's electrical generating plants and is one of a number of problems that are coming to light a year after the decisive victory over Iraqi forces.
The report, which was commissioned by Congress and is circulating in the Pentagon in draft form, is the Defense Department's most comprehensive effort to assess the military lessons of the war.


Stamps
Markings Mysteries
One of the fastest-growing areas of interest for the postal historian, who usually cares more about where an envelope has been than what stamp is on it, is the field of auxiliary markings.
This area is particularly accessible because it does not take any special expertise to figure out why an envelope was marked in a certain way.
Furthermore, the philatelic material is usually inexpensive.


Dismissal of Kleinman Raises More Questions
Because George Steinbrenner's path back to baseball must go through Leonard Kleinman, the Yankees' decision to dismiss Kleinman, their chief operating officer, on Friday left a large question in many minds:
If while Kleinman worked for the Yankees, Steinbrenner couldn't induce him to drop his lawsuit against Commissioner Fay Vincent, a prerequisite to the owner's return to direct involvement with the team, why would Steinbrenner instigate or permit a move that would leave him with seemingly less leverage over Kleinman?


Ruth A. Lyons and Hazen E. Burford Are Wed
Ruth Ann Lyons, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael M. Lyons of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday in Los Angeles to Hazen Earl Burford, a son of Mrs.
David L. Burford of Los Angeles and the late Mr.
Burford.
The Rev.
Vincent Serpa performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Dominic's Church.
Ms.
Lyons, 34 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a partner at BFL/Green Street Communications and Marketing, an advertising and public relations concern in Pasadena, Calif.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.


Wall Street; Testy Questions for Fidelity
Most mutual fund shareholder meetings are swift and sedate.
At first, the joint shareholder meeting that Fidelity Investments held on Wednesday for nine of its international mutual funds seemed to fit that mold.
Then the fireworks started.
Only about a dozen investors gathered in the long beige conference room on the fifth floor of Fidelity's headquarters here.
The meeting opened smoothly under the direction of J. Gary Burkhead, the company's president, as a bevy of staffers looked on.


Miss Kelly to Wed
Mrs.
Robert F. Kelly of Pelham Manor, N.Y., has announced October wedding plans for her daughter, Christina Marie Kelly, and Robert Audera Weeks Jr., whose parents live in Summit, N.J.


Glory Days Are Long Gone for 49ers
Staggered by a depletion of talent on the field, defections from the coaching staff and recently hit with reports that the team might be up for sale and that the owner, Edward J. DeBartolo Jr., is under police investigation on a sexual assault allegation, the San Francisco 49ers are fighting the image that they are a crumbling dynasty.
"It's been a heck of a tough time," said Jerry Walker, the 49ers public relations director.
"Some days we walk into the office and just say to ourselves, " 'What's going to happen next?' "


Hearings on Attica Motions Start on April 20
The long legal battle to determine whether New York State officials were responsible for the bloodshed that followed the Attica prison insurrection in 1971 has entered yet another phase, two and a half weeks after a jury in Buffalo rendered a mixed verdict in the case.
Lawyers for the state officials and their accusers, the 1,281 inmates who filed the $2.8 billion civil-liability suit in 1974, have filed motions to set aside portions of the verdict, setting the stage for additional rounds of court battles to determine what, if any, damages should be paid.


Peeler Suspended By Missouri Coach
He is the Big Eight's leading scorer and a big reason that Missouri is ranked No. 9 in the nation, but when Missouri plays eighth-ranked Oklahoma today, ANTHONY PEELER, who has been averaging 22.8 points a game, won't be in uniform.
He was suspended for the game after Coach NORM STEWART learned that he had skipped class a few days ago.


Commercial Property: Factory Outlets; Unlikely Malls, Unlikely Tenants, Unheard-of Places
NOTHING looks particularly unusual about the factory outlet center that Upstate Realty &amp; Property Development is building in Plattsburgh, N.Y.
It will have about 50 stores in 150,000 square feet of space and cost about $15 million, including land, to build.
But it is less than a mile from two thriving regional malls -- a clear violation of the once-sacrosanct manufacturers' rule that thou shalt not sell wholesale any closer than 30 miles from a retail outlet.


Blame Insurers for High Insurance Costs
To the Editor:
I find frustrating and take issue with the increasing tendency to blame the little guy for the high cost of insurance, both health and auto.
Thus, in "Blatant Fraud Pushing Up the Cost of Car Insurance" (front page, Feb. 6), you state that the insurance industry is paying vast sums for exaggerated car damage claims with little challenge or investigation.
While insurance fraud certainly exists, you fail to mention the many other possible causes for high insurance premiums.
For example, you refer to a study by the Quality Planning Corporation, a consulting company hired by the insurance companies, which found that fraud accounts for $21.55 out of every $100 of auto premiums.
What about the other $78.45, which isn't even discussed?


Dubliners Open New York Hotel
The new Fitzpatrick Manhattan Hotel has a portrait of the Irish President, Mary Robinson, in its lobby; prints from the Book of Kells in its bar, and Dublin Bay prawns on its restaurant menu.
These are a few of the clues that the hotel, on Lexington Avenue between 56th and 57th Streets, is owned by the Dublin-based Fitzpatrick Hotel Group, which also has three hotels in Ireland: the Fitzpatrick Castle Hotel in Dublin; the Fitzpatrick Shannon Shamrock in Bunratty, and the Fitzpatrick Silver Springs in Cork.


Swiss Speed Skier Killed During a Practice Run
On the next-to-last day of the 1992 Winter Olympics, a Swiss speed skier, practicing on a public slope before his event was to begin, was killed today when he crashed into a huge tractorlike machine that is used for grooming trails.
There was still some question late today of whether the skier, Nicholas Bochatay, was skiing at an unsafe speed, or whether the vehicle was dangerously parked, concealed beneath a slight ridge.


Names and Dates Left Him Cold
To the Editor:
Twice in three days Henry Ford's quotable comment that history is "bunk" has been referred to in your newspaper -- first by Thomas Fleming in his review of Michael Kammen's "Mystic Chords of Memory" (Jan. 12), then in an Op-Ed column on Jan. 14.


Corrections
The Connecticut Q&amp;A column on Feb. 9, about Moriah Ritson of Planned Parenthood, misstated the cost of the contraceptive Norplant to Planned Parenthood.
It is $350, not $150.


Payable to Society
Michael R. Milken remains in jail for his junk bond dealings at Drexel Burnham Lambert -- he got 10 years -- and has paid $400 million to compensate victims of his crimes, but courts, creditors and insurance companies are still looking for the bottom of his pockets.
Mr.
Milken has now agreed to pay an additional $500 million to people who lost money in his junk bond ventures, while his old associates at Drexel have agreed to come up with $300 million, bringing the total compensatory fund to $1.3 billion, including $100 million from Drexel's insurers.
When word of the deal came out in The Los Angeles Times, the presiding judge confirmed it was in the works.
Final terms are supposed to be settled on or before March 2.
And that is the key for Mr.
Milken, once America's highest paid executive, and his codefendants.
If they can settle all complaints before Drexel's next bankruptcy court hearing on March 5, the 45-year-old Mr.
Milken and his former colleagues would get blanket protection for any future lawsuits in the case.


Playing It Safe With a Balustrade
BESIDES being decorative, a balustrade, that assembly of posts and railings that is part of most staircases, is a safety feature that should be repaired at the first sign of looseness.
If an entire balustrade wobbles, the newel posts probably need tightening.
They are the large vertical posts at the top and bottom of the staircase.


An Older Origin for Humankind
WITH so little left to remember our prehistoric ancestors by, much of anthropology rides on the interpretation of a few slivers of bone.
After using new dating techniques to scrutinize a three-inch-long skull fragment found a quarter century ago near Lake Baringo in Kenya, scientists reported last week in the journal Nature that it belonged to an early member of the genus Homo and is 2.4 million years old.
It was previously believed that Homo, the family to which humans belong, didn't appear until some 500,000 years later.


Review/Rock; Kravitz and the 60's And the Unradical Cult
The best way for the rock singer and songwriter Lenny Kravitz to slow his descent into terminal silliness would be for him to admit that his whole persona of hippie rock star has been a joke.
If Mr.
Kravitz, who performed with the Cult at the Paramount Theater at Madison Square Garden on Wednesday night, is taken from any other angle, he comes off as an extraordinarily dim bore, albeit one with an entertaining, zeppelin-size ego and an ability to write real melodies.
Mr.
Kravitz, like so many other rockers obsessed with style, makes a fetish of the late 1960's and early 70's, drawing on the Beatles, Jimi Hendrix and an occasional Stax single or two.
Dressed in strategically ripped hip-hugger jeans and a tight leather vest, he could have walked off a stage in 1968.
Even the band's instruments were chronologically correct: Les Paul guitars played through Marshall amplifiers; a Fender Rhodes electric piano.
And he drew on the decade's silliest aspects as well, preaching to the audience that "We are all brothers and sisters."


Rameau's Operas, Colorful and Varied, Enjoy a Comeback
Mention Baroque music and most people hear Bach, Vivaldi and their ilk -- the German and Italian masters whose music fills our churches, concert halls and, like it or not, elevators.
But music of the French Baroque has been enjoying a comeback, and nowhere is that revival of interest more apparent than in recent albums devoted to the colorful, varied and theatrically involving stage works of Jean-Philippe Rameau.
There are several reasons for this revival.
Rameau (1683-1764) was a fascinating character.
He attained prominence at the very end of the French Baroque, living long enough to see its ornate conventions attacked by Italianate simplifiers like Rousseau and German reformers like Gluck.


Albee's 'Marriage Play' In East Coast Premiere
"THIS is marriage." It isn't until Edward Albee's "Marriage Play," in its East Coast premiere at the McCarter Theater, is nearly all talked out that the audience hears such a definitive statement, but who could have doubted it was on the way?
Throughout 80 numbing minutes, the playwright professes to universalize a 30-year bondage between two tedious characters who sit around, parrying.
While Jack, the restless, unfaithful husband, pontificates about "gnawing discontents" and "confused anxieties," Gillian, his wife, resigned to nothingness, retaliates with tales of her own affairs or, to use her word, dalliances.
And rhetoric, also Gillian's word.


Monika Barrero to Wed in Autumn
Dr. and Mrs.
Ezequiel F. Barrero of Westport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Monika Ana Barrero, to Christopher Paul Quinlan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Quinlan of Pittsfield, Mass.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Barrero, 28 years old, graduated cum laude from Boston College and received a master's degree in Spanish literature and translation from New York University.
She is an account coordinator in New York for L. Zinger, an international manufacturer and wholesaler of silk garments.
Her father is an internist in Bridgeport, Conn.


New York's Ballot Disgrace
Once again New York stands embarrassed before the nation because of its petty-minded election law.
Paul Tsongas, fresh from victory in New Hampshire, now faces the possibility of getting knocked off New York's April 7 Democratic primary ballot because of a legal challenge to his petitions.
Patrick Buchanan, meanwhile, is definitely off the G.O.P. ballot, and the state's Republican Presidential primary has been canceled.
Unlike many states, which sensibly reserve a spot on the primary ballot for all serious White House contenders, New York forces candidates to collect petition signatures and then defend them against endless legal challenges invited by the state's arcane petition rules.


Acting Responsibly In Acquiring a Dog
"How to Pick Out the Right Family Dog"  [ Westchester Q&amp;A, Feb. 9 ]  correctly says that keeping a dog as a pet is a responsibility not to be taken lightly.
Regular veterinary care, the need for proper feeding and exercise and the prohibition against giving a dog as a gift received the attention they deserve.
However, in keeping with this spirit of responsibility, I believe two issues were treated too lightly -- adoption from a shelter and spaying or neutering.
Countless animals are killed in this country each year because of overcrowded shelters and unwanted new litters.
Many wonderful pets are available from shelters and they have already been housebroken and "socialized" to living as a member of a family.
A reputable shelter requires spaying or neutering for all adopted animals as the only practical method to deal with the overpopulation issue.
All
pet owners should adhere to this policy, regardless of where they obtained the pet.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PETRARCH'S REMEDIES FOR FORTUNE FAIR AND FOUL A Modern English Translation of "De Remediis Utriusque Fortunae." By Conrad H. Rawski.
Indiana University, $395.


Irene Henricks to Marry Steven P. Eno in June
Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Hendricks of Dix Hills, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Irene Elizabeth Hendricks, to Steven Patrick Eno, a son of Sandra Ellis of Toronto, and the late George G. Eno.
A June wedding is planned.


'Jim' and 'Chuck' Letters: Trenton Foes Call a Truce
After weeks of trading potshots over taxes, the state budget and education financing, Gov.
Jim Florio and the Republican leadership of the new Legislature have agreed to take a ride together, a bipartisan, whistle-stop train ride across part of New Jersey and on to Washington to fight for mass-transit money.
The truce of sorts was forged last week in an exchange of cordial and carefully crafted letters between Mr.
Florio and the Republicans.
First, Mr.
Florio sent identical letters to Assembly Speaker Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian and State Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco in which he raised concerns over proposed cuts in Federal mass-transit aid.
Mr.
Florio also invited the Republicans to accompany him to Washington "to present the state's case to Congress."


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
We must break the deadlock over the abortion issue by rethinking what is essential and central to our beliefs, what is posturing and what we can let go.
Surely, we can agree that the beginning of life is a remarkable continuum, from conception to birth -- one with many shades of gray.
Can we not also agree that a woman has a right to control her body, but that with that right goes the responsibility that, when a child is not wanted, contraceptives be used and that, when contraceptives fail, an early decision on whether to continue the pregnancy be made?
Can we not then agree that a woman who fails to act thus responsibly forfeits a measure of her rights in favor of the developing life now dependent on her?
Is there not a point at which the fetus has earned the right to complete its gestation?
That it is difficult to define at what point one should protect a developing life should not detract us from the necessity of doing so.
KATHERINE H. DANIELS
Lancaster, Pa.


It's Flash, It's Dash and It's Out of Detroit
Detroit is once again turning heads with its car designs the striking forms of the Cadillac Seville, Buick Skylark and Chrysler's new family of mid-size sedans.
The change has energized the Big Three's studios, where designers still wince at the memory of a 1983 Fortune magazine cover showing four General Motors models, one indistinguishable from the next.
That image sent home the point -- "signed, sealed and delivered," as one designer put it: car styling, a traditional American strength, had become a weakness.
In recent years, even while battling the incursions of foreign car makers and retooling to meet ever-stricter Federal standards, they have kept a wistful eye on design.
And in recent months, they have rolled out the fruits of their new visions, designed to distance themselves from the drab decades, to return to the days when the whole car -- not just the vanity plate -- made the statement of who you are.
It's hardly a return to the be chromed land yachts of the 1950's, but it is a world of "cab forward" design, cat-eye headlights and even plastic cladding around the bottom, an upscale image borrowed from Europe that lends a racy line (as well as protecting the paint job from road debris).


The Toasts of the Town
WEDNESDAY -- The director and trustees of the Whitney Museum of American Art saluted Terry Winters at a black-tie dinner and preview celebrating the opening of his show of abstract paintings.
Linda Beauchamp, president of Donna Karan's men's wear division was honored by the Fashion Institute of Technology Alumni Association at the Plaza.
The dinner's proceeds helped the association's scholarship fund.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: South Dakota; Rival Senators Face Showdown In the Heartland
This is the state that rewards political victors by carving their faces in a mountainside.
But if you lose here, it could be your last stand.
No one knows that better than two Senators from neighboring states: Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and Tom Harkin of Iowa.
A loss in the Democratic primary on Tuesday by either man could spell the end of his quest for the Presidency.


She's No. 1 With a Bullet In Short-Track Skating
Cathy Turner's decision to forgo her singing career to return to short-track skating paid off in the grandest way imaginable tonight as she won the Olympic gold medal in the women's 500-meter event, becoming only the second United States athlete to win a second medal in the 1992 Winter Games.
With a silver for helping the American team win the 3,000-meter relay event last Thursday night, Turner joined Bonnie Blair, the long-track speed skater, as a double medal winner and gave the United States its 11th medal over all and fifth gold of the Games.


Ms. Barnabeo, Lawyer, to Wed
Patricia F. Barnabeo of Bridgewater, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter Susan Patricia Barnabeo to Angelo Romualdo LoMascolo, a son of Dr.
Nicolo G. LoMascolo and the late Vittoria Perrino LoMascolo.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Barnabeo, an associate counsel for Home Box Office in New York, graduated magna cum laude from Bucknell University and received a law degree from the University of Michigan.
She is also the daughter of the late Austin E. Barnabeo, who was a senior research scientist with Union Carbide in Bound Brook, N.J.


The Candidate's Cancer
Paul Tsongas said it himself after winning the Democratic primary in New Hampshire last week: The next big issue he must overcome is public concern about the durability of his triumph over cancer.
The issue is important for two reasons.
First, his health determines his ability to perform.
Mr.
Tsongas certainly acts robust, able to swim the arduous butterfly stroke at tournament speed.
Even so, the public must be reasonably certain he could serve without a debilitating recurrence.


Yamaguchi Leaped, and Then Looked
She wasn't nervous.
She wasn't tense.
But Kristi Yamaguchi sure wasn't going to tempt fate by thinking about any medals before the final round of the women's figure-skating competition here at the 1992 Winter Games.
"I was looking through a pamphlet," she said, "and there was a picture of the Olympics medals. I turned the page real fast. I didn't even want to get too good a look at it."


Why Bud Crystal Has Chutzpah
To the Editor:
Graef S. (Bud) Crystal gets my vote for the chutzpah award of the year. ("The Gadfly C.E.O.'s Want to Swat," Feb. 2)


Julie Merkelson and Andrew Dermack to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Lloyd E. Merkelson of Bayside, Queens, have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Julie Florence Merkelson, and Andrew Jay Dermack, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy Dermack of Commack, L.I.


Sunday Dinner; Going South of the Border Without Leaving the City
New York City has never been a hub of superior Mexican cuisine.
It could be the relative paucity of Mexican-Americans in the Northeast, or a lack of knowledge and appreciation of the real thing.
There are, however, a few places in Manhattan where you can get a savory education.
For those who would like to investigate, here are some restaurants that fill the bill.
El Parador Cafe
325 East 34th Street; (212) 679-6812 -- This 32-year-old restaurant, owned by the brothers Manuel and Jose Alejandro, is the kind of neighborhood place that you thought had gone the way of the Third Avenue El.


Round-the-World Balloon Flight Put Off, This Time Till November
Concluding a month of setbacks and an anguished attempt early this morning that nearly launched the first round-the-world manned balloon flight, the crew of the Earthwinds balloon has abandoned further attempts until November.
The captain, Larry Newman of Scottsdale, Ariz., said he and his crew, Don Moses of Hawaii and Maj.
Gen.
Vladimir A. Dzhanibekov, commander of the Russian astronaut training program, had given up for the season because of the persistent winds here; unless the balloon is launched in dead calm, its special aerodynamic shape creates perilous handling problems.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 9 about action by the Anglican Church of Canada against a homosexual minister reported the testimony of a defense witness, the Rev.
Douglas Fox, incorrectly.
Mr.
Fox said he was ordained in 1981 by Michael Peers, now the Anglican Primate of Canada, after telling Bishop Peers that he was a homosexual.
But he testified that he was celibate at the time of his ordination and remained so during the years he served in Bishop Peers's diocese.
Mr.
Fox did not say he was an active homosexual when he was ordained.


Krabbe Tests Defended
The lawyer for KATRIN KRABBE said Friday that new scientific evidence would help clear the 22-year-old world double sprint champion of charges that she and two teammates -- GRIT BREUER and SILKE MOLLER -- tampered with urine samples to thwart a drug test.
But yesterday, NORBERT LAURENS, a lawyer for the German Athletics Federation, which suspended the three women and a trainer for four years, said the procedures followed in collecting, handling and analyzing the questionable samples were beyond reproach and would be upheld.


Martial-Arts Movies Find a Home In South Africa
Crippled by the recent culture boycott, the South African film industry is all but moribund these days.
Occasionally, the promise of an artistic movie with a big name or anti-apartheid message -- for example, Athol Fugard's "Road to Mecca" starring Kathy Bates or the protest musical "Sarafina!," recently filmed in Soweto -- will raise the spirits of South African directors and producers.
But the film makers spend most of their time hoping that the end of apartheid will usher in a new era, when they can make and market films without censure from the international community.
Nonetheless, one cinematic genre is flourishing: martial-arts movies.
Modest production costs, minimal unionization, varied scenery and perpetual sunshine make South Africa an ideal place to shoot such low-budget films.
Because martial-arts movies require few special effects and tend to draw a dependable audience, film makers who shoot in South Africa can be sure of making money, especially if they keep their South African connections quiet.


In Familiar Philadelphia, Sampras Feels at Home
The setting was as familiar as a backyard to both semifinalists.
The U.S.
Pro Indoor was the event that launched the professional career of Pete Sampras four years ago and delivered him his first title in 1990.
When Sampras arrives in Philadelphia each February, he checks in at the customary hotel and then glances across the street to make sure that a certain comforting diner named Little Pete's is still there.
It always is, and it's always open.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Creating a Lollipop
Q.
I've seen expensive topiary lollipops at florist
shops and would like to try making these plants myself.
Is this so hard? -- Patricia B. Sinclair, St.
Louis.


And Speaking of Complaints About Hockey Referees
When Bob Gainey left Madison Square Garden after Friday night's game, the coach of the North Stars was asked if his team's dramatic loss to the Rangers would have any effect on Minnesota in its game last night with the Islanders at Nassau Coliseum.
"We'll bounce back," said Gainey, who coached his team to the Stanley Cup finals last spring in his first year behind the bench.


Compassion for Elderly
To the Editor:
"Ideas &amp; Trends: Elderly Become Addicts to Drug-Induced Sleep" (The Week in Review, Feb. 2) is pitiless toward old people.
Two examples:
In an accompanying photograph, a withered hand holds a bunch of pills as if begging for them.
You quote Dr.
Marshall Folstein, a psychiatrist and Alzheimer's disease specialist: "The real problem is, they don't have anything to do when they're awake so they want to be asleep."


Contemporary Folk Art From Three Collections
OVER the last year, gallery taste in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut has taken a turn for the childlike.
Audiences in New Jersey have been regaled with model trains and the model boats of Malcolm Forbes.
In Westchester, the Scarsdale Historical Society still has its show of toys and the Rye Art Center its paintings and sculpture by children.
Then there are the new displays, like that of locomotive models and railroad memorabilia at the College of New Rochelle's Castle Gallery, and, the object of this review, childlike art done by adults at the Rockland Center for the Arts here.
"Contemporary American Folk Art," as it is called, comes as a sequel to, but by no means the equal of, Geoffrey Holder's wide-ranging collection shown at the Katonah Museum last May.
It also follows shows in Connecticut that included many of the same names: folk artists are beginning to look like a cartel.
In this case, the works were drawn from the collections of Herbert Hemphill Jr., Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Sears and Rubens Teles.


Unhappy Queen


Political Talk
Like Nelson, Like Nephew
While troops of national reporters were camped out in Albany waiting to hear whether Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo would make a last-minute entry in the New Hampshire primary late last year, another New Yorker with a famous political name was wrestling with the same decision -- and was finally talked out of it by the White House.


Friends Don't Let Friends Write Bad Poetry
POETS, POETICS, AND POLITICS
America's Literary Community Viewed From the Letters of Rolfe Humphries, 1910-1969.
Edited by Richard Gillman and Michael Paul Novak.
Illustrated. 295 pp.
Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. $35.


On the Street; The Hemline Springs Eternal
As temperatures inched upward into the 50's this past week, skirts seemed to be going along with the rise.
The mild weather brought out skirts of all shapes, from full and short to the just-slightly-longer, full-circle ballerina style that stops near the knee.
There were polka dots and leopard spots, and there was a wool dress in a soft dusty rose plaid worn by Mary Tyler Moore (lower left) as she walked along Fifth Avenue.


Many in Yugoslavia Fear U.N.'s Effort Could Fail
As the United Nations prepares to deploy a 14,400-member peacekeeping force across battle-scarred regions of Croatia, many here fear that the effort could quickly bog down, or fail completely, in the quagmire of ethnic hatreds that opened up during Yugoslavia's seven-month civil war.
In approving to send the force on Friday, the United Nations Security Council cleared the way for the first deployment of United Nations troops on the European mainland.
In addition, if lingering financing problems are resolved so that the full 31-nation force is deployed, it will be, if only briefly, the largest peacekeeping effort in numbers of troops, police officers and observers that the United Nations has undertaken since its founding.


J. Carter Brown . . . and Beyond
When J. Carter Brown surprised almost everyone last month and announced his resignation as director of the National Gallery of Art in Washington, he brought to a close a chapter in the evolution not only of his own institution but of all American museums.
Such was the impact of his tenure that before Mr.
Brown assumed his post in 1969, the image of an art museum was one thing, and today it is something else.
Although he was hardly alone in reshaping that image, his contribution was vital.
The quiet gallery that he took over has become a strutting giant on the international stage, a purveyor of major traveling exhibitions and a center for the study of the visual arts.
With its glamorous addition designed by the architect I. M. Pei that doubled the institution's physical size, and its wide array of educational and scholarly programs, the gallery is an exemplar of what museums aspired to become during the expansionist 1970's and 80's.
And the brilliant and energetic Mr.
Brown has come to epitomize the museum director.


Pamela London To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander London of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela Vida London, to Andrew Dean Nicholls, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dean Nicholls of Midland, Ontario.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
London, 25 years old, graduated from Bryn Mawr College and is in her last year at the Medical College of Pennsylvania.
Her father retired as president of the United States division of Imprimerie Centrale Commerciale, a Paris printer of art publications.
Her mother, Dorothy London, is the career information librarian at Columbia University.


POSTINGS: Mount Kisco Project; Faux Cast Iron for a Furniture Store
The three-story Mount Kisco Furniture building rising at 65 South Moger Avenue in downtown Mount Kisco, N.Y., is apt to have a more historic feel than its predecessor -- a brick structure with a white stucco veneer that burned down in October 1990.
"I'm trying to pick up the proportions of the old building and give an illusion of cast iron on the upper two floors," said Kenneth Nadler, a partner with Nadler Philopena and Associates, the local architectural firm that designed the project.


Three Savory Vegetable Casseroles as Winter Fare
WINTER is an excellent season for baking vegetable casseroles.
These savory dishes, which combine more than one vegetable and are sometimes layered or seasoned with cheese, are hardy enough to be the focus of a weekend supper.
A form of starch -- noodles or rice, for example -- is all that is needed alongside.
Once such casseroles have been assembled they can be set aside, then baked just before serving.
Or they can be baked and reheated, if that is more convenient.
And while the baking is time consuming, requiring up to two-and-a-half hours, it demands no particular attention from the cook.


Sunday Outing; Brooklyn's Treasury Of the Arts
The history of art, from ancient Egypt to modern America, is chronicled at the Brooklyn Museum.
Housed in a landmark Beaux-Arts building on Eastern Parkway, the museum's collections include more than 1.5 million objects, from totem poles to Impressionist masterpieces.
Most of them are on permanent display throughout five floors of galleries.
The Grand Lobby on the first floor showcases contemporary artists.
A display that depicts significant sites, events and individuals in Brooklyn's history will be on view there through May 3.
It is a collaboration of Houston Conwill, a sculptor; Estelle Conwill Majozo, a poet, and Joseph De Pace, an architect.


Give Me a Break, Cut Commercials
To the Sports Editor:
One of my problems with the CBS coverage of the Olympics is the time spent on commercials.
Richard Sandomir reports 10 1/2 minutes of commercials per hour ("When the Time Is Right, So Is CBS," The Times, Feb. 15).
I timed the commercials on Monday, Feb. 17, with the following results: During the live hockey game between 2 and 5 P.M., I recorded 36 minutes, or 12 minutes per hour, of commercials.
During the evening primetime I recorded 19 minutes of commercials between 8 and 9 P.M., 17 minutes between 9 and 10 P.M., and 15 1/2 minutes between 10 and 11 P.M.
If this isn't enough to drive anyone to PBS, what is?
BERNARD KLEINMAN Brooklyn


Julie Orent Engaged to S. .G. Luchs
Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert H. Orent of Convent Station, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Julie Beth Orent, to Scott Glenn Luchs, a son of Marjorie Luchs of Englewood, N.J., and Dr.
Saul Luchs of Cliffside Park, N.J.
A May 1993 wedding is planned.
Miss Orent, 23 years old, graduated from Tufts University, where she is studying for a master's degree in special education.
She teaches at the Tufts Eductional Day Care Center in Medford, Mass.
Her father is a chemical engineer at the Exxon Research and Engineering Company in Florham Park, N.J.
Her mother, Judith Orent, teaches mathematics in the upper school at the Montclair Kimberley Academy in Montclair, N.J.


At Work; Round Two on the Mommy Track
Felice Schwartz has been out talking to corporations about women's issues since 1962, and has felt herself to be on very sure ground for a long time.
So when she decided to speak out on a forbidden corporate topic -- the biological fact that women have babies and the social fact that they work and have careers -- she chose to do it in an influential and widely read forum.
"The cost of employing women in management is greater than the cost of employing men," she wrote in the opening sentence of an article published three years ago in the august Harvard Business Review.
"This is a jarring statement," she continued, "partly because it is true, but mostly because it is something people are reluctant to talk about."


Christine Kilton to Marry Joseph A. Augustine
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Kilton of Trumbull, Conn., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Christine Marie Kilton, and Joseph Albert Augustine, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. Augustine of Geneva, N.Y.
Ms.
Kilton, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Georgetown University and is studying for an M.B.A. at Harvard University.
Mr.
Augustine, 27, is a vice president at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in New York.
He graduated magna cum laude from the University of Rochester, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and from which he also received an M.B.A.


Spain Trip Called Off
The Cardinals' two-game exhibition trip to Spain was canceled yesterday when the Major League Baseball Players Association declined to endorse it.
The Cardinals had been scheduled to play a team of Japanese all-stars March 14 and 15 in Barcelona, Spain.
"We never were able to reach an agreement on it," said Donald Fehr, the head of the union. '
Steve Greenberg, the deputy commissioner, said he thought an agreement had been reached.
"It's disappointing," he said.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS -- N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Jan.92
Dec.91
Jan. 91
Rents
177.5
+2.8
+3.3
Homeowner's costs
173.9
-0.2
+4.6
Fuel and utilities
105.2
-0.4
-1.1
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.95
8.84
9.55
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.02
5.98
7.62
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.82
8.75
9.38
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.84
5.84
7.47
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.86
8.78
9.41
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.82
5.85
7.45
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.08
8.96
9.75
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.50
6.43
7.92
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.19
4.19
6.20
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.25
8.25
9.58
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


The Path of Andrew Carnegie Leads to the Neediest Cases
Just as aspiring basketball players tack posters of Wilt Chamberlain on their wall, Peter W. Janssen kept a book commissioned by Andrew Carnegie on his nightstand.
"Think Rich and Grow," by Napoleon Hill examined the lives of some of the world's richest men in order to provide a blueprint for success.
"The book helped me achieve my goals and financial security," he said.
"But now it is time to go on from there, and like Carnegie, put that money to good use."


An Apology from Donatelli
Clark Donatelli, the captain of the United States hockey team, apologized tonight for his verbal attack Friday night on Swedish referee Sven Erik Sold after the Americans lost, 5-2, to the Unified Team.
"If I offended any fellow Americans back home, I'm sorry," Donatelli said.
"I want us to take the loss as men, not a bunch of babies."


Off Road, in the Alps, Kuralt Keeps Footing
The narrow roads winding through the snowy mountains of the Savoy region of France are a different topography from Charles Kuralt's usual rural travels along the backroads of America for CBS.
But Kuralt's gentle, let-the-news-proceed-without-me approach has found a welcome home at the 1992 Winter Olympics.
He doesn't have his "On the Road" bus or Izzy, his cameraman, or Larry, his soundman.
Just a little Ford, a producer, Peter Schweitzer, and rambling conversations about what to do next.


'Voyager': Good Crew, Slow Trip
An optimist could describe "Voyager" as what might have turned out if Gary Cooper had wandered into a Bertolucci or Antonioni film.
It would have been a happy if unlikely accident.
Sam Shepard has never given a more complex or impressive performance than he does here, as a world traveler named Walter Faber, an iconic, Cooperesque American, tough on the outside but sensitive on the inside.
Faber learns in the most painful manner that he cannot shut off his emotions or control his fate.
But let's face it: "Voyager" is also unfashionably elliptical and slow, filled with dialogue rather than blazing action.
It's no mistake that the film brings to mind a dead actor and a European directorial style that was popular 20 years ago.
And though "Voyager" is an English-language film, it is the kind of project that seems to have been spawned by a United Nations committee.
A French-German co-production, the film was directed by the German Volker Schlondorff and adapted by the American Rudy Wurlitzer from the novel "Homo Faber," by the Swiss writer Max Frisch.
These elements add up to a pessimist's description, sure to convince audiences that it's nap time, or at least time to rent "Terminator 2" again.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 26 about Harris tweed misstated the population of Stornoway, in the Outer Hebrides.
In 1981, the year of the latest census, it was 8,639, not 50,000.


The Trains Are Ready, The Parking Isn't
ANYONE who's gone near some train stations in the New York area recently, especially during the morning rush, has seen chaos in motion.
The trains aren't the problem.
It's the scowling commuters circling the packed parking lots, looking -- often in vain -- for a spot.
Two weeks ago, about 80 Long Island Rail Road commuters angrily stormed a makeshift impound lot at the Ronkonkoma station after their illegally parked cars were towed into it.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Feb. 8  MANHATTAN  East Midtown 222,500
255 East 49th Street  (Sterling)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 745-sq.-ft. condo in a 7-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned-elevator, balcony, East River view; common charge $448, taxes $2,648 (Broker: Halstead Property Co.)  Greenwich Village 580,000
2 Horatio Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 950-sq.-ft penthouse co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, 11-ft. ceilings, fireplace, wrapped terrace, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,376, 59% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Stuyvesant Square Area 115,000
145 East 15th Street  (Gramercy Arms)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, common roof rights; maintenance $432, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman &amp; Associates)  Upper East Side 592,000
400 East 70th Street  (Kingsley)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, balcony, 3 exposures, East River view; common charge $1,046, taxes $5,004 (Broker: Sulzberger-Rolfe)  Upper East Side 1.127 million
149 East 73d Street  3-bedroom, 5-bath, 3,300-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, eat-in kitchen, library, fireplace, new windows, 3 exposures; maintenance $2,929, 30% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 820,000
530 West End Avenue (86th St.)  (Sexton)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,600-sq.-ft. prewar condo, 24-hr. doorman, dining room, library, 4 exposures; common charge $1,451, taxes $5,269 (Broker: Hunt/Kennedy Inc.)  BRONX  Riverdale 105,000
3515 Henry Hudson Parkway  (Briarcliff)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, windowed kitchen 3 exposures; maintenance $515, 53% tax-deductible (Broker: Trebach Realty)  Williamsbridge 240,000
940 Burke Avenue  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; 1-car garage, 19- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,500 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN Bensonhurst 310,000
966 74th Street  3-family, detached, frame house; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms and a bath in the second and 1 bedroom and a bath in the third; 2-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Velsor Real Estate)  Sheepshead Bay 265,000
2341 East 27th Street  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 1/2 baths, dinette in each; 1-car garage, 26.4- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS College Point 193,000
23-40 127th Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Forest Hills Gardens 530,000
69 Greenway Terrace  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath single-family, attached, English Tudor; dining room, butler's pantry, 2 fireplaces, 1-car garage, 30- by 123-ft. lot; taxes $2,700 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Grasmere 171,500
30 Mallory Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, brick ranch; dining area, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 42- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  Heartland Village 118,000
153 Devon Loop  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 625-sq.-ft. condo in an 8-year-old building; dining area, eat-in kitchen, terrace; common charge $201, taxes $1,071 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)


Another Scandal in Japan, This Time Involving Billions
LIKE all the traditional Japanese arts, political scandals here tend to follow a reassuringly familiar pattern.
The corrupt are revealed and punished with a keen theatrical sense, each step in the Confucian drama a demonstration of the system's ability to purify itself -- and hence guaranteeing that the familiar pattern, including the insistent demands for change, will not be altered.
The latest scandal -- the fourth in the last three years -- may not break that mold, but it has produced something generally in short supply here: real exposure of some of the back alleys connecting parts of the Japanese system.


Polished Service and a Seasonal Menu
WHEN a good restaurant is under the watchful guidance of a demanding owner-manager, it isn't likely to change radically.
Nevertheless, chefs do come and go.
So when we heard that two of the original culinary triumvirate at Robert Henry's restaurant in New Haven had departed sometime back, we decided it might be time for a return visit.
The extraordinarily handsome dining room, ensconced in space once occupied by the Union League Club, is as elegant and inviting as always, with well-spaced tables and banquettes, a comfortable niche with wide windows at the front and a gas fire flickering in the hearth.
Before dinner we enjoyed aperitifs in the bar at the back.


Getting Scolded
To the Editor:
Art Spiegelman scolded you for listing his "Maus II" on the fiction side of your best-seller list (Letters, Dec. 29).
As senior assistant district attorney under Jim Garrison in 1964-65, I scold you for listing his book "On the Trail of the Assassins" as nonfiction.
RALPH SLOVENKO Detroit


Caveman to Carp: The Prime-Time Cartoon Devolves
Animation has its advantages: no temperamental stars, no expensive location shoots.
Put a cartoon show on during prime time and self-respecting grown-ups can watch without turning to the Saturday-morning gulag.
Since Fox penciled in "The Simpsons," other networks have been doodling in hopes of finding an answer to the Bartman.
Now ABC and CBS are entering the picture.
"Capitol Critters" is on ABC Saturday nights at 8, and on Friday "Fish Police" begins on CBS at 8:30.


Two Men Beat Traffic Agent
Two men beat a uniformed traffic agent with a chain, took his summons book and then tried to run him over with their van after he gave them a parking ticket Friday afternoon in midtown Manhattan, the police said.
The agent, Nosakhare Algbedo, had just issued a summons to a van driven by Louis Guevara and Emil Lafargue, both 24 years old, when they attacked him at 5 P.M. at 56th Street and Ninth Avenue, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Psychotherapy Can Help Depressions
As recently as 13 months ago, a highly rated psychiatrist, in the American Medical Association Directory of 1990 with a Physician's Recognition Award for completing a program of updated study since 1987, at a well-known Long Island private hospital was encouraging a public employer to believe that severe manic depression could be successfully treated with rest and intensive talk therapy, culminating in eventual "freedom" from drugs.
The employer was then "suggesting" that sufferers of this disease apply to the hospital in question for "treatment."


Ms. Yim to Wed Richard Surratt
S.
Faith Yim of Princeton, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter Leila Robin Yim to Richard Johannes Surratt, a son of Lon Surratt of Trenton, Fla., and Sonja Kamunen of Littleton, Colo.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Yim, 27 years old, is policy analyst for the Environmental Protection Agency in Washington.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University, and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Stanford University.
Her mother is a librarian at the West Windsor branch of the Mercer County library system in Princeton Junction, N.J.
Her late father, Dr.
W.
Michael Yim, was a metallurgist at RCA Laboratories in Princeton.


The Executive Life; How to Squeeze Money From the Tightwads
The high-flying, high-tech superstars of California's Silicon Valley are justly famous for their expensive Christmas parties and perquisites like company gyms and sales meetings in Hawaii.
But when it comes to philanthropy this crowd of overnight tycoons is notoriously stingy.
"It's only been in the last 18 months of so that some of the valley's biggest companies like Sun Microsystems have even set up corporate giving programs," said Leigh Weimers, a columnist for The San Jose Mercury-News.
But judging from the success of the Silicon Valley Charity Ball, the real problem may not be with the givers, but with the approach of the askers.
Now in its sixth year, the ball is expected to raise as much as $700,000 April 25 in San Jose.
That will bring total donations to more than $2 million since the ball's creation, making it the biggest one-night annual charity event in northern California, and one of the largest in the West.
Past beneficiaries have ranged from the California Parkinson's Foundation to a local repertory theater.


A Wannabe Who Got to Be
Some 15 years ago, Griffin Dunne became a movie producer because he wasn't getting work as an actor.
Now he's working as an actor in a play about a guy who wants to become a movie producer.
The play, "Search and Destroy" by Howard Korder, which opens Wednesday at Circle in the Square Uptown, concerns Martin Mirkheim, a ne'er-do-well with big dreams and a big tax bill, who is convinced that if he can buy the movie rights to an obscure book by a mysterious self-help guru his problems will be over.
Needless to say, he suffers disillusionment at the hands of the guru, and is swept into a maelstrom involving cocaine-dealing and murder.
The play, a black comedy by the author of "Boys' Life," is directed by David Chambers.


Ask Not 'Is It Art?' Ask 'Did an Artist Make It?'
Ever since marcel duchamp introduced "ready-mades" as art in 1914, household objects -- telephones, urinals, automobiles, fluorescent lights and vacuum cleaners -- have proliferated in museums and galleries.
Many people will always see them as intruders.
Needless to say, they continue to provoke the question "Is it art?"
Coincidentally, two works in the Duchamp tradition of nose-thumbing at traditional art will be auctioned in New York on Thursday.
One, a five-hole toilet seat, was painted as a joke by Willem de Kooning, to be used during a croquet party in East Hampton, L.I.
The other is Robert Gober's 1987 "Pair of Urinals," sculptured replicas of two drainless plumbing fixtures.


Views on Foreign Cars Cost Salesman His Job
A Chevrolet salesman who questioned the value of the "Buy American" movement in a nationally televised interview has been dismissed by his employer, who says his customers are angry about the comments in the interview.
The episode highlights concerns about the popularity of foreign cars and the loss of jobs among American auto workers.
It also put the salesman, 31-year-old Matt Darcy, at the center of the debate between those who believe buying a domestic car is a duty and those who are offended by efforts to coerce consumers.


CAMPUS LIFE: Notre Dame; Black Alumni Acting as Mentors To Black Students
Black alumni of the University of Notre Dame will be taking on the role of mentors for black students here, helping them to learn about career and academic opportunities from the outside in.
Members of the Black Alumni of Notre Dame, a six-year-old group of 700 black graduates of the university that is part of the main alumni association, will begin providing mentoring to interested students among the university's 330 black undergraduates at the end of February.
The school has 6,420 white undergraduates of an undergraduate total of 7,623 students, which includes other minorities and international students.


The Reluctant Devil Travels With Success
From the outside, the Devils success this season can be attributed to several players.
From the inside, which is undoubtedly more accurate, everyone points to Scott Stevens.
The rugged and indefatigable Stevens has brought a physical presence to a defense that had been sorely lacking one.
He also brought an unparalleled aura of leadership on the ice and in the dressing room.


Spanish Police
To the Editor: With regard to the letter "Spanish Police," a similar incident happened to my wife and me in Spain last summer.
We were traveling in a rental car on the coastal road between Nerja and Malaga when we were pulled over by the Guardia Civil.
I was not exceeding the speed limit, so I was confused.
The officer came over, looked in the car and simply said "Ingles," then walked away.


Blackburne Is Queried On Expenses at M.T.A.
Laura D. Blackburne, whose spending as chairwoman of New York City's Housing Authority led to her resignation yesterday, also has a record of large expense claims as a board member of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, a pattern that prompted the agency to tighten its rules on reimbursements.
M.T.A. records show a series of letters in 1988 and 1989 between auditors and Ms.
Blackburne, in which the agency repeatedly sought reimbursement for claims it considered inappropriate or insufficiently documented.


Additions to U.S. Parkland Urged
NO matter where one goes to watch the variety of bird life in the state, there is hardly ever disappointment, environmentalists say.
But a report issued by a conservation coalition warns that if Congress delays in buying land around federally owned parks and refuges, countless birds -- many migratory -- face a serious threat to their numbers.
Naturalists say that housing and industrial development in recent years and a decrease in farm acreage, because of rising real-estate values, have helped to deplete the open land used by waterfowl and other birds along their seasonal flight paths up and down the East Coast.


Corrections
A report in the Business Diary column on Feb. 9 about the American Express Company misstated the activities of its Information Services Corporation.
The corporation processes Visa and Mastercard transactions only, not American Express card transactions.


Lisa J. Sotto to Wed Bruce D. Saber
Lisa Judy Sotto and Bruce David Saber, both lawyers in New York, are engaged to be married in September.
Ms.
Sotto, 29 years old, is an environmental lawyer in the New York office of Hunton &amp; Williams, a Richmond law firm.
She graduated from Cornell University and the University of Pennsylvania Law School.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvyn Sotto of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Her father retired as an importer of women's fashions.


How to Win a Grammy, or at Least a Nomination
If you take the grammy awards at their self-proclaimed face value -- as a reflection of "artistic and/or technical excellence" in recorded music -- you are bound to be baffled or amused when the choices for the 1991 awards are announced on Tuesday, starting at 8 P.M. on CBS.
Instead, consider them the product of a peculiar subculture, which calls itself the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences.
The population is somewhere above 7,000; the subculture's distinguishing characteristic is that each member has amassed half a dozen record credits as performer, songwriter or technician.


Corrections
An article on page 15 in some copies of the Travel section today, about Expo '92 in Seville, incorrectly describes the Pavilion of Discovery.
The pavilion was largely destroyed in a fire on Tuesday.


Jane Pickens Hoving Dies at 83; Leader of Pickens Sisters, a Trio
Jane Pickens Hoving, a popular singer on Broadway, radio and television for 20 years and later an organizer in numerous philanthropies and society events, died on Friday at her home in Newport, R.I.
She was 83 years old and also had a home in Manhattan.


Quicker Route To Shakespeare
A new bus service designed to simplify travel from London to evening performances of the Royal Shakespeare Company in Stratford-on-Avon will be introduced March 26, the start of the company's spring and summer season.
In past seasons visitors from London using public transportation relied on a train and bus journey, with a change at Coventry, that took as long as three and a half hours.
After an evening performance this meant theatergoers got back to London at around 3 A.M.
The R.S.C.
Shuttle has been introduced by Edwards &amp; Edwards, the London-based ticket agency, with the theater company's support.
There will be four pickup points in central London -- at Russell Square, Park Lane, Victoria Coach Station and Cromwell Road.
The nonstop ride to Stratford will take approximately two hours, with the 4:30 P.M. arrival allowing time for sightseeing and dinner before the play.
The bus leaves Stratford 15 minutes after the final curtain and arrives back in London at about 1 A.M.


Still in Cuba
To the Editor:
In her review of Miguel Barnet's "Rachel's Song" (In Short, Jan. 5), Alison Carb Sussman calls Mr.
Barnet "the Cuban-born writer."


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
Treasury balance statement, in billions
$2.6
-$1.0
Tuesday
Auto sales, annual rate
6.4
6.2
Consumer confidence index
50.4
51.5
Wednesday
Durable goods orders, in percent
5.0
1.0
Thursday
Jobless claims, thousands
452
445
Friday
G.D.P., percent change
0.3
0.5
Chicago purchasing management index
47.7
48
Tuesday:Two-year Treasury note auction *
The House Banking Committee considers the Resolution Trust Corporation's semiannual report.
Wednesday: Five-year Treasury auction  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Forcing Fate in South Africa
Rebuffed last week in a critical local election, President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa now presses boldly for a fresh mandate.
He calls for a referendum among whites on the question of ending minority rule.
"If I lose that referendum," Mr. de Klerk promises his startled opponents, "I will resign and you can have an election."
Thus 4.5 million whites, 60 percent of them Afrikaners, will soon be asked to make a fateful choice: go forward to nonracial democracy or deny an aroused black majority real hope for peaceful change.
This is as stark a choice as voters anywhere have faced.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Clifton 145,000
10 Mina Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 60 year-old two-family; separate utilities, 2-car garage, enclosed sun rooms; taxes $1,873.
Freehold 162,000
53 Hidden Stream Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; c/a, 2-car garage, fireplace, family room; taxes $3,400.
Howell 141,000
2 Concord Circle
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 7-year-old ranch; 2-car garage, c/a, den, w/w carpeting; taxes $2,588.
Jackson 119,900
11 New Castle Court  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 18-year-old ranch; den, 2-car garage, deck; taxes $3,499.
Lakewood 55,000
1068A Aberdeen Drive  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 19-year-old condominium apartment; c/a, porch, 1-car garage; monthly charges $108, taxes $1,743.
Waldwick 110,000
45 Waldwick Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old bungalow; handyman special, porch, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,983.
OTHER AREAS North Salem, N.Y. 427,000
Post Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old colonial; deck, eat-in kitchen, screened porch, family room; taxes $10,440.
East Haddam, Conn. 139,900
Old Colchester Turnpike
2-bedroom, 1-bath, new Cape Cod; formal dining room, unfinished basement, 1 acre; taxes not yet determined.
Bay Shore, L.I. 370,000
76 South Montgomery Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old colonial; great room, sun porch, 3 fireplaces, 1.2 acres, 2-car attached garage; taxes $9,444.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
FACING TOMORROW What the Future Has Been, What the Future Can Be.
By Thomas Hine.
Knopf, $22.


Vincent Is Always Ready For a Good Game of Chess
On the day the 32-day lockout of 1990 was settled, Fay Vincent sat in his office waiting for the I's to be dotted and the T's to be crossed on the final agreement.
Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, passed the time in many ways, being host to club owners, discussing Greek and Latin classics with the union counsel, Gene Orza, collecting autographs from player-negotiators.
Vincent also read the newspapers, one in particular, with great interest.
For that was the day that The Daily News revealed that George Steinbrenner, the Yankees owner, had paid $40,000 to a self-proclaimed gambler for information considered harmful to Dave Winfield, a Yankees outfielder.


Making a Difference; A Rare Golfing Opportunity
Recent reports indicate that Japanese investment in United States real estate has slowed, but Masatsugu Takabayashi bucked the trend last week.
Mr.
Takabayashi's company, Taiheiyo Club Inc., owner and operator of many golf courses in Japan, joined with Sumitomo Credit Service Ltd., the leading issuer of VISA cards in Japan, to acquire the Pebble Beach golf resort for a reported $500 million.
"This was a rare opportunity to become the owner of one of the world's best resorts," Mr.
Takabayashi said through an interpreter.


From Bill Morrissey, Blue-Collar Angst With a Folk Touch
In the title song on Bill Morrissey's fourth album, "Inside," the narrator admits to his companion that their treadmill life certainly "ain't Hollywood." Singing in a quiet, gravelly voice against which Suzanne Vega's softer harmony rings like a mournful echo, Mr.
Morrissey, a 40-year-old folk singer and songwriter from New England, describes the dreary existence of an unemployed worker who has recently given up drinking.
He fixes dinner each night when his wife, a waitress, returns to their furnished room.
Then they wait up to watch the late movie on a black-and-white television set.
Winding through the stark, matter-of-fact language is a solo violin played by Johnny Cunningham that evokes all the regrets and disappointments that cannot be stifled.
Despite adversity, however, the relationship seems to be holding.
"And you won't leave soon/ Because I know/ You're just like me/ With no place to go," the singer reminds her.
"Call it love if you think you should/ There's no need to explain."


Owners Know It's Spring When Chilling Arbitration Process Hibernates
Contrary to the nostalgic belief of misguided romantics, baseball's version of winter does not end with the first pop of ball in mitt or first crack of bat against ball.
In these modern times, it ends when the last salary-arbitration case is decided.
Winter, it can thus be proclaimed, is gone, and spring has arrived.
Lingering in the fresh air of training camps, however, is the economic carnage arbitration has left in its wake.


Milan Misto
With the world in a "Fashion/Fashoff" mood (to quote Franco Moschino's suit, above), the Italians designing spring collections said the heck with boring -- let's try bizarre.
Gianni Versace brought denim to the ball.
Ozbek updated the spaghetti Western.
Complice sizzled, showing models dressed like tailored gangsters and sultry temptresses.
Meanwhile, Milan's master of ease, Giorgio Armani, stuck with bellissimo.


Katherine Monick, Actress, to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene Monick of New York and Glenburn, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Innes Monick, to James Thompson Hogarth, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thurston Hogarth of Tring, Hertfordshire, England.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Monick, 27 years old, is an actress.
She graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.
Her father, a Jungian psychoanalyst in New York, is also an Episcopal priest and an author.
Her mother, Barbara Monick, is a family therapist at the Scranton (Pa.) Counseling Center.


Review/Theater; The Story of St. Joan With a Shavian Touch
Joan of Arc, like every other visionary to come along in the last few centuries, has been an enigma to theologians, composers and playwrights alike.
It took the Church of Rome nearly 500 years to decide whether she was a heretic or a saint.
And it was more than 20 years after George Bernard Shaw described her as a "half-witted genius" that he changed his mind and wrote a play about her.
"St. Joan," which is being given a commendable revival by the Royston Theater Company, is more of a staged biography with dramatized footnotes than the usual Shavian dialectic on social and human foibles.
In fact, if one is familiar with the story of the Maid of Orleans, "St. Joan" is basically a sermon on the nature of faith and a caution to prophets of any age against overstaying their welcome.
But sermons can be amusing as well as enlightening, especially when it's Shaw in the pulpit, and "St. Joan" contains not only some of the playwright's most acerbic writing but also his most poetic.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
Rosenblatt speaks to what we in the reproductive-health movement have always advocated, a centrist position -- a position that emphasizes responsible sexuality and teaches that abstinence is the only 100 percent sure method to avoid pregnancy and infection with sexually transmitted diseases, including H.I.V.


When the Mirror Itself Is the Fairest One of All
Mirrors, among the costliest decorative furnishings in American homes until the Civil War, were status symbols imported mostly from Britain by merchants and statesmen.
Their importance and the inability of American craftsmen to produce the frames and glass plates explains the many English-made mirrors in historic mansions and museums on this side of the Atlantic.
The subject is explored in the exhibition "Looking Glasses in America: 1725-1850," at the Yale University Art Gallery through March 22.
In the exhibition of 33 mirrors, about a third have European frames and all have imported glass.
"Glass craftsmen in America were not skilled enough to produce error-free glass plates until the late 19th century," said David L. Barquist, the associate curator of American decorative arts at Yale who organized the show.
"It was easier to import the framed mirror until about 1790. After that, Americans made many of the frames but continued to use foreign plates, which were not made here until after 1870."


Playing It Safe With a Balustrade
BESIDES being decorative, a balustrade, that assembly of posts and railings that is part of most staircases, is a safety feature that should be repaired at the first sign of looseness.
If an entire balustrade wobbles, the newel posts probably need tightening.
They are the large vertical posts at the top and bottom of the staircase.


Serious Sharing of 'Star Wars?' Not in This Millennium
THOUGH nuclear arsenals are shrinking fast in East and West with the cold war's demise, the dream of zapping warheads with futuristic space weapons lives on -- with a strange new twist.
Last week, the United States and Russia reversed nearly a decade of mutual hostility on the topic by discussing the possible sharing of "Star Wars" anti-missile technology.
The talks followed Russian President Boris Yeltsin's proposal last month "to develop, create and jointly operate a global defense system" against rogue nations that refused to abide by the rules of the nuclear club.
Despite all the posturing, military analysts say decidedly less is going on than meets the eye.
As has frequently been the case since President Ronald Reagan unveiled his Strategic Defense Initiative nearly nine years ago, Star Wars is being used as a bargaining chip.
But this time both sides are playing the game, as their military establishments angle to keep costly research programs alive as budgets fall and their politicians pursue their own agendas.


Aid Cuts Vex Connecticut's Less-Than-Gold Coast
When Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. unveiled a budget earlier this month that featured deep cuts in state aid to cities and towns, he sent a shudder through this city and the rest of Fairfield County.
Famed for its millionaires and their palatial estates, Fairfield County is by far the wealthiest corner of Connecticut and one of the wealthiest areas in the nation.
Yet it also harbors a large middle class and many working-class people.
And amid a recession that has put many out of work and left the real-estate market stagnant, most towns were already struggling to meet expenses long before the Governor announced his budget.
Even though state aid is a small part of most local budgets in the county, the cuts have upset many officials and forced deeper reductions in spending.


Spring Is Coming; Northeast's Biggest Fishing Expo Is Here
A visit to the World Fishing and Outdoor Exposition, which runs from Tuesday through next Sunday at Rockland Community College Field House in Suffern, N.Y., will leave many astonished at the equipage, preparation and intensity that goes into sport fishing in America.
When I was a lad, getting ready for angling involved little more than going out, lantern in hand, on warm spring evenings to pluck nightcrawlers from the lawn.
Sometimes I spent a quarter for a dozen hooks at George Gifford's general store.


A Snare for the Unwary?
To the Editor:
In Bertha Harris's otherwise insightful and imaginative review of Robert Kelly's recent collection of fictions, "Cat Scratch Fever" (Jan. 19), she claims that the foreword to the section "Russian Tales" is "yet another fiction and a snare for the unwary." May I quote from said foreword?
"I had complained to the poet and linguist Bruce McClelland about the hard time I always had trying to sense out the meanings of Slavic words. . . . He could not enter too deeply into my sense of alienation, but instead put into my hands Townsend's 'Continuing With Russian.' "


New Car Ferry From Seattle
After an 18-month hiatus in car ferry service between downtown Seattle and Victoria, British Columbia, a new high-speed ferry will begin year-round service in May, allowing motorists to make the trip to Victoria's Inner Harbor in two and a half hours.
Seacat Victoria, with spaces for 80 cars and operated by Sea Containers, will replace a vessel that was run by the Stena Line as a combined car ferry and floating casino.
That vessel, which made the trip in four and a half hours, was removed from service in November 1990 after the state of Washington banned gambling on waterways and Stena encountered financial difficulties.


Sports of The Times; There's a New Breed Of Leaders in Sports
MAYBE it's from a generation of Oprah and Phil going on television to reveal the amazing fact that even men have feelings.
Maybe it's from a lifetime of reading Dear Abby and Ann Landers in the papers.
Maybe it's from the mandatory psychology class in college.
Whatever the reason, New York currently has three new-age leaders in Jeff Torborg, Buck Showalter and Pat Riley, who believe in group dynamics and motivational techniques.


Ms. Verderame To Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Verderame of Wayne, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Patricia Verderame to William Newman Farlie 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Farlie Jr. of Upper Montclair, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Verderame, 26 years old, graduated from William Paterson College and is a health inspector in Hackensack, N.J.
Her father is a retired plumbing contractor.
Her mother, Evelyn Verderame, is the senior revenue collector for the office of the Wayne Tax Collector.


Pension Funds for One-Family Houses
The recent decision by the California Public Employees Retirement System to invest $375 million in the construction of one-family houses within the state is being welcomed by builders here, who have been squeezed by a severe shortage of financing.
The first large-scale investment by a public pension fund in residential construction is being watched closely by builders across the country, who think it could spur similar moves by public pension funds in other states and open up a potentially huge source of new financing.


Out of the Picture
As chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, John E. Frohnmayer sometimes seemed to be trying to please everybody, with the inevitable result.
As a Bush appointee, he tried to respond to conservative critics who said that his agency was supporting obscene and sacrilegious works.
But his approach neither appeased his critics nor raised any cheers in the art world.
Last week, a day after Patrick J. Buchanan excoriated the Bush Administration for "subsidizing both filthy and blasphemous art," the White House announced Mr.
Frohnmayer's resignation.
In a letter accepting that resignation, Mr.
Bush noted that some N.E.A.-funded art "does not have my enthusiastic approval." On the other side, The National Association of Artists' Organizations said that Mr.
Frohnmayer left behind "a compromised agency which artists feel they cannot trust." In a farewell speech to members of his N.E.A staff, Mr.
Frohnmayer said he would continue to oppose "the lunacy that sees artists as enemies and ideas as demons."


Vienna Philharmonic at 150: What Makes It So Special?
Later this year, the new York Philharmonic, the oldest orchestra in the United States, will celebrate its 150th anniversary.
As it happens, 1842 was a very good year for orchestras: the Vienna Philharmonic was born just a few months before the New York.
Though ranking orchestras is futile and contentious business, most informed observers would place the Vienna Philharmonic at or near the top of any qualitative listing worldwide, a position it has held through much of its illustrious history.
The orchestra will celebrate its 150th anniversary in a series of concerts next month in Vienna, but festivities are already under way.
Today, in Paris, the Vienna Philharmonic begins a three-week anniversary tour that will include three concerts in the United States under Lorin Maazel, at Carnegie Hall on Thursday and Friday and at the Kennedy Center in Washington next Sunday.


Can Sony Make Hollywood Pay?
Riding the success of "Terminator 2," "Hook," "Prince of Tides" and "Bugsy," Sony Pictures Entertainment, which owns Columbia and Tri-Star Pictures, dominated the American box office last year with a 20 percent share of the market and record ticket sales of $1 billion.
Last week, it led the Hollywood studios with 36 Oscar nominations.
"They have certainly put themselves on the map," said Dale Pollock, president of A &amp; M Films.
"They have made Columbia and Tri-Star places that talent wants to work."


Three Savory Vegetable Casseroles as Winter Fare
WINTER is an excellent season for baking vegetable casseroles.
These savory dishes, which combine more than one vegetable and are sometimes layered or seasoned with cheese, are hardy enough to be the focus of a weekend supper.
A form of starch -- noodles or rice, for example -- is all that is needed alongside.
Once such casseroles have been assembled they can be set aside, then baked just before serving.
Or they can be baked and reheated, if that is more convenient.
And while the baking is time consuming, requiring up to two-and-a-half hours, it demands no particular attention from the cook.


Hearings on Attica Motions Start on April 20
The long legal battle to determine whether New York State officials were responsible for the bloodshed that followed the Attica prison insurrection in 1971 has entered yet another phase, two and a half weeks after a jury in Buffalo rendered a mixed verdict in the case.
Lawyers for the state officials and their accusers, the 1,281 inmates who filed the $2.8 billion civil-liability suit in 1974, have filed motions to set aside portions of the verdict, setting the stage for additional rounds of court battles to determine what, if any, damages should be paid.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Parsippany-Troy Hills
AT the crossroads of three interstate and four state highways and the confluence of several rivers and streams sits the Township of Parsippany-Troy Hills, the most populous municipality in Morris County.
It also is home to more than 50 major corporations, which bring in more than 50,000 people a day.
"Our location is perfect," said Mayor Frank B. Priore, "so we have become a major employment center without having to offer corporations a nickel's worth of incentives."


The Soothing Style of Baden
IN the summer of 1791, Constanze Mozart paid a return visit to the ancient spa of Baden, 16 miles south of Vienna, to take the thermal cure for her real or imaginary ailments, and her husband spent a few days with her and their sons.
The choirmaster of the parish church of St.
Stephen, Anton Stoll, asked his composer friend to write something for his singers.
Mozart went to the little garden pavilion of the house at 4 Renngasse where he had rented rooms for his family, and on the first piece of paper that came to hand wrote the "Ave Verum." Short as it is, it is a deeply moving classic.
A few months later Constanze received news in Baden that her husband was very ill, rushed to Vienna by carriage and found Mozart dying.


Housing Chief Quits Her Post Under Pressure
Laura D. Blackburne, the chairwoman of New York City's Housing Authority, resigned under pressure yesterday after a week of mounting criticism of her spending practices, including the hundreds of thousands of dollars she spent on office furnishings and business trips.
At a hastily arranged news conference at City Hall yesterday afternoon, Mayor David N. Dinkins said that Ms.
Blackburne, 53 years old, submitted a letter of resignation yesterday and that he had accepted it.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
KEEP THE ASPHALT, PLEASE
WHAT is it that Joni Mitchell sang?
"Hey Paradise, they put in a parking lot." Peter Jennings, the ABC News anchor, may soon be singing a similar song.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
RENAISSANCE SOUNDS
Admirers of Renaissance music will have a rare opportunity to hear Thomas Tallis's "Spem in alium" this afternoon at 4:30 in Greenwich.
The 40-part a capella motet for eight five-voice choirs in all vocal ranges will be performed at St.
Barnabas Church.
It will be conducted by Peter Phillips, who leads the Tallis Scholars, a touring and recording ensemble based in London.


Susan B. Evans To Wed in April
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Evans of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Butler Evans to George Arthur Middleton 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Algernon Middleton of Rowayton, Conn.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Evans, 29 years old, graduated from Duke University.
Until recently, she was the managing editor of Sailing World magazine, in Newport, R.I., of which her fiance is the director of sports marketing, a position he also holds at Cruising World magazine, also in Newport.
Her father is the president of American Financial Services Association, a financial trade association in Washington.


The Accent Is Not French
To the Editor:
In support of her contention that "Poland's cultural identity has always had a bit of a French accent," Gabrielle Glaser asserts in "Europe's View of 'Veronique': A Matter of State"  [ Feb. 2 ]  that "Polish imported some of its characteristic nasal sounds from French." This statement is completely wide of the mark.


Elizabeth Spill Is Affianced
Mr. and Mrs.
George C. Spill of Allentown, Penn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Anne Spill, to Richard Tolman Grebe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Grebe of Cortlandt Manor, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Spill, 24 years old , is a freelance graphic designer in Sausalito, Calif.
She graduated from the University of the Arts.
Her father is the managing partner of the Allentown office of Deloitte &amp; Touche, the New York accounting firm.
Her mother, Gladys Spill, is a former counselor at the Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Hospital in Allentown.


Dollar Up Across Board
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
128.95
127.88
132.15
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6565
1.6265
1.5060
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1869
1.1874
1.1523
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7405
1.7715
1.9440
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$351.20
$353.25
$356.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


DELAY BY THE U.S. SAID TO IMPERIL AID TO EX-SOVIET LANDS
A delay by the United States in approving a large financing increase for the International Monetary Fund -- motivated in part by election-year politics -- is threatening to upset the West's efforts to provide billions of dollars in aid to Russia and other former Soviet republics, I.M.F. officials say.
The United States had promised other I.M.F. members that it would approve a new $12 billion contribution to the lending agency sometime in 1991, but its failure to do so has stalled plans to increase overall financing by $60 billion and thus threatened plans to grant aid to the Soviet Union.


Lauren Comly Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Albert R. Comly of Lancaster, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lauren Paige Comly to Edwin Alfred Cowen 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cowen Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Comly, 26 years old, is a development associate at Stanford University.
She graduated magna cum laude from Dickinson College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a technical service manager at the Texarkana, Tex., plant of the Alumax Aluminum Corporation, a maker of aluminum products in Atlanta.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
Roger Rosenblatt's article "How to End the Abortion War" (Jan. 19) is a valiant attempt to find the sources of the abortion conflict in American culture.
But we will not get to the root of the problem by excluding issues of gender and power from consideration.
Those committed to understanding the abortion war would do well to acquaint themselves with the history of reproductive politics in the United States.
This is a history of women who knocked themselves out to break into the conversations that powerful men have traditionally had only with other men about rules governing women's bodies and their fertility.
RICKIE SOLINGER
Boulder, Colo.


Drawing Japanese Mothers Into Circle of Volunteers
IT is hard to ignore the icily polite relationship between Japan and America that has developed recently.
Repeatedly, news articles and broadcasts document yet another salvo in the exchange of Japan and America bashing, whether it concerns Japanese politicians' aspersions on American work ethics or jingoistic American advertisements on the air waves.
With 15,000 Japanese expatriates living in Westchester, this issue can be especially sensitive.
In some communities that have relatively large Japanese populations, like Hartsdale and Scarsdale, the current strained political relationship between Japan and America underscores pre-existing isolationist tendencies in both communities.


Topics of The Times; Unlikely Eden
A lot of apples grow in New York State.
So do a lot of cows.
Painters from the Hudson River School found its landscape majestic.
Folk artists like Grandma Moses remembered it as the most peaceable of rural kingdoms.
Even so this is not a place one associates with Eden.
Perhaps one should.
Only California, Florida and Texas, The Times reported last week, make more money from nurseries and greenhouses than New York.
Here, the geraniums are too many to count and the incidence of hanging plants too frequent for even the most assiduous knotters of macrame.
Here, seedlings shiver in cold frames and pachysandra gets ready to sprawl.
Here, gardenias grow for prom nights and baby's breath for wedding days and sycamores start on their shady careers.
Here is a garden.


In a Post-Cold War Era, Scandinavia Rethinks Itself
IN the years after World War II, Sweden and its Nordic neighbors seemed to regard Europe as if it were someplace else, an unpredictable, even perilous foreign realm consumed by the intrigues of the cold war.
Sweden, Finland and, to a lesser degree, Norway stayed aloof on their side of the Baltic Sea, turning their energies inward while they shaped their small, conformist and homogeneous northern societies into what many people admiringly regarded as well-ordered models of socialist engineering.
Now, with the collapse of the Soviet military threat and the growing pace of European economic and political integration, Scandinavia's three northernmost nations appear to be coming in from the cold, bringing their foreign policies into harmony with each other as they realign both their economies and their external politics to more closely resemble those of the rest of Europe.


Radical Keel for Conner's Cup Yacht Is Actually Nothing New
It turns out that the innovative and ingenius underwater shapes of the new America's Cup class yachts may not be so new after all.
How else to explain the underwater design of a boat built almost two decades ago that has striking similarities to the radical keel recently tried by Dennis Conner on his cup racing yacht?
"It looks like exactly what I did 20 years ago," said Arthur C. Paine, a yacht designer from Bernard, Me.
In 1973, Paine created a 30-foot boat that he named the Paine Monomaran.
It carried a radical keel, too, one with two blades (or foils) connected by an elongated lead bulb.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  U.S. HOLDS UP AID TO RUSSIA
A delay by the United States in approving a big financing increase for the International Monetary Fund is threatening to upset the West's efforts to provide billions of dollars in aid to former Soviet republics, fund officials report.
They say that the delay is motivated in part by election-year politics.  1  TARGET ERRORS IN GULF WAR
A failure to communicate target restrictions in the Persian Gulf air war inflicted heavier damage than was intended to Iraq's civilian infrastructure, including electrical plants, a new report by the Defense Department says.  1  HEAVILY ARMED IN RIO
With smugglers funneling high-powered rifles from Miami to Rio de Janeiro's hillside slums, the Brazilian police say they are losing an arms race with drug gangs.  3  DOUBTS ON YUGOSLAV PEACE FORCE
As the United Nations prepares to deploy a 14,400-member peacekeeping force to Yugoslavia, many fear that the effort could bog down or fail in a quagmire of ethnic hatreds.  12  U.S.
NAVY PATROLS RUSSIAN SHORES
Americans may no longer consider Russia an enemy, but the United States Navy remains reluctant to pull back from the Arctic waters that have long been a home to the former Soviet Fleet.  14  GERMAN TONGUE REASSERTS ITSELF
When German diplomats appear at international conferences these days, they can no longer be counted on to deliver speeches in English or French.
A new Government-directed campaign seeks to return German to its former world prominence.  7  Calm returns to southern Lebanon as Shiite gunmen pull back.  6  National 16-26  ASPIN TAKES AIM AT PENTAGON
The chairman of the House Armed Services Committee wants to cut $50 billion to $120 billion more from the Pentagon's budget over the next five years than the President has already proposed.  1  THE CAMPAIGN ROAD AHEAD
Strategists in both political parties are surveying the two dozen states that hold primaries in the next three weeks to pick out the critical battlegrounds: the richest opportunities to accumulate delegates, demonstrate strength and embarrass an opponent.  1  For Senators Kerrey and Harkin, Tuesday is do-or-die day.  20  Mr.
Tsongas got a blessing, of sorts, from Jimmy Carter.  22  The Tsongas fund-raising effort has suddenly gained strength.  22  THIS FLIGHT WAS NOT ON TIME
After a month of setbacks, the crew of the Earthwinds balloon abandoned any attempt at a round-the-world flight until November.  16  COURT FIGHT OVER CREDIT CARDS
Half the states have laws that either bar or limit credit-card fees for late payments, for annual renewals and for exceeding credit limits.
But many banks set such fees outside those limits, arguing that they are governed only by laws of states where their credit-card operations are based, not where customers live.
Now that argument is under legal challenge.  1  THE NEW LOOK OF THE KLAN
Inspired by David Duke's example, the Ku Klux Klan has begun to cultivate savvy, clean-cut-looking disciples who convey a sanitized message.  16  Regional 28-36  SAINT OR UNCLE TOM?
The campaign to canonize a slave who died in 1853 has prompted a heated debate among American Catholics that reveals much about the modern-day church's complicated and sometimes awkward relations with its black parishioners.  1  CAMPAIGN RECORDS SOUGHT
The Manhattan District Attorney has requested extensive records of Mayor Dinkins's 1989 campaign, law enforcement officials and campaign workers said, a sign that the investigation into thefts by his former campaign treasurer has become a broader inquiry of the Mayor's campaign finances.  30  2 STANDS ON SHELTER MONEY
Gov.
Cuomo, who has said that the state's shelter allowance for welfare recipients is "shamefully inadequate," has proposed legislation that could undermine efforts to raise the grant.  28  Two Mafia trials with little in common.  33  Long legal battle on Attica grows longer.  36  Neediest Cases 32  Obituaries 34  Lawrence Hilford, a pioneer in the marketing of videocassettes.
Arts/Reviews 51  Theater: "St. Joan."  Campus Life 39-43  Fashion 46-47  Weddings 48-50


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Finances; Donors Emerge After Tsongas's Victory
Until recently, the room at the end of Paul E. Tsongas's fifth-floor headquarters here served as a storage area for boxes filled with campaign booklets.
These days the room is used by three volunteers who sit on the floor and sort the sacks of mail that come in throughout the day, a good portion of them bearing donations to the Tsongas campaign.
The once-anemic fund-raising efforts of the campaign have suddenly gained strength.
The surge began, Mr.
Tsongas's aides say, in the days leading up to the New Hampshire primary when public opinion polls first showed the former Massachusetts Senator overtaking Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
It gained speed when Mr.
Tsongas won the New Hampshire balloting on Tuesday, although Governor Clinton remains the leader in raising money.


Ms. Stevenson Plans June Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Stevenson of Toronto have announced the engagement of their daughter Fiona Stevenson to Roger Cavalier Feinstein, a son of Rosalind and Dr.
Howard M. Feinstein of Ithaca, N.Y., and Chilmark, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Stevenson, 26 years old, is a reference assistant at the Canadian Consulate General in New York.
She graduated from the University of Toronto.
Her father is a freelance art director in Toronto.
Her mother, Jean Stevenson, is a consultant in Toronto to retail stores.


The Bags Aren't Fake Anything, They're Real Plastic
The hard plastic handbag of the 50's has been reinvented for the 90's.
Forty years ago, the bags were cut and molded into shapes resembling bowties, pagodas and even coffins.
They sold for $50 to $60, about the same as an alligator bag at the time.
By the 60's, the hard plastic had virtually disappeared from sight, supplanted by lightweight vinyl.


Fiona Eisenberg Planning to Marry
September wedding plans have been announced for Fiona Ivy Eisenberg, an account executive at Liz Claiborne, and Harry William Lipman, an associate at the law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, both in New York.
Ms.
Eisenberg, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barney Eisenberg of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Her father is an executive sales representative for SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals in New York.
Her mother, Ethel Eisenberg, is the director of the medical library at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Harrison, N.Y.


Schrempf Is the Latest Victim Of a Bowie Defensive Standoff
What was shaping up as a rare blowout for New Jersey came down to just another fright night in the life of the Nets on Friday night as they turned back the Indiana Pacers, 106-102, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Up by 17 points with 8 minutes 25 seconds to play in the fourth quarter, New Jersey saw its lead vanish when the Pacers' Detlef Schrempf hit a jump shot that tied the score at 101-101 with 41.8 seconds left.


New Yorkers, etc.
Chances are that at one time or another almost everyone has done it.
Some, perhaps most, have been blissfully unaware of the results of their actions.
They are so self-absorbed that even a sea of unhappy, disapproving faces don't register.
Others, who are conscious of what they are doing, alternate between small pangs of guilt and an attitude that translates to "I've put up with this and now it's my turn."
What everyone, almost, has done is hold up a line.
In turn, everyone, almost, on any number of different occasions, has put up with other people holding up lines.
Still, not everyone is equally as guilty.
The infrequent holder-upper, who possibly has a legitimate reason and who does, at least, get twinges of guilt, cannot be equated with the insensitive and thoughtless who carry on as though they are the only people in whatever universe they're in at the moment.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  YANKEES -- Fired Leonard Kleinman, chief operating officer and executive vice president.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with John Olerud, first baseman, and Pat Hentgen, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Announced that Jim Clancy, pitcher, has declined an invitation to attend spring training as a non-roster player.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Steve Foster and Mo Sanford, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Agreed to terms with Carlos Hernandez and Mike Piazza, catchers, and Jamie McAndrew and Mike James, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
METS -- Agreed to terms with Kevin Baez, shortstop, and Eric Hillman, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Agreed to terms with Kurt Stillwell, shortstop, on a two-year contract.
Basketball Continental Basketball Association  ROCKFORD LIGHTNING -- Acquired Darrell Dumas, forward, from the Columbus Horizon for a 1992 fourth-round draft pick.
Football National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Richard Harvey and Darrell Davis, linebackers.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Named Chris Clausen strength and conditioning coach.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Scott Mitchell, quarterback, to a one-year contract and loaned him to the Orlando Thunder for the upcoming World League season.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Dan Stryzinski, punter, to a two-year contract.
Named Jim Overton director of corporate sales.
Soccer National Professional Soccer League  DETROIT ROCKERS -- Signed Keith Furphy, forward, to a 10-day contract.
American Professional Soccer League  SEATTLE STORM -- Announced the club has seased operation.
Tennis
ATP -- Fined Boris Becker and Ivan Lendl $1,000 each for outbursts during the Eurocard Classic.
College  CALIFORNIA, PA. -- Named John Wybranowski graduate assistant football coach.
HOLY CROSS -- Named Tony Ball offensive backfield coach.
MISSOURI -- Suspended Anthony Peeler, guard, for one game because he missed a class.
NORTHERN COLORADO -- Announced that the contracts of Ron Brillhart, men's basketball coach, and Janet Schafer, women's basketball coach, will not be renewed.
OHIO STATE -- Announced the resignation of Elliot Uzelac, football offensive coordinator.
TEXAS-EL PASO -- Announced that Binny Canales, assistant volleyball coach, has resigned to become women's head volleyball coach at Western New Mexico.


Givers of Foreign Aid Shifting Their Methods
NEARLY half a century after colonial empires began to crumble and dozens of new countries were born with high hopes of ending dependency and deprivation, a significant number of those nations have seen growth stall and desperate poverty grow instead.
Billions of aid dollars and armies of experts later, international lending and development organizations, with thinning resources for the post-cold-war world, are tackling the blunt question: Why do some countries fail?
The answer, more often than not, is bad government -- in its broadest sense.
And as a result of a lot of rethinking in an age of scarcity, aid is getting a new look in both content and methods of delivery.
In voluntary organizations, think tanks, national aid agencies and the World Bank, experts say with increasing frequency that technical assistance and sound economic prescriptions are just not enough in many countries, even if they are rich in natural resources.


Nancy D. Wax, Lawyer, Weds
Nancy Dana Wax, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Wax of Lawrence, L.I., was married yesterday evening to Andrew Jeffrey Wigler, the son Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Wigler of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Harold D. Halpern officiated at Temple Gates of Zion in Valley Stream, L.I.
Mrs.
Wigler, 27 years old, is a public defender with the Nassau County Legal Aid Society in Hempstead, L.I.
She graduated from Adelphi University, and received a law degree from Yeshiva University, as did her husband.
Her father is a founding partner of the architecture firm of Wax, Bryman, Ferraro &amp; Associates in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Her mother, Loretta Wax, owns Skinz Inc., a women's clothing manufacturer in Hewlett, L.I.


The Mets Hand the Game to Hundley
In baseball, the catcher, the field spread out before him, the dugout visible via his peripheral vision, is the brain's control center.
All information flows from him or passes through him.
He selects the pitches.
His choice of location for those pitches positions the infielders.
A glance at the manager can transmit a warning of trouble concerning the man on the mound.
It is a complicated, relentless and absolutely delicate function, and it is one the Mets are prepared, even eager, to assign to a rookie.
The Mets believe Todd Hundley can handle the complex circuitry of strategy and impulse, and so desperately do they need and want him to do so that they don't care what the 22-year-old does with his bat.


Invisibility Is More Than Meets the Eye
One of the most daunting tricks of the film trade remains how to handle an invisible character.
Through the decades -- beginning with the mad scientist played by Claude Rains in the 1933 classic "The Invisible Man" -- transparent people have had to contend with a variety of problems.
They looked like clothes dummies.
Their mobility was limited.
And film makers relied on cornball tricks like using poles and wires to float clothing in space.
Even as recently as 1990, with "Ghost," film makers were using such old-fashioned devices as a levitating penny and slamming doors to portray the reach from the beyond.
The audience had to
believe
.


The Uses of Anti-Dumping Laws
To the Editor:
I read with great interest James Bovard's thesis (Forum, Feb. 9) that United States trade laws "reduce competition and raise prices to protect consumers against the one-in-a-million possibility that foreign companies could corner the market -- and raise prices." Further, he argues that Congress should repeal the country's antidumping laws.


When Butch Cassidy Came By in Bolivia
To the Editor:
I have anecdotal evidence for the forensic anthropologists and historians investigating the possible deaths in Bolivia of Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (news article, Jan. 17).
Frank J. Dunleavy, my trader-prospector-explorer grandfather, was from 1907 to 1912 general manager and director of the Boston and Bolivia Rubber Company.
In 1907 he was in Bolivia, supervising a jungle rubber plantation, when according to family tradition, Butch Cassidy appeared unannounced at his door.
The outlaw was fed and sent on his way with a "gift" -- an article from my grandfather's wardrobe to which he had taken an obsessive fancy.


Ms. Lawrence To Wed in April
Martin Lawrence of Manhasset, L.I., and Ruth Lawrence of East Meadow, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Audrey Beth Lawrence to Glenn Rosenberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick M. Rosenberg of West Orange, N.J.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lawrence, 34 years old, graduated from New York University.
She is a dental hygienist in New York and a student at Theater Dance, a New York dance school.
Her father retired as the chief executive of the Milo Products Company, a New York calendar manufacturer.
Her mother is a secretary for the United States Navy in East Meadow.


Rep. Frank Pallone Jr. of New Jersey To Wed Sarah Hospodor in August
Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew T. Hospodor of Annapolis, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sarah Ellen Hospodor, to Representative Frank Joseph Pallone Jr. of New Jersey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pallone of Long Branch, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Hospodor, 30 years old, is the director of federal relations for the National Realty Committee, a real-estate lobbying group in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Southern California.
Her father is the president and chairman of The ARINC Company, an airline industry communications company in Annapolis.
Her mother, Rose Marie Hospodor, is assistant personnel director at the investment firm of Legg Mason Inc., in Baltimore.


Look, Too, to Private Technical Schools
To the Editor:
The problem with "A New Track for Blue-Collar Workers" (Forum, Feb. 9) is that parents push their children toward the bachelor's degree because there is a stigma in our society in not having one.
Guidance counselors are measured by the number of kids they send to college.
The idea of being a technician is one that simply doesn't enter our consciousness.


Clean Pool
Here is a common female fantasy -- a corollary to the male dream of sitting at the piano at a party and mesmerizing all the women with a dazzling rendition of "Rhapsody in Blue."
The woman's version takes place in a poolroom, one of those dark, smoky establishments rarely depicted in Martini &amp; Rossi ads.
The heroine, dressed for dancing, is taken there by her date.
Preening, he racks the balls and shows her how to hold a cue.
With a condescending smile, he hands it to her and says, "Now you try."


The Soothing Style of Baden
IN the summer of 1791, Constanze Mozart paid a return visit to the ancient spa of Baden, 16 miles south of Vienna, to take the thermal cure for her real or imaginary ailments, and her husband spent a few days with her and their sons.
The choirmaster of the parish church of St.
Stephen, Anton Stoll, asked his composer friend to write something for his singers.
Mozart went to the little garden pavilion of the house at 4 Renngasse where he had rented rooms for his family, and on the first piece of paper that came to hand wrote the "Ave Verum." Short as it is, it is a deeply moving classic.
A few months later Constanze received news in Baden that her husband was very ill, rushed to Vienna by carriage and found Mozart dying.


Where Hope and Death Dwell Together
John Kelly gets huffy when his work is called musical theater.
"It makes me think of 'Brigadoon,' " he says.
"I don't do 'Brigadoon.' " Yet he has been using the elements of musical theater -- a little song, a little dance, a little high drama -- since the end of the 70's, when he lip-synched to Maria Callas singing "Carmen." This was at the Anvil, a gay nightclub in Greenwich Village, popular before the time of AIDS.
Not that John Kelly was ever just another drag queen.
Even then he was a performance artist.
Except, he also gets a little huffy at the phrase performance art.
"Sometimes I call myself a performance artist," he said.
But then sometimes he doesn't.
What John Kelly is is a theater artist in his mid-30's from Jersey City.
He was trained as a painter and a dancer and possesses what a Times critic called a "pungent countertenor." As a performer and director he has created theater works that, while defying categorization, have been praised by critics.
They include "Find My Way Home" (1988), a movement-oriented tale of Orpheus, and "Love of a Poet" (1990), based on a Schumann song cycle in which he adopts the persona of a melancholy bard.


Japanese Didn't Invent Military Sex Industry; America-Bashing
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 4 front page reports Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa's criticism of American work habits, the latest disparaging remarks about the American people by Japanese politicians.
Below that, you report from Seattle: "The fiery remarks about Japan's trade policies by Lee Iacocca, the chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, seemed to draw a more negative response here last month than the insults against American workers by Japanese leaders."
I find it hard to believe that the good people of Seattle shrug off being called lazy by the Japanese Prime Minister, but take umbrage when Mr.
Iacocca points out that Japan's closed market and one-way trade policies hurt America.


Rain Didn't Stop Their Parade


An Indian City of Spiritual Splendor
JUST a few hours' journey from the modern bustle of New Delhi there is a quiet preserve of India as it was before the invasion of superbazaars, boom boxes belting hits from Bombay movies and nightmare traffic.
It is a town that offers both the rhythms of medieval-village India and a glimpse of a mythical reality.
The town is Vrindaban where, legend has it, the young god Krishna sported with the gopis, the milkmaids smitten by his radiance, and especially with his consort Radha.
Vrindaban was little more than a bend in the Jumna River until the 15th century when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, a Bengali saint, led a revival of devotion to Lord Krishna.
Krishna is best known in the West as the protagonist of the "Bhagavad Gita," the centerpiece of the epic "Mahabharata." But the devotional worship of Krishna took as its focus the earlier part of the Hindu god's life, his childhood and youth, which were set in Vrindaban and nearby Mathura.


Go for the Gusto, Not Just the Gold
To the Sports Editor:
Hurrah for Dave Anderson ("The Olympics Don't Need Us vs. Them," The Times, Feb. 16), but he hasn't gone quite far enough.
"What the Olympics means, and has always meant," he wrote, "is, quite simply, the opportunity for an athlete to say that he or she is the best in the world in that event on that day."
The Olympics not only means winning; it also means competing with the best, being a part of a world community of athletes, coaches, officials and spectators.


For the World of Ships, A Master Miniaturist
It might seem true to form that someone who plays the rebec and sings medieval music for excitement would choose to carve models of ships and figureheads for a livelihood.
Such a person is Glenn Braun, the artisan in residence at the Crafts Center of the South Street Seaport Museum.
He scrapes a living from blocks of cherry and basswood, using knife and sandpaper and a great deal of patience and imagination.


CAMPUS LIFE: Florida; Apartments To Be Inspected For Safety
In this community that has been struck by seven college student murders in the last two years, an effort between the University of Florida here and law enforcement officials has produced a preventive measure: apartment safety inspections.
Originating from student suggestions last spring, minimum safety requirements have been approved by local officials and inspections of complexes will begin on Feb. 27.


Anne Woodside, Dancer, to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Woodside of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Elizabeth Woodside to Joseph Daniel Gribbins , a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Gribbins of Lyme, Conn.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Woodside, who is 24 years old and a student at Mercer County Community College, teaches ballet at the Princeton Ballet School.
She also dances with Teamwork Dance and Danceworks, modern dance companies in Princeton, and is a former principal dancer with the Princeton Ballet, now the American Repertory Ballet Company.
Her father is president of R.H.W.
Associates, a company in Princeton that advises banks on commercial loans.
Her mother is a manager for Competitive Sport, an athletic shoe and clothing store in Princeton.


Breaking Up
Dr.
William H. Masters and Virginia E. Johnson, the sex researchers, have had enough of each other as husband and wife.
They announced last week that they have filed for divorce after 21 years of marriage, though they will continue to work together at the Masters &amp; Johnson Institute in St.
Louis.
Their decision was based on "differences in the goals each has for the balance of their lives," said their son-in-law, William Young, who is the institute's director.
"I'm sure people will say, 'If these two people can't get along, who can?' " he added.
"But people are people and they will continue to work together and be great friends." Dr.
Masters, 76 years old, serves as a consultant now, though he is in the office every day, Mr.
Young said, and Ms.
Johnson, 67, is chairwoman of the board.
In fact, their work had become something of a wedge between them, according to Mr.
Young.
He said that the three- to four-year waiting list for therapy at the institute left the couple "little time for personal interests, family or friends."


Streetscapes: 44 West 77th Street; Restoration of an Altered Facade
IF the co-op board's budget could stretch, it would cover one of the most dramatic restorations ever.
But the $500,000 available would have to multiply tenfold before the studio apartment house at 44 West 77th Street, stripped of its ornate facade in 1944, could return to its original neo-Gothic glory.
Yet the building's facade is still so elaborate that most people don't even know that the original richer facade is gone.


Marketing a Family Business to the Young
To the Editor:
Mary Rowland's series on family business succession (Your Own Account, Jan. 5, 12, and 19) gave broad but succinct coverage of many of the problems and possibilities inherent in transferring business ownership and management from one generation to the next.
I would add that because so many other options compete for younger family members' career commitments, the entrepreneur interested in family business continuity should develop a strategy for "marketing" the family business to his or her children.
The strategy should include targeting prospective successors, building the business's image and the family's awareness of it, determining the dollar and nondollar costs involved and other marketing tactics adapted for this special purpose.
JAMES W. LEA  Chapel Hill, N.C., Feb. 5  Mr.
Lea is a professor at the University of North Carolina.


When City Officials Make a Move, Who You Gonna Call?
NO New Yorker is short of opinions, but some New Yorkers' opinions on public policy get asked more often than others'.
To journalists, they are the "usual suspects," people whose expertise, verbosity and often wit make them particularly quotable.
To City Hall, they are an unelected Greek chorus, critiquing every official move.
To readers, they are seldom more than a name and a phrase.
Here are brief profiles of some of the many members of that chorus.
Raymond D. Horton President, Citizens Budget Commission
When Raymond D. Horton talks about New York City's finances, people may not listen, but they can't help hearing.
For more than a decade, this son of a Chevrolet dealer from Sibley, Iowa, has been one of the most vocal critics of the nation's largest municipal budget.
"Over time, we got to feel like, 'Oh God, he's pushing that idea again,' " said Alair A. Townsend, a former deputy mayor who heard many Horton ideas.
But, she added, "He's a smart guy."


Apartment Sales: Mixed Signals
SUSAN WEST recently inherited an eight-room co-op in a prewar building in the Carnegie Hill section of Manhattan.
On Jan. 1, she put the apartment up for sale for almost $875,000.
She then received seven bids and in three weeks sold it for close to her asking price.
"We really wanted to sell it quickly, but I was surprised that it happened this fast," said Ms.
West, a book editor.
"I think it happened because it is a very good apartment, and I think it was priced right."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
TRIBUTE TO DEWHURST
Two years ago Colleen Dewhurst was mistress of ceremonies at the Night of Stars fund-raiser for the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts in Goldens Bridge.
She served in that capacity every year that she was at home in South Salem during the 12 years of her tenure as honorary board chairman of the organization.
This year the event, to be held next Sunday at 7:30 P.M. in the John Jay High School Auditorium in Cross River, will be dedicated to Ms.
Dewhurst, who died last Aug. 22.


Building Unions Protest S.R.O. Project on 43d St.
For nearly a month building-trade unions have picketed the Times Square Hotel to call attention to the high unemployment in their industry and protest that the hotel is not paying prevailing wages for transforming it into the largest single-room-occupancy residence in the city.
In the building on the northeastern corner of Eighth Avenue and 43d Street, the residents, many of them elderly or infirm, are coping with the disturbance of the two-year renovation and the intermittent hoopla outside their front door.
Outside the pickets contend that the project employs unqualified workers and illegal aliens so that the contractor can pay unconscionably low wages.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Arriving at the Next Battleground, Clinton Attacks Tsongas in Maryland
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who has spent the last few days attempting to lower expectations about how well he can perform against Paul E. Tsongas in the Maryland primary on March 3, indicated today that he planned to turn Maryland into a battleground after all.
Without mentioning Mr.
Tsongas, a former Senator from Massachusetts, by name, Mr.
Clinton took him to task for criticizing proposals to cut taxes for the middle class and to create a student loan fund.
Mr.
Tsongas has said such ideas, which Mr.
Clinton has proposed, were irresponsible and insufficient to meet the nation's needs.
Mr.
Clinton called this "pious rhetoric."


TV Services
To the Editor:
Your Talking column about TV services on Feb. 9 contains a statement that may mislead your readers: "Options include staying with the local cable franchise service or having one of the newer satellite companies install alternative equipment."


POSTINGS: Affordable-Housing Conference; Cuomo, Dinkins and . . .
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo will be the keynote speaker and Mayor David N. Dinkins will make the opening remarks at the 1992 Governor's Housing Conference in Manhattan on Thursday.
The day-long conference, which will focus on the need for affordable housing, is designed for public officials involved in housing issues, as well as for community-based providers, housing advocates, nonprofit housing organizations, the real estate and construction industries and business, labor, legal and allied professional groups.


NEW YORK
Uncommon combinations are what count this spring: opaque and sheer, lace and pin stripe, denim and silk, even for evening.
Here, some stylish Manhattan mixes.


Bridge
Study the diagramed deal and try to find a way to make six no-trump after the opening lead of the heart ten.
If you succeed, you will be doing better than many experts: At a tournament in Moscow a few years ago, everyone failed in the attempt.
If you need a clue, heed the deliberate slight misarrangement of the hearts in the North hand.
The deal comes from Eastern Europe.
It was created in Hungary by the late Geza Ottlik, a card wizard, and appeared in a book he wrote jointly with Hugh Kelsey of Scotland.
The title is "Adventures in Cardplay" (Victor Gollancz, London, 1979), and it is generally acknowledged to be the most advanced work ever in the field of dummy-play.


Getting to Work Won't Be the Same
IN government offices and corporate boardrooms across the state, officials and business leaders are developing plans they hope will radically alter the driving habits of millions of New Jersey residents.
Reacting to provisions contained in the 1990 Clean Air Act, a Federal law that requires states to adopt strict clean-air policies over the next several years, officials are working on regulations that will force thousands of employers to somehow persuade their employees to be less dependent upon their automobiles to get to work.
The Clean Air Act requires each state to come up with its own regulatory scheme by Nov. 15.


The Doctor Plays God in a Revival in Westport
JUST when it was feared that the Boston Post Road Stage Company would shut down in mid-season, the theater won a reprieve by raising more than half of the $25,000 needed for the next show to go on.
Given such a precarious state, one might expect a company to come up with, say, a conservative comedy or a nice little musical: a crowd-pleaser, something safe and inoffensive.
Not an obscure melodrama with intimations of morality and an emphasis on mortality.
And not a play that mystified critics 25 years ago and flopped in a week.
And certainly not one that, once announced, would provoke phone calls threatening to bomb the theater, as the producers have reported.


Islanders Are Rising To Occasion Again
Look at the Islanders.
Yes, the Islanders.
They won their fourth consecutive game today, a grueling 2-1 victory over the Minnesota North Stars at Nassau Coliseum.
It is their longest winning streak of the season.
They have won eight of their last 10 and are 14-6-1 in their last 21.
They are all the way up to mediocre and that's not meant in a sarcastic way.
Halfway through the season, they seemed hopelessly out of the playoff picture, and were one of the worst teams in the National Hockey League.
Now, they have a .500 record and are tied for the 11th-best mark in a 22-team league.


Laura Woodworth to Marry in May
Laura Staples Woodworth, a third-year law student at the University of North Carolina, and Jonathan Wilmore Keohane, a graduate student in astronomy at the University of Minnesota, are engaged to be married in May.
Ms.
Woodworth, 25 years old, graduated from Yale University and is the daughter of Martha Williams of Fairfield, Conn., and Dr.
Thomas B. Woodworth of Midland, Mich.
Her father is a senior occupational health specialist at Dow Chemical Company in Midland.
Her mother is the membership director at WSHU, a public radio station in Fairfield.


Q and A
Hungarian Family Tree
Q.
My parents, both Jewish, came from Hungary, and I would like to
research
my family tree.
Which airlines fly to Budapest and where do I write for information about synagogue births and deaths?
I would also like details about inexpensive hotels in Budapest and information on English-speaking guides. -- I. G. Grossman, Yardley, Pa.


Gun Runners From Miami Give Brazilian Drug Gangs Lead in Arms Race
With smugglers funneling high-powered rifles and pistols from Miami to Rio's hillside slums, the police say they are losing an arms race here with drug gangs.
Facing new, military-style weaponry in the hands of traffickers, Rio's police commanders last month threw out most of their bulletproof jackets as useless.
After a police helicopter was shot down, pilots have standing orders to avoid low passes over shantytowns during drug raids.
In a recent scene on the television news, antidrug police armed with .38-caliber revolvers were shown retreating from a slum in the face of semiautomatic weapons fire.


BEST SELLERS: February 23, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
HIDEAWAY, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
2
8
2
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles.
3
2
20
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
4
3
9
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
5
4
2
BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $21.95.) A dinner party, attended by a woman, her former husband and their two grown children, reveals family strains and love.
6
5
5
LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $21.95.) The fifth volume of "The Corps" tells of an attempt to rescue marines during World War II.
7
7
3
FUGITIVE NIGHTS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $22.) Three people on the trail of a dangerous fugitive, through the glamour spots and desert areas of Palm Springs, Calif.
8
1
VOX, by Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) A man and a woman learn about each other and themselves through a telephone conversation on an "adult party line."
9
6
5
PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $21.50.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware to the rescue of an actress menaced by a man recently released from prison.
10
9
4
McNALLY'S SECRET, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $21.95.) The sleuth Archy McNally's pursuit of a stolen block of priceless stamps uncovers scandals on Florida's Gold Coast.
11
10
14
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the life of Edwina Winfield.
12
14
19
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
13
12
27
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
14
11
2
GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Delacorte, $20.) The private eye V. I. Warshawski probes a case involving pet dogs, a man's disappearance and Chicago scandals.
15
98
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on her own and other people's struggles to achieve self-esteem.
2
3
19
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
3
2
12
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
4
4
14
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5
8
23
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
6
5
6
PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers Group West, $22.95.) A lawyer's presentation of the case for believing that the C.I.A. was involved in the death of John F. Kennedy.
7
6
12
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A reporter's account of an N.B.A. championship season spent with Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls.
8
7
8
BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle, illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental warning from the 19th-century American Indian.
9
17
10
THE WORLD IS MY HOME, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) The autobiography of the popular novelist. (LP)
10
9
15
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
11
13
36
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
12
10
2
SEIZE THE MOMENT, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The former President defines the challenges America faces in the newly changed world and what our country should do about them.
13
14
26
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Thoughts on life's commonplaces. (LP)
14
1
THE TEXAS CONNECTION, by Craig I. Zirbel. (Texas Connection/Ingram, $21.95.) A Scottsdale, Ariz., attorney argues that Lyndon Johnson was involved in the assassination of John F. Kennedy.
15 *
11
9
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) The story of an Auschwitz survivor in the Catskills, told in comic-book form.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
1
12
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
3
2
7
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
4
5
12
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.
5
3
12
THE BEST TREATMENT, by Isadore Rosenfeld. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Counsel from a physician on a host of medical problems.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
CAMBRIDGE, by Caryl Phillips. (Knopf, $19.) Mr.
Phillips's splendid and tragic novel tells two stories that ought to be one -- that of a thoughtful Englishwoman in the 19th-century West Indies and that of Cambridge, a proud and powerful slave.
THE NEW EMPERORS: China in the Era of Mao and Deng, by Harrison E. Salisbury. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A fascinating and detailed picture of the personal relationships and private lives of China's rulers for 40 years, by a veteran of The New York Times.
BILLIE DYER AND OTHER STORIES, by William Maxwell. (Knopf, $18.) Tales partly true yet wholly imagined, dealing with themes of memory, history, change and loss, located in the childhood of the distinguished writer and editor, now in his 80's.
BYZANTIUM: The Apogee, by John Julius Norwich. (Knopf, $30.) The second of a projected three volumes, this readable and provocative history takes the Eastern Roman Empire from Charlemagne's coronation in 800 to the late 11th century.
A LANDING ON THE SUN, by Michael Frayn. (Viking, $21.) Something of a philosophical fable, much of a satire on bureaucracies, finally a spy thriller, employing to fine effect many of Mr.
Frayn's numberless talents.
SALEM IS MY DWELLING PLACE: A Life of Nathaniel Hawthorne, by Edwin Haviland Miller. (University of Iowa, $35.) Mr.
Miller doesn't look for what isn't there in Hawthorne's secretive life, and renders well the lively flavor of his times.
UNTO THE SONS, by Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) Mr.
Talese has brought his enormous reportorial industry to bear on his own family, especially his Italian-born father's side, meticulously reconstructing a personal history and a way of life now distant.


Rival South Africa Whites Stake Out Strategy
President F. W. de Klerk's governing National Party and its right-wing opponents paused today to devise competing strategies for a national referendum that will ask South Africa's whites whether they want to press ahead with a negotiated transition to a post-apartheid democracy.
The referendum, which Mr. de Klerk announced on Wednesday, could be held as early as March 18.


Making a Difference; A Budding Titan in Comics
Scott Rosenberg started collecting comic books when he was 10 years old, and he was soon hooked.
Now, as the chief executive of the Malibu Graphics Publishing Company of Westlake Village, Calif., he is taking on the titans of comics, Marvel and D.C., with all the aggressiveness of a superhero.
Last week Malibu lured away eight of Marvel's top artists and writers, instantly making the company a far more credible force in the industry.
"With these artists on board, and with the new titles we'll be debuting, we see significant market share growth ahead," said the 29-year-old Mr.
Rosenberg, who started Malibu in 1986 with three partners.


How a Rape Victim Wreaks Revenge
"BLOOD MOON" by Nicholas Kazan is a brutal shocking crime drama.
Like television re-enactments of unsolved mysteries, this gripping play is a fictionalized account purported to be a true story.
How much fiction and how much truth are in this bizarre tale is impossible to tell, because the event does not involve an arrest, trial or any official or documented facts.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
I don't want to "permit but discourage" abortion.
I want to stop abortion the way the abolitionists wanted to stop slavery.
I believe slavery is wrong: that no one has the right to assure his or her quality of life by owning another.
In the same way, and for the same reasons, I believe abortion is wrong: that no one has the right to assure her quality of life by aborting another.
ANITA JANDA
Kew Gardens, Queens


RECORD BRIEF
Emmylou Harris: 'Emmylou Harris and the Nash Ramblers at the Ryman'
Reprise 26664-2; all three formats.


Winnifred Ellis Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony T. Ellis of Hillsborough, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Winnifred Canning Ellis to David Leonard Mahoney, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas H. D. Mahoney of Cambridge, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ellis, 32 years old, is the public-relations manager of The San Francisco Examiner.
She graduated from the University of Colorado.
Her father is a partner in Pacific Venture Partners, a venture capital company in Menlo Park, Calif.


Lisa M. Conn and James D. Stathis Are Married
Lisa Mary Conn, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Joseph L. Conn of Little Falls, N.J., was married yesterday to James Dean Stathis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Constantine Stathis of West Orange, N.J.
Judge Nicholas G. Mandak of Superior Court in Passaic County, N.J., officiated at the Brooklake Country Club in Florham Park, N.J.


In His Various Defining Moments, Has Bush Clearly Defined Himself?
GEORGE BUSH has been in public life since the 1960's, and he has been President of the United States, scrutinized every day in every way, for more than three years.
Yet as he labored last week to recover from a Republican primary in New Hampshire in which he was able to attract only 53 per cent of the vote, his managers were still struggling to find some way to present a clearer impression of the man and his policies.
A New York Times/CBS News poll conducted last week dramatized the depth of the President's problem: the poll showed that more than half of registered voters find it hard to say what Mr.
Bush hopes to accomplish in a second term -- although, of course, Mr.
Bush still has several months in which to refine his message to the nation.


SPEAK FOR YOURSELF
Your article made me angry.
Good public speaking is a learned skill, just as good writing is, not an inherent quality some are born with and some are not.
I am tired of women blaming every failure on their sex.
What does being a woman have to do with it?
Good public speaking requires training, concentration and practice.
ANETT D. GRANT
Minneapolis


What They're Wearing
Dresses that are short, shapely, with a swing to the skirt -- and that show plenty of leg in shiny tights.
These are the looks being seen about Manhattan at night.


Airport Art
To the Editor: Suzanne Carmichael's article made me aware of what I have missed while sitting in frustration at some of our airports.
Airlines are helpful about printing gate locations for their hub airports; they could also call attention to what paintings and sculptures await the traveler as well as where they are located.
I would never think to check out parking garages.


Former Official at City College Says President Knew of Problems
A former City College official forced out after nine students were trampled to death at a basketball game last December is charging that the school's president, Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston, had been aware of long-standing problems with the supervision of student events on campus but had failed to take action to tighten control.
The official, George D. McDonald, was the college's vice president for student affairs for more than nine years until he was forced to announce his retirement last month in the aftermath of the tragedy.


Camera
Photographers usually look to the annual Photographic Marketing Association Show for the debut of new products and trends.
But the signals given off at this year's show, held two weeks ago in Las Vegas, Nev., are difficult to decipher.
For example, what is one to conclude from a show where cardboard cameras priced at less than $20 and electronic imaging systems that run from $300 to $600 were both touted?


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Dr. Kathleen Pike; Challenging the Must-Be-Thin Message
WHEN Dr.
Kathleen Pike sees a stick-thin model flaunting the latest in designer fashions in a television advertisement, she tends to pay less attention to the dress than to the subtle influence the ad has on the women who see it.
The underlying message, she says, is that thin is good -- the thinner the better.
And that message plays a major role in distorting the image many women and teen-age girls have of their own bodies, Dr.
Pike said.


Bush Plans Shake-Up of Posts at State Dept.
The Bush Administration is planning a shake-up of several key State Department posts, including the reassignment of its chief arms control expert, Administration officials say.
Reginald Bartholomew, who as Under Secretary of State for International Security Affairs was involved in negotiating the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, will become United States representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the officials say.


Champion Norris Has Too Much Punch for Daniels
Showing clear superiority in power and speed, Terry Norris made the seventh straight successful defense of his World Boxing Council superwelterweight championship today with a ninth-round knockout of Carl Daniels.
Fighting before a hometown crowd of 6,182 at the San Diego Sports Arena, the 24-year-old Norris improved his overall record to 31-3 by dominating the fight with strong inside punching and closing it out with wicked straight right hands.


Melissa Weiss, Lawyer, to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen A. Weiss of West Hartford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Melissa Lyn Weiss to Michael Barry Bausano, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Dominic Bausano of West Bloomfield, Mich.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Weiss, 26 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from Boston College.
Her father is a urologist in Hartford.


Susan Harvey To Wed in June
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert Harvey and Joan Harvey of Westfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Ann Harvey, to Anthony John Raine Cook, a son of John and Vivien Cook of Westfield.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Harvey, 24 years old, is a supervisor at the Union County (N.J.) Association for Retarded Citizens.
She graduated from the University of Michigan, where she was a founder of the Baker-Mandella Educational Center for Anti-Racist Education.
Her father is the pastor of the First Baptist Church of Westfield.
Her mother is the director of the speech pathology department of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark.


'Seize the Moment'
To the Editor:
I would like to commend you on your choice of Richard Perle to review Richard Nixon's "Seize the Moment: America's Challenge in a One-Superpower World" (Jan. 19).


Abigail Sadler Plans Wedding
Sheila Emerson Sadler and Harry M. Sadler Jr., both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Abigail Emerson Sadler, to Dr.
Benjamin Leighton Shneider, the son of Professor and Mrs.
Gordon Shneider of Elburn, Ill.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Sadler, 31 years old, is a research associate in pediatric neurology at Yale University School of Medicine.
She graduated from Vassar College and has master's degrees in psychology and neuroscience from Columbia University.
Her father retired as a consulting engineer in New York.
Her mother retired as the founding director of the Village Community School in New York.


Stalking the Next Walkman
A few weeks ago, giving the toast at an annual Sony reception here, Norio Ohga almost sounded like a man who had forsaken electronics for the glitter of Hollywood.
The 62-year-old president of the Sony Corporation talked for 15 minutes without once mentioning the Walkman, the video camcorder, or any of the other gadgetry that propelled his company to huge profitability and tremendous growth in the 1980's.
He made only a cursory mention of his pet technological project, Sony's billion-dollar bet on high-definition television.
What he did talk about were Sony Pictures Entertainment and Sony Music Entertainment -- once better known as Columbia Pictures and CBS Records.


Charles F. Tebo Weds Dr. Roen
Dr.
Janet Leslie Roen, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Philip R. Roen of New York, was married yesterday to Charles Francis Tebo, the son of Selma A. Tebo of Worcester, Mass., and the late Ralph E. Tebo.
Justice Theodore R. Kupferman of the Appellate Division of the New York State Supreme Court, First Department, officiated at the Harvard Club in New York.
Dr.
Roen, who is keeping her name, is an ophthalmologist on the staff of Lenox Hill Hospital in New York and the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a medical degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a urologist in New York, and the author of several books in that field.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
IN all the world there may be only a handful of people who know the difference between a Laundromat and a Launderette, and even fewer who care.
Enter Tom Litwin, who has spent a lifetime in laundry.
He still delights in explaining to the uninitiated that Laundromat, as in Shorty's Deluxe Laundromat, is a name that used to be licensed to the Westinghouse Company, which also made all the washers used at Laundromats.
Launderette -- you know, Sudz n' Duz Launderette -- was Bendix turf.


Meadowlands No Place For a Large Complex
Re: "Vision of Rail and Office Complex Moves Closer to Reality," Jan. 26: William McCann's vision of a "gleaming oasis of glass and steel," proposed for construction in the Hackensack Meadowlands, is a futile one.
The idea of a major office and hotel complex's being built at a time of office glut and hotel room vacancies is misguided.
Other Meadowlands hotels are suffering.


A Park as Not Just Another Pretty Space
Is it reopening time in the gardens of the West?
So you would think, to judge from the recent blossoming of books, conferences and exhibitions on the subject of landscape design.Through Friday, the Urban Center, on Madison Avenue between 50th and 51st Streets, presents "New Park: New Ideas," a show of 20 landscape designs by students at City College, Harvard, Parsons School of Design, the University of Virginia and Yale.
The designs, though wonderfully various, were all conceived for a single site: the 21-acre plot where a park is being planned for Riverside South, the complex under development by Donald Trump on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
Sponsored by the Municipal Art Society with support from the Greenacre Foundation, "New Park: New Ideas" is an important show, not least because, as a display of student work, it offers a peek over the design horizon.
The prospect shows great promise.
It's indicative of renewed idealism that studios in five design schools chose to focus on this site, a meeting ground for the critical issues of public space and environmental conservation.
The students have risen to the level of the project's ambitious intentions.
Overall, these designs are refreshingly free from formula: no modernoid lunar landscapes with lollipop light bulbs, no "Olmstoid" caricatures of Frederick Law Olmsted's pioneering work of a century ago.
Collectively, the students grasp that what the city needs is not only more green, open space but also more fertile imagination.


Karen Lipson, Lawyer, to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Walter Lipson of Suffern, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Karen Beth Lipson, to Alan Jay Goldberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor Goldberg of Scarsdale, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lipson, 29 years old, is an associate at the law firm of Williams &amp; Connolly in Washington.
She graduated magna cum laude from Dartmouth College and received her law degree from New York University, as did her fiance.
Her father is a dentist in Suffern.
Her mother, Marjorie Lipson, a social worker, is the executive director of Volunteer Counseling Service of Rockland County in New City, N.Y.


PARIS Melange
The Chanel collection summed up the mood of Paris with crisp cotton shirts worn over gauzy evening skirts -- sending a fresh breeze through fashion.
And there were more surprises: trench coats cut in organza, dresses worn over dresses, unexpected mixes of prints and extravagant creations -- some wearable, some not.
Even poodles pranced out on the runway in eye-catching costumes. --


Relief for the Hungry


CAMPUS LIFE: Pennsylvania; Freshman Orientation, by Euripides
Freshmen at the University of Pennsylvania here were given homework before they even set foot on campus last fall, but no one is complaining.
In fact, it worked out so well, administrators said, that this idea was expanded into a continuing course and next year's freshmen will be given homework, too.
For the university's academic orientation program, its first, all 2,300 incoming freshmen were sent copies of Euripides' Greek tragedy "The Bacchae" and asked to read it before arriving on campus.


Nancy Kesselman to Wed in July
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph I. Kesselman of Westport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Nancy Lee Kesselman to David James Roodberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian Roodberg of Closter, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kesselman, 28 years old, is a senior account executive in New York at Dentsu Corporation of America, a subsidiary of a Japanese advertising agency.
She graduated magna cum laude from Duke University and has an M.B.A. from the American Graduate School of International Management.
Her father is chairman of Greentree Software Inc., a New York computer company.


Swedish Referee Is On Thick Ice
The international hockey community apparently has rejected the United States' claim that a Swedish referee showed bias in his treatment of the team.
According to a person familiar with the selection of officials for the Olympic hockey tournament, Sven Erik Sold of Sweden has been tentatively penciled in to referee the gold-medal game Sunday afternoon between the Unified Team and Canada.
The selection was made by the officiating committee of the International Ice Hockey Federation, immediately after Sold's controversial performance on Friday in the United States-Unified Team match.


Tech Notes; Trains That Don't Screech
One unpleasant part of commuting by rail is the shriek of steel wheels on steel rails, particularly when trains go around sharp corners.
The sounds are produced because the wheels on the outside of a curve have a longer distance to travel than those on the inside.
In a car, differential gears compensate for such unequal travel.
But each pair of steel train wheels is solid metal, with no compensation mechanism.
As a result, one wheel is dragged along the track.
The metal-on-metal scraping produces the high-pitched sound, which can be grating for people who live near tracks or who are waiting on platforms.


Corrections
An article on February 9 about the study of the roots of depression misidentified the college attended by Jennifer Muneyyirci, a researcher.
She is a freshman at Yale.


Law From His Court Bench, Opera From the Piano Bench
HE calls her his built-in soprano.
He is her resident composer.
She sparkles, as an opera singer should, and he is reserved, the way one expects a United States District Court Judge to be.
But when Judge Richard Owen and his wife, Lynn Owen, talk about opera -- especially
his
operas -- the air crackles.


Tour Bikes Built for Two
A bicycle built for two is the means of locomotion on trips to California's wine country, Colorado and France run by the Tandem Touring Company.
No experience on the bikes is needed, according to Rod Kramer, co-owner of the company with his wife, Julie.
There are four departures for the seven-day Napa and Sonoma tour, $1,288 a person; five dates for a seven-day Colorado Rockies trip, costing $1,088; two dates in September for the three-day Colorado weekend, $325, and nine-day tours of France's Burgundy and Beaujolais regions, one each in July and August, $1,750.
Prices are based on two people sharing a room and include accommodations, breakfasts and most dinners.
Rentals of one of the company's 10 tandems cost $32 a day extra.
The tours are accompanied by vans.
Though most participants are twosomes, the company will try to team single travelers on request.
Tandem Touring Company, 3131 Endicott Drive, Boulder, Colo. 80303, (303) 499-3178.


Music With Morality
The clarinetist Don Byron's long-awaited first album, "The Tuskegee Experiments," proposes that a work of art should be a work of morality.
The album comes with a political point of view, in the form of an essay written by Mr.
Byron and a poem by the poet Sadiq set to music.
Though Mr.
Byron, for lack of a better description, is called a jazz musician, the album hops nimbly from free improvisation to swinging jazz to a piece by the classical composer Robert Schumann.
Jazz audiences, producers and record companies rarely permit this type of wide expression.


'Swaps' and the Next Great Banking Crisis
To the Editor:
Floyd Norris' column on how the next great banking crisis could result from their dealings in new financial products like interest rate swaps (Market Watch, Feb. 9) was perceptive and timely.
Unfortunately, the article gives the impression that it is merely particular products that pose risks for the world financial system.


UP AND COMING: Darren Gibson; A Dancer, a Teacher and a Role Model, All at 22
The girls all said yes and the boys said no, Darren Gibson says, remembering when recruiters came to P. S. 111 in Queens to audition children for the New Ballet School.
Finally, Mr.
Gibson and a friend talked themselves into trying out for the free program, which was founded by Eliot Feld to give public school students a chance they might not otherwise have to learn the art of classical ballet.
Today, 12 years later, Mr.
Gibson is a star of the Feld Ballets/NY and a protege of Mr.
Feld.
The 22-year-old dancer is not only a glittering performer whom the choreographer likes to challenge with difficult new roles but also a sensitive assistant who helps run rehearsals.
In addition, he serves as a role model for current students at the school.
The first graduate of the New Ballet School to join the company, Mr.
Gibson stood out early for the burnished glow he brought to ballet technique.
He transforms himself on stage from an ordinary-looking young man to a sensuous performer who can seem both exotic and innocent.


Chess
Some of the major tournaments on the circuit are parts of larger chess festivals.
Thus, the Hastings premier tournament in England around New Year's and the Hoogoven Tournament in Wijk-aan-Zee, the Netherlands, held this year from Jan. 9 to 25, are usually accompanied by second-string tournaments that are also strong.
In these cases, the winner of the Hastings "challengers" gains entrance to next year's premier and the Hoogoven "B" winner qualifies for the next "A" tournament.
A typical Hoogoven "A" has almost all grandmaster participants plus a few rising international masters; a representative Hoogoven "B" will have one-third grandmasters and the rest international masters.


Younger Perez Proves He's the Punctual One
One Perez is better than none, but the Yankees are still waiting patiently.
Pascual missed another day in camp; his younger brother, Melido, was on time again.
They certainly are different men.
Pascual Perez, injured for most of the last two seasons, is talkative, flamboyant and unpredictable.
Melido, acquired by the Yankees last month for second baseman Steve Sax, is sedate by comparison, a rock of punctuality and stability.


The Wedded Hiss of Albee Turns Verbal
In Edward Albee's "Marriage Play," a two-character drama filled with questions, the question that crops up most frequently is, "What do you mean?"
It is, understandably, the first utterance out of the mouth of Gillian, a middle-aged wife, when her husband, Jack, returns home early one afternoon and announces point-blank, "I'm leaving you."


Flawed Opinion In Any Tongue,
To the Sports Editor:
I am an American citizen born and raised in France, and I find Richard Sandomir's comments on CBS's TV coverage of the Winter Olympics offensive (TV Sports, Feb. 14).
As a matter of fact, his comments about foreign athletes speaking English border on the ridiculous.
To the contrary, much credit is to be given to most of the athletes whose often broken English added a charming dimension to the telecast.
Some of the finalists, such as Eric Berthon, a gold medalist, indeed spoke impeccable English.
Katarina Witt's command of the English language was outstanding and her delivery far from stilted.
MARION MOSKOW Englewood, N.J.


Making a Difference; Canada's Big Shin-Kicker
In accusing the United States of playing "low-level politics" in a series of recent trade actions against Canada, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney has promised a "shin kicking" campaign to get them reversed.
His chief shin-kicker is Canada's 15th ambassador to the United States, a 52-year-old career foreign service officer named Derek Burney.


Is This Job Necessary?
CRAPSHOOT
Rolling the Dice on the Vice Presidency.
By Jules Witcover.  450 pp.
New York:  Crown Publishers. $25.


Plastic Surgery: A Profession In Need of A Facelift?
"DOC HOLLYWOOD," a comedy-cum-morality play that appeared in theaters last year, pits the seductions of the big city against the virtues of small-town life.
For the prototype of the slick, the soulless and the rich, the scriptwriters picked a plastic surgeon.
Will Michael J. Fox amass a fortune in Los Angeles making the beautiful more beautiful, or become a country doctor in South Carolina?
You can guess the outcome, and also the outrage of many of the country's plastic surgeons, who felt they were being stereotyped.
Most have spent seven years after medical school learning their specialty.
And, they insist, they are not simply catering to vanity.
Seeing themselves as inheritors of a medical tradition that goes back to the battlefields of World War I, some plastic surgeons trek regularly to Mexico or the Philippines to heal the burns and the cleft palates of the poor.
Others work in inner cities.
Still others have pioneered advances in microsurgery or implant technology.


A Garden of Rodin
WHILE waiting for a tour to begin at the Rodin Sculpture Garden at Stanford University in Palo Alto, Calif., I watched a group of visitors photograph one another before Rodin's bronze portal, "The Gates of Hell." One of them had an arm around "Eve," another cozied up to "Adam." Across the garden, a blue jay alighted atop the headless figure of "The Walking Man." No museum officials stepped up to shoo the bird or shush the sightseers.
On the contrary, at this permanent open-air exhibit of 20 sculptures by Rodin, the setting invites touching.
The B. Gerald Cantor Rodin Sculpture Garden was completed in 1985 as an addition to the Stanford University Museum of Art.
Housing about 150 pieces by the French artist, the university has become known as one of the best places in the world to view Rodin's work.
Only the Musee Rodin in Paris has a larger collection.


How Restaurants Can Help the Heart
How nice to live in Bergen County, where some 30 restaurants now offer "heartwise" menu choices along with their regular fare ("Restaurants Enlisted in Heart Diet Campaign," Feb. 9).
The project was developed and encouraged by the Pascack Healthy Heart Program and Pascack Valley Hospital.
Diners who must or want to limit calories, fat, salt and sugar can do so in the participating restaurants.


The Cuban Beat of 'The Mambo Kings'
Months of preparation had gone into the dance sequence being shot in an ornate, abandoned movie theater here last April.
The steamy number -- a flirtation between Cesar Castillo (played by Armand Assante) and Dolores Fuentes (Maruschka Detmers) -- is an important moment in the film "The Mambo Kings."
The slick, precise moves of the mambo must communicate passion yet control.
Dolores is attracted to Cesar but has misgivings about succumbing to him.
The dance perfectly captures their desire, while its stylized formality also expresses her restraint and sense of propriety.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 23, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
42
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
3
1
HEARTBEAT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) A chance meeting of a man and a woman, both successful in television, brings them long-sought happiness.
4
4
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
5
5
TWILIGHT'S CHILD, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) When she becomes the owner of a hotel, a woman finds herself haunted by past heartaches.
6
5
DAZZLE, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $5.99.) The familial, professional and romantic life of a woman who becomes a celebrity photographer.
7
4
FORGIVING, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A woman finds family problems and love when she establishes a newspaper in Dakota Territory.
8
5
ETERNITY, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.50.) A mail-order bride in 19th-century Maine.
9
1
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.99.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
10
1
TEXAS!
SAGE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.99.) A woman and a man find true love while fighting to save her family's business.
11
14
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
12
3
MAGIC HOUR, by Susan Isaacs. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) A detective's romantic and professional lives become entangled.
13
5
THE CAT WHO KNEW A CARDINAL, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran investigates the murder of a despised man.
14
4
VITAL SIGNS, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A physician's quest for fertility brings her horrifying experiences.
15
3
THE SECRET PILGRIM, by John le Carre. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A member of British intelligence recalls his three decades as a spy.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
9
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
2
4
AND THE SEA WILL TELL, by Vincent Bugliosi with Bruce B. Henderson. (Ivy, $5.99.) An enigmatic 1974 murder case involving two American couples on a Pacific atoll.
3
40
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
4
4
CROSSFIRE, by Jim Marrs. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $13.95.) A Dallas journalist presents the case for believing that a conspiracy caused the death of John F. Kennedy.
5
1
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Vintage, $11.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
6
433
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
7 *
32
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
8
14
HIGH TREASON, by Robert J. Groden and Harrison Edward Livingstone. (Berkley, $6.99.) Evidence to suggest that the assassination of John F. Kennedy resulted from a massive conspiracy.
9
118
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
10
17
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, touch, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
28
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
76
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
57
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
25
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
5
11
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1992. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


New &amp; Noteworthy
SOMETHING TO DIE FOR, by James Webb. (Avon, $5.99.) For purely political reasons, a Secretary of Defense schemes with a battle-hungry admiral to convince the President and Congress that a good war is just what America needs.
Written by a former Secretary of the Navy and author of "Fields of Fire," this novel "should push Mr. Webb onto anyone's list of first-class military-political writers," David Murray said in The Book Review last year.
LUCIUS D. CLAY: An American Life, by Jean Edward Smith. (Owl/Holt, $19.95.) As head of the military forces that occupied Germany after World War II, Gen.
Lucius D. Clay used his extraordinary powers as benevolent despot to help shape the vanquished country into the economic power it is today.
In fact, his biographer argues, had it not been for Clay, the United States might have let the Soviet Union take all of Germany.
"Mr. Smith's biography is masterly," Stephen E. Ambrose said here in 1990.
"Mr. Smith provides large sections of his interviews with Clay, mixing them with his own research and analysis quite successfully. . . . I recommend this book without reservation."


South Koreans Express Pent-Up Anger at Japan
Along the narrow streets of Apkujung Dong, a fashionable neighborhood of boutiques, restaurants and night clubs, things Japanese are very in.
Women's baggy dresses, men's short hair cuts and video games all take their cue from Tokyo.
But when some visiting Japanese diners complained noisily the other evening that prices at a Japanese restaurant were higher than at home, the strains underneath the surface flared into the open.


Style Makers; Reed and Melissa Evins, Shoe Designers
Reed Evins remembers playing happily with scraps of leather and discarded sketches on the floor of his Uncle David's workrooms when he was 3 years old.
After graduating from the Rhode Island School of Design, he did the inevitable: joined his uncle's shoe design company.
His sister, Melissa Evins, was not interested in the family shoe business.
After she graduated from Tulane University, she went to work for an advertising company -- until she got a call from her brother.
"You have to come with me," he said.
"I need you."


Life Expectancy Vs. Expectations
To the Editor:


Cut Off From the New Reality
When The New York Times uses the term "operating system," it usually feels obliged to define it.
Other newspapers do the same.
They're not patronizing the readership.
They're just facing facts.
But suppose they felt the same way about "election" or "touchdown"?
"Operating system" is that kind of term.
An operating system is a fundamental item in the world of software.
If you don't know what one is, you're not going to learn on the basis of a single phrase, no matter how artfully crafted.
And how likely are you to grasp the point of the news story when you literally don't know the first thing about the topic?


Food Fight
Considering how picky the French can be about food, it comes as small surprise that Ronald McDonald has finally stepped on someone's toes.
In a new poster meant to help keep those Big Macs moving at its 66 outlets in the Netherlands, McDonald's recently used a photograph of four chefs in a kitchen, one of whom has thoughts of McDonald's floating over his head.
Turns out one of the others in the shot is none other than Paul Bocuse, perhaps France's best known chef.
He filed suit for 15 million francs -- $2.7 million -- and his lawyers began talking settlement with McDonald's last week.
"When I first saw this, I thought it was a vulgar joke," said Mr.
Bocuse, who owns one of only 19 restaurants with three Michelin stars.
"How can I be seen as promoting this tasteless, boneless food?" McDonald's admits the error, and will doubtless come up with some cash, which Mr.
Bocuse says he will use to support his cooking school.
"This way," he said, "McDonald's will be supporting the great traditions of French cooking."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; BUSH PUSHES PLAN TO REVIVE ECONOMY
President Bush took to the airwaves today to generate support for his economic recovery legislation, saying that an alternative Democratic plan would "give you two years of pocket change in exchange for a lifetime of higher taxes."
The President cast his plan, which will be pitted against the Democrats' measure in House votes next week, as a common-sense attack on the recession that would stimulate growth by boosting the homebuilding industry and putting money in consumers' pockets.
He again urged the public to demand that Congress enact a core package of his proposals by March 20, a deadline he set in his State of the Union Message in January.


What's Next?; Contemplating the classics
For some fashion pros, what's coming is already here.
Among the first to catch the approaching wave of classic style are Ines de la Fressange, left, whose new Paris boutique sells only sure, timeless designs, and Connie Darrow, below, a senior vice president at Barneys New York, who's given up maverick dress for luxurious simplicity.
"It was almost subconscious," she says.
"I had to pare down."


Ms. Mellett Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin R. Mellett of London have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kathleen Ann Mellett, to John William Rose, a son of John W. Rose and Arleen G. Rose, both of New Rochelle, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mellett, 27 years old, graduated from Arizona State University and received an associate's degree from the Tobe-Coburn School for Fashion Careers in New York.
She is an administrative assistant at Leverte Associates, an advertising agency for the pharmaceutical industry in South Norwalk, Conn.
Her father is president in London of Coca-Cola Northwest Europe.
Her mother is an antiques dealer in London.


When City Officials Make a Move, Who You Gonna Call?
NO New Yorker is short of opinions, but some New Yorkers' opinions on public policy get asked more often than others'.
To journalists, they are the "usual suspects," people whose expertise, verbosity and often wit make them particularly quotable.
To City Hall, they are an unelected Greek chorus, critiquing every official move.
To readers, they are seldom more than a name and a phrase.
Here are brief profiles of some of the many members of that chorus.
Raymond D. Horton President, Citizens Budget Commission
When Raymond D. Horton talks about New York City's finances, people may not listen, but they can't help hearing.
For more than a decade, this son of a Chevrolet dealer from Sibley, Iowa, has been one of the most vocal critics of the nation's largest municipal budget.
"Over time, we got to feel like, 'Oh God, he's pushing that idea again,' " said Alair A. Townsend, a former deputy mayor who heard many Horton ideas.
But, she added, "He's a smart guy."


This Week: Seeds
As your packets of new seeds arrive, organize a chart that has this information: when each plant should be sown indoors; when your plants should be moved to the cold frame for hardening off (acclimating to the outdoors); when to plant them in the garden, and when to harvest.
Find out the last frost date for spring in your area.
Many plants cannot safely be put out of doors until all danger of frost is past. (In the New York region this date can range from April 20 on Long Island to mid-May upstate.)


Redford Journal; A Woman, a Storefront Library and a Fight for a Better Future
At one end of this West Texas village sits the old Madrid Store, which has served as a window on the rest of the world for many young people, offering them an escape from the heat and the dust and from back-breaking work in the fields.
The shelves are stocked with books instead of blue jeans or canned food because Lucia Rede Madrid decided that "all children deserve books, even if they live in the middle of nowhere."


Playing It Safe With a Balustrade
BESIDES being decorative, a balustrade, that assembly of posts and railings that is part of most staircases, is a safety feature that should be repaired at the first sign of looseness.
If an entire balustrade wobbles, the newel posts probably need tightening.
They are the large vertical posts at the top and bottom of the staircase.


Fair Play for the Middleman
To the Editor:
Regarding "Cutting out the Middlemen" (All About Retailers, Feb. 2), the passing on of broker commissions to a retailer is illegal.
Manufacturers' representatives and brokers are not middlemen and do not add anything to the price of goods.
In fact, reps and brokers help many manufacturers keep their sales expenses lower than they could with a direct sales force.
Subsequently, the consumer benefits.
Wal-Mart's move to eliminate reps and brokers to capture their sales commissions would be illegal as well as unfair to all its competitors.
STEVE MARTON  Edgewater, N.J., Feb. 10


An Evening At the Pops. Lolli, That Is.
In fact, neither performance raised any critical hackles; I happily deferred to the taste of my companions, who were 8 and 4 years old.
The concerts were parts of two series for children presented by Dino Anagnost and the Little Orchestra Society -- Happy Concerts for Young People (ages 6 to 12) and Lollipops for Little Ones (ages 3 to 5).


Suits Pushing Banks To Obey State Laws On Credit Card Fees
Although half the states in the country have laws limiting or banning credit card fees for late payments, for annual renewals and for exceeding credit limits, banks have largely charged the fees anyway.
They argue that they are governed only by the laws in the states where their credit card operations are based -- not where the customers live.
Now, that argument is being challenged in more than a dozen lawsuits in four states.
Their aim is to see that the laws in the states where the customers live are enforced, and more suits are expected.


Sailing Over The Edge
OUTERBRIDGE REACH
By Robert Stone.  409 pp. New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $21.95.


Jerome Weinstein, 63, Real-Estate Developer
Jerome Weinstein, a builder and real-estate developer, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 63 years old and also had a home in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Mr. Weinstein died of complications from a stroke, his family said.


Japanese Didn't Invent Military Sex Industry; Raise Level of Debate
To the Editor:
It's easy to sympathize with James Fallows in "A Plea for Truth-in-Bashing" (Op-Ed, Feb. 10) when he attacks fatuous extremes in the debate about Japan.
But his argument seems disingenuous.
Mr.
Fallows has built a career in part on finding fault with Japanese policy and in some cases, Japanese culture.
He is called a basher or, politely, a "revisionist" and subjected to the type of arguments his article condemns.
Clearly, some challenges to Japan's critics are stupid, but others cannot be dismissed through ridicule of their unenlightened cousins.


Are Gold Medals Tarnishing Ballet?
Yes, but is it sport?
Art is what ballet is about, and yet the talk this time of year is increasingly of medals, gold and otherwise.
Even during the recent Prix de Lausanne, celebrating its 20th anniversary as a prestigious Swiss ballet competition in which young talent is fostered rather than exploited, the dominant images were tinged with Olympics-style hopes, both realized and dashed.


Ellen Porten Has Wedding
Ellen Rachel Porten, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Porten of New York, was married yesterday evening to Douglas Coleman Stern, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan D. R. Stern of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Porten, 29 years old, is a senior manager with Lehman Ark Management Company, a money-management concern in New York.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University.
Her father is the chief investment officer for IBJ Schroder Bank and Trust Company in New York.


Blue Sailors and Other Legendary Names
BLUE SAILORS grow along the roads.
They are often seen flowering with their companion, Queen Anne's lace, in one of the prettiest natural plant combinations that the summer months can provide.
Legend has it that this wild chicory was named blue sailors because a young maiden waited longingly by the roadside for her lover, who sailed away to sea and never returned.
She was so loyal in her waiting that the gods took pity and transformed her into a roadside plant with sailor blue flowers.


Canonizing a Slave: Saint or Uncle Tom?
Pierre Toussaint has been dead 139 years.
But the way he lived his life is now the subject of a heated debate among American Catholics that reveals much about the modern-day church's complicated and sometimes awkward relations with its black parishioners.
For Pierre Toussaint was born, and chose to stay, a slave.
At a time when slaves were rebelling in his native Haiti he was accompanying his owners to New York, where they lost their fortune but not his loyalty.
By day Toussaint the coiffeur would earn money powdering and pomading the heads of New York society.
By night, he would don his crimson uniform and return to wait on his invalid owner, quietly supporting her household.


Blue Sailors and Other Legendary Names
BLUE SAILORS grow along the roads.
They are often seen flowering with their companion, Queen Anne's lace, in one of the prettiest natural plant combinations that the summer months can provide.
Legend has it that this wild chicory was named blue sailors because a young maiden waited longingly by the roadside for her lover, who sailed away to sea and never returned.
She was so loyal in her waiting that the gods took pity and transformed her into a roadside plant with sailor blue flowers.


District Attorney Requests Extensive Records From Dinkins
The Manhattan District Attorney has requested extensive records of Mayor David N. Dinkins's 1989 campaign, law enforcement and campaign officials said yesterday, indicating that the investigation into thefts by his former campaign treasurer has become a broader inquiry.
At the same time, prosecutors have begun questioning current and former campaign officials about the Mayor's disputed transfer of stock to his son, David Jr., people who were present at the questioning said.
Questions about the transfer plagued Mr.
Dinkins in the waning days of his 1989 mayoral campaign. 1989 Campaign Records
On the stock transfer, people who were present at the questioning by the Manhattan District Attorney's investigators said it concentrated on who was in strategy meetings in the final days before the election while Mr.
Dinkins and his advisers wrestled with how to handle allegations about the transfer.


Sunday Menu; A Scrod Recipe That Accepts All Sorts of Substitutes
The secret to making life easy in the kitchen and at the grocery store is to keep an open mind about ingredients.
If some are not readily at hand, then others should be substituted.
Take this particular recipe for Spanish-style scrod as an example.
No new potatoes?
Try other varieties, and peel the skins.
And if scrod or cod are not at the fish market, use another mild-flavored white fish like flounder.


Tenants at a Housing Project Defend Blackburne
It was 25 years ago in the tall brick Tompkins Houses in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, that Laura D. Blackburne began her career as a rookie housing assistant.
In November 1990, at a party there to celebrate her appointment as the city's new Housing Authority chairwoman, she greeted a crowd of almost 1,000 friends and housing project residents with the words, "I'm home."


Joe Juneau


Lawrence B. Hilford, 57, Pioneer In the Marketing of Videocassettes
Lawrence B. Hilford, a pioneer in the videocassette industry, who founded the Orion Home Entertainment Corporation, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 57 years old.
He died after a long battle with lymphoma, his family said.


Social Events
Art Preview at the Armory
Feb. 26 -- The fourth annual art show of the Art Dealers Association will open at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street, with a preview reception giving ticket holders first chance at the wares of 64 dealers from around the country.
The reception benefits the Henry Street Settlement; the show will be open to the general public from Feb. 27 to March 2.
Preview tickets: $500 for admission from 5 to 9 P.M.; $250 from 6 to 9 P.M. and $125 from 7 to 9 P.M.
At the Armory, (212) 472-2960, or from (212) 766-9200.


Rhode Island Scandals Ignite Revolt by Voters
In corporate board rooms, churches and community centers across the nation's smallest state, a citizen revolt is under way.
Rhode Islanders are fighting for a corruption-free state.
Galvanized by a year-old credit union crisis and countless revelations of political corruption, thousands of people are calling for change in Rhode Island through an organization whose name conveys their impatience: "Right Now!"


All Primary Elections Should Allow Independent Candidates
To the Editor:
In "Bush's Choice" (letter, Feb. 6), Barbara Gimbel, secretary of the New York State Republican Family Committee, criticizes President Bush's claim that his market-based health care plan is rooted in support for choice for consumers.
She asserts that conservatives such as the President are inconsistent in being pro-choice on marketplace issues and anti-choice on social issues, such as abortion.
However, the same reasoning would say that liberals are just as inconsistent for being anti-choice on marketplace issues, yet pro-choice on social issues.


Where's New York? Ask the Computer
IT took a long time, but I have finally resigned myself to a couple of things.
I am lousy at math.
I can't play guitar.
And I don't do geography.
The geography thing, for instance.
There was a time that I was heading back from Detroit to New York and had traveled 30 miles before I realized I was on my way to California.
And then there was the time when I was certain I was going the right way on a county road whose number matched the one on the map of Minnesota.


Topics of The Times; Faint Hearts, Fearless Snowdrops
A gardener, who is tired of hearing friends whimper that no good can come of these bland and too comfortable winters, is not seeing any complaints in his snowdrops and crocuses.
His snowdrops have been giving him big bouquets since mid-January and the crocuses started blooming right after the recent passing cold spell.
His friends say they require the rigors of winter to bolster their fortitude and their consciences.
They lament that rigors have been few and far between this year -- wind-chill factors with little bite and snowfalls with no stamina.


No-Win Situation
To the Editor:
Walter Goodman's essay "Beauty and the Broadcast"  [ Jan. 26 ]  shows that he just doesn't get it.


Conflict of Generations


Colorado Klansman Refines Message for the 90's
Tall, handsome and affable, Shawn Slater is being groomed for a future in politics.
He is only 25, but he already enjoys wide name recognition in Colorado, a supporting organization and a message he says is perfect for the 1990's: "Equal rights for all; special privileges for nobody."
Mr.
Slater, who has announced a bid for City Council in this Denver suburb, is the state's head of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan.
"This is only the beginning," he said, sipping a cola in a shopping mall here.
"I hope to be the governor of Colorado someday."


Belts, Lights and Other Aids to Auto Safety
FOR the vast majority of travelers, a vacation still means loading up the car and taking to the highway.
Although there is lots of bad news out there for drivers, there is some good.
Traveling by automobile was safer last year than in 1990, according to National Highway Traffic Safety Administration estimates.
The death rate of 1.9 for each 100 million vehicle miles was the lowest since the Government started keeping records on a mileage basis in 1921.
And if the estimates are borne out as the agency gathers the remaining statistics, the number of highway deaths last year, 41,150, will be the fewest since 1962.
The keepers of data say that vigorous efforts against drunken driving and increasing compliance with seat-belt laws played a role in the decline.
But it was also a year that saw changes in auto safety equipment and deeper research on reducing the death toll from driving.


Whose History Is Bunk?
THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA
By Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. 160 pp. New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $14.95.
THE CHANGING CULTURE OF THE UNIVERSITY
Partisan Review, Volume 58, No. 2 (Spring 1991). 410 pp.
Boston:  Partisan Review Inc. $5.
DEBATING P.C.
The Controversy Over Political Correctness on College Campuses.
Edited by Paul Berman. 338 pp.
New York:  Laurel Books/Dell Publishing Company.
Paper, $8.
THE POLITICS OF LIBERAL EDUCATION
Edited by Darryl J. Gless and Barbara Herrnstein Smith. 305 pp.
Durham, N.C.:  Duke University Press.
Cloth, $34.95.
Paper, $14.95.


Canned Goods Spoil Coverage
To the Sports Editor:
The CBS coverage of the Albertville Olympics is just further proof that CBS stands for "Can't Broadcast Sports."


Boston Fans Take Pride In Cheering 'Home Team'
In a town where sports bars seem as common as convenience stores, the battle for the bronze between the United States and Czechoslovakia drew sparse crowds today as many fans abandoned their "home team" after it lost its shot at bringing home the gold.
But there was still pride in the United States hockey squad, even after it failed to take the bronze medal.
After all, 15 of the United States team members played for colleges in the Boston area.
Six of the Olympic players came from Boston University, another six came from Boston College and three were from Harvard..
Goalie Ray LeBlanc began his career in Fitchburg, just 40 miles northwest of here.


Behind the New Faces
THE FASHION WORLD is currently fixated on a few reigning beauties so ubiquitous they're known simply by their first names.
But there is a new generation of gorgeous young women right behind them.
And since fashion, like a vampire, feasts on fresh blood, they're starting to attract attention.
For the most part, the new beauties are still known by their pictures, not their names.
There's the blonde in the latest Guess ad, the one pretending she's Marilyn Monroe.
And the lace-clad knockout in a recent issue of Vogue, posed by Helmut Newton in a Monte Carlo cardiothoracic hospital.
The photographer Steven Meisel, a talent scout, found seven promising glamour girls with perfectly arched eyebrows, and put them on the cover of Italian Vogue last November.


Second Chance


Making a Difference; A Risk-Taking Executive Approaches a Payoff
Boake A. Sells is close to winning a big gamble -- that he could pick up the pieces of a failed 1980's leveraged buyout and restore its financial health.
Mr.
Sells is chairman and chief executive of Revco D.S.
Inc., which began the last decade as the country's largest drugstore chain, built up from one store opened in Detroit in 1956 by Sidney Dworkin.
In 1986, in the fashion of the time, Mr.
Dworkin led Revco into a $1.29 billion buyout, but the buyout began to falter when Revco's cash flow failed to cover interest payments.
Less than a year later, Mr.
Dworkin was out and Mr.
Sells in.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Georgia; Carter Welcomes Tsongas to Plains
Former President Jimmy Carter met with Paul E. Tsongas here today and, though not endorsing the former Massachusetts Senator, said Mr.
Tsongas's honesty and message of economic truth could appeal to Georgia voters.
Mr.
Carter emphasized that he would not endorse any Democratic candidate in advance of the March 3 primary here, and he stressed two of Mr.
Tsongas's favorite themes: no tax cut for the middle class and telling the American voters the truth.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
A direct relationship between women's health and the accessibility of safe and humane abortion services is acknowledged by public-health experts throughout the world.
All that is necessary to end the so-called abortion war is a loud, firm statement from national medical leaders proclaiming abortion to be a necessary medical service that must be available to all women.
The silence of our medical leadership is prolonging the battle.
JANE E. HODGSON, M.D.
St. Paul


County Assessing Its New Housing Powers
THE lack of affordable housing, long perceived as one of the county's most persistent and intractable problems, is receiving fresh attention in the halls of county government these days in light of a re-interpretation of the State Constitution that gives counties the power to condemn land and finance low-cost housing.
Since the ruling earlier this month by the office of the State Attorney General, Robert Abrams, county leaders have been working on a plan to use their new powers, one that they hope municipalities fiercely opposed to low-income housing will endorse.
Although the ruling gives the county the power to condemn property for housing, Westchester officials have repeatedly said that they would not use that power to override local zoning laws.


Trips for Travelers in a Hurry
TRAVELERS prone to sudden bouts of wanderlust face a problem: because they want to leave town quickly, they usually must scramble for leftover reservations by calling travel agents, airlines, hotels or package tour operators.
If they are lucky, they may be able to book their desired itinerary at a price that has been discounted by a company eager to unload tickets with little time before departure.
But some travelers may not find the reservation they want, forcing them to pay extra or change their schedule or destination.


Focus: California; Pension Funds for One-Family Houses
THE recent decision by the California Public Employees Retirement System to invest $375 million in the construction of one-family houses within the state is being welcomed by builders here, who have been squeezed by a severe shortage of financing.
The first large-scale investment by a public pension fund in residential construction is being watched closely by builders across the country, who think it could spur similar moves by public pension funds in other states and open up a potentially huge source of new financing.


'Pearls' After Dark
Black is still best. Here, hot styles at cool prices


More Than a Footnote
To the Editor:
I thought William H. McNeill omniscient until I read, in his review of "The End of History and the Last Man" by Francis Fukuyama (Jan. 26), the reference to "a French intellectual named Alexandre Kojeve (to me, entirely unknown)."


'Seize the Moment'
To the Editor:
Your handling of a recent review distressed me, and it should you.


World Markets; Staying With the Hong Kong Play
The Hong Kong stock market is on a roll.
After a spectacular rise of more than 40 percent in 1991, Hong Kong has jumped 11 percent since the beginning of the year.
Along the way it has passed 17 new highs for the blue-chip Hang Seng index.


Composer Awaits Debut at a Temple
THE composer contemplated the coming performance of his music an event that for most living composers is as rare as, say, a snowstorm during global warming.
The work was quite listenable, not at all avant-garde, he said reassuringly.
Even the most musically conservative of Reform Jews should feel a nostalgic twinge, he said, as they listen to his "Sabbath Eve Service," to be presented Friday evening during regular services here at the Westchester Reform Temple.
Lionel Semiatin, at 74 still penning string quartets and other compositions at his White Plains home, said he looked forward to hearing his "Sabbath Eve Service," especially because the work for organ and voice had been performed only a few times since its completion in 1960.


Manhattanville Presents Its Winning Violinist
PRIZE-WINNING soloists and ensembles dominate the concert scene this week.
On Wednesday at 8 P.M., the Manhattanville College Community Orchestra gives its first free concert of the spring semester on the Purchase campus, and the music director, Elliot Magaziner, introduces Judith Spokes, winner of the college's 1992 Concerto Competition.


The U.S.O.C. Applauds the Troops
Senior officials of the United States Olympic Committee today pronounced themselves satisfied with their team's overall performance at the Albertville Olympics, even if their criteria for measuring it has changed in the last two years.
At the same time, they sounded a familiar refrain: that with more facilities and greater public support American athletes could have won more than the 11 medals they captured here and would have higher totals in the Winter Games ahead -- 1994 in Lillehammer, Norway, and 1998 in Nagano, Japan -- as well as in the Summer Olympics this year in Barcelona, Spain, and four years hence in Atlanta.


Seville's Extravaganza, Expo '92
FOR centuries, visitors have climbed La Giralda to view Seville from atop the tower of its massive early Gothic cathedral.
And for centuries it has been a view of palaces, parks and myriad churches set against a background of parched Andalusian countryside and the legendary Guadalquivir River.
But today, if you stand 250 feet above the ground and look northwest, that view has been transformed by the sudden appearance of a strange new city, a city of open-air theaters, ultramodern buildings, artificial lakes, shaded avenues, designer bridges and cable cars that covers 540 acres of the long-verdant Island of Cartuja.


Protect Us From Government Protection
To the Editor:
The theme running through "Deep-Freeze the Regulatory Freeze" (Forum, Feb. 2) was summed up by one phrase indicating that Americans generally "want government to protect them" from the ills of the world.
Decades of government "protecting" Americans got the United States into its current mess.
Government-subsidized education, health care and housing has encouraged costs to zoom out of control and quality to decline in many areas.
The auto industry is an example of how government involvement can turn what was once a bastion of free enterprise into a virtual public utility.
For the sake of our great free and democratic society, don't advocate increasing ever-stifling regulation.
DOUGLASS C. LYON  Rochester, N.Y., Feb. 4


Q and A
Property Restrictions Question: After buying a house on Staten Island, I discovered, as did my neighbors, that the property we own is part of a designated open space.
This means that as homeowners we cannot put up fences or outdoor decks or install pools.
No one was aware of these restrictions and we feel that we should have been told about the designation before we bought.
Is there anything we can do about this? . . .
Attilio Figliozzi, Staten Island


The Executive Computer; Double-Hard-Disk Capacity, Through Software
A fundamental law of the computing universe is that no matter how much disk space you buy, it is not enough.
Despite the fact that hard disk capacity has relentlessly increased in the last decade, this law remains unchallenged.
The first hard disks were five megabytes; now they come in sizes up to one gigabyte, which is 1,000 megabytes.
A disk that size could store 1,250 copies of "Moby Dick."


Susan M. Park Is Wed on L.I.
Dr.
Susan Marie Park, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Choong Geun Park of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Samuel Huntington Borden, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Borden Jr. of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
James W. Adelmann, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the Garden City Community Church.
The bride, 26 years old, is a resident in internal medicine at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
She graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and received a medical degree from Albany Medical College, as did her husband.
Her father is a psychiatrist with the New York State Forensic Service in Westchester County.
Her mother, Chang Duk Park, is a pharmacist at Creedmore Psychiatric Center in Queens Village, Queens.


Susan Trost to Wed
May wedding plans have been announced for Susan LaRhea Trost, a daughter of Vincent Trost of Potomac, Md., and Marlene Metcalfe of Somerset, N.J., and Timothy Edward Vallely, a son of Grace Olwyn Vallely of Norton, Cleveland, England, and the late John Vallely.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Trost, 26 years old, is a senior consultant with Andersen Consulting and Mr.
Vallely, 28, is a systems consultant with I.B.M., both in London.


INSIDE
Earthbound, Till Next Fall
After a month of setbacks, the crew of the Earthwinds balloon abandoned until next November any attempt to set off on a 22,000-mile flight around the world.
Page 16.
Battles Taper Off in Lebanon
Relative calm returned to southern Lebanon as the two main groups of Shiite Muslim fighters agreed to halt rocket attacks against Israel.
Page 6.
An Arms Race in Rio
As high-powered weapons flow in from Miami, drug gangs in Rio de Janeiro seem to be better armed than the police officers.
Page 3.
A German Lingua Franca?
As Germany reasserts its political strength, its envoys are seeking to restore German to its position as a major diplomatic language.
Page 7.
The New Look of the Klan
Inspired by David Duke's example, the Ku Klux Klan is recruiting savvy, clean-cut-looking disciples conveying a sanitized message.
Page 16.
Norwegian Wins Slalom
Finn Christian Jagge of Norway upset Alberto Tomba of Italy for the slalom gold medal.
Czechoslovakia defeated the United States hockey team 6 to 1 to capture the bronze medal.
SportsSunday, section 8.
News Summary, Page 2 Obituaries, Page 34 Weather, Page 35 Radio, Late TV, Page 51


Miss Harmon To Wed in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Harmon Jr. of Far Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Yvonne Harmon, to James Patrick Gaffney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Gaffney of New Canaan, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Harmon, 28 years old, is a real-estate saleswoman with Ted White &amp; Company in New York and a graduate of Southern Methodist University.
Her father is a partner at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, a New York investment banking concern.


Confirmation Is Reassuring
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein deserves thanks for having the courage -- for that is what it seems to take -- to write that LP's are superior in sound to compact disks  [ "At Last Gasp, LP Remains the Champ," Feb. 9 ] .


Women in the News
THE GIRLS IN THE BALCONY
Women, Men, and The New York Times.
By Nan Robertson.
Illustrated. 274 pp.
New York: Random House. $22.


Thus Spake Helmut Kohl: Auf Deutsch
When German diplomats appear at international conferences these days, they can no longer be counted on to deliver speeches in English or French, as has long been their custom.
Now they prefer to speak in German.
Their break with postwar practice is part of a new Government-directed campaign to return German to its former position as a major international language.


REAL-ESTATE FIRMS ACCUSED OF BIAS
The State Attorney General has accused three Nassau County real-estate brokerages of violating state and Federal housing discrimination laws by steering black customers to homes in minority neighborhoods.
The brokerages included LaRosa Realty of Westbury, which had been found guilty of the same discriminatory practices in 1986 and was under a Federal court order to stop.


Summer Games Tickets Are Going Quickly
Demand for tickets to the 1992 Summer Olympic Games in Barcelona has been very high, and those hoping to attend should place their orders soon, according to the exclusive United States ticket agent for the Games.
There are very few seats left for the most popular events, including the opening and closing ceremonies, said the company, Olson-Travelworld.


Jerome Weinstein, 63, Real-Estate Developer
Jerome Weinstein, a builder and real-estate developer, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 63 years old and also had a home in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Mr. Weinstein died of complications from a stroke, his family said.


Get Out Your Handkerchiefs
The state of many current American films is enough to make audiences cry, which is precisely the effect intended.
Strong emotions are back in style, as are tumultuous romances, family quarrels, tearful reunions and the kinds of scenery and costume that give such moments added decorative interest.
There's an old-fashioned name for this set of cinematic conventions, and it's applicable even when the subject is career meltdown rather than star-crossed love.
These are what were once called women's pictures, though much of the weeping is now about professional problems -- and the main characters sometimes happen to be men.
Women's pictures have been out of fashion for so long that the present resurgence -- with films like "Fried Green Tomatoes," "The Prince of Tides," "For the Boys," "Shining Through," "Hard Promises," "This Is My Life" and even "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle" and the remake of "Father of the Bride" -- comes as a genuine surprise.
It can be ascribed in part to a widespread softening of 80's winner-take-all attitudes, with women playing more kindly, less cutthroat characters than their aggressive male forebears.
There is also Hollywood's recession-minded realization that women may be worth more as ticket buyers in the audience than as bubble-brained temptresses on screen.


Playing It Safe With a Balustrade
BESIDES being decorative, a balustrade, that assembly of posts and railings that is part of most staircases, is a safety feature that should be repaired at the first sign of looseness.
If an entire balustrade wobbles, the newel posts probably need tightening.
They are the large vertical posts at the top and bottom of the staircase.


A la Carte; A Tripartitte Collaboration for Fanciers of Game
THREE well-known chefs are collaborating on what may be the ultimate gourmet extravaganza of the year on Long Island.
A few months ago, Starr Boggs suggested to Guy Reuge of Mirabelle in St.
James and Michael Meehan of the Mill River Inn in Oyster Bay that they join forces to cook a special game dinner.
The two chefs enthusiastically agreed.


Japanese Didn't Invent Military Sex Industry
To the Editor:
Lest your report on karayuki-san, "comfort women," forced into prostitution by the Japanese army in Korea (news article, Jan. 27) be used to fuel the fires of Japan-bashing, let us be clear that the military exploitation of women through rape and prostitution has a long history in every military society, including ours.
A former Navy chaplain who served in Japan during the post-World War II occupation told me that when he protested the American base commander's efforts to set up prostitution centers using Japanese women, he was reassigned stateside.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about warehouse stores misstated the location of the Price Club.
It is in Lake Grove.


James W. Wagner, 70, Director of Spelling Bee
James W. Wagner, longtime director of the National Spelling Bee, died last Sunday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Cincinnati, his hometown.
He was 70 years old.
His family said the cause of death was prostate cancer.


ISLAM CHALLENGES PAKISTAN ECONOMY
Efforts by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to steer Pakistan's economy away from state planning and toward free markets and privatization are being threatened by Islamic fundamentalism.
Last year, the country's highest Islamic court declared that all forms of interest, or "riba," on bank loans, deposits, international borrowing and lending were "repugnant" to Islam and ruled that Pakistan must abolish such interest by June.
Ignored at the time, the ruling is now being viewed with increasing alarm by more moderate members of the Government and by foreign lenders and investors.


SYRIA'S GAME
Judith Miller's article "Syria's Game: Put On a Western Face" (Jan. 26) makes a reference to the country's Jewish community, noting that Jews, even more than other Syrians, are "closely monitored" and that human rights groups have found that "Jews are unable to travel outside the country as a family." But the situation of Syria's Jews is far more serious than this.
In fact, the Syrian Jewish community is being held hostage.
Amnesty International reports that the 4,000 Jews of Syria are victims of intimidation, imprisonment and torture.
Syrian police control the purchase, sale and transfer of Jewish property.
Jews are forbidden to emigrate, and those traveling outside Syria must leave behind family members and large financial deposits as security for their return.


A July Wedding For Miss Moran
Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Moran of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Sarah Moran, to Dean Cameron Barry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Barry of Aurora, Ohio.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Moran, 33 years old, is a research associate at the Zivic Group, an executive recruiting firm in San Francisco.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
Her father is the president of Hampton Hall, a promotions and marketing firm in New York.


Public &amp; Private; Getting a Second Wind
Desiree Washington says somebody offered to pay her off.
She told this to Barbara Walters on national television Friday night.
Ms.
Washington is sweet and earnest, the kind of young woman who would have shown up at a train station with a small valise, big eyes and high hopes in old-fashioned movie musicals if old-fashioned movie musicals ever cast black people.
She is the woman who was raped by Mike Tyson.
She says she was offered a million dollars to drop the charges, which is an awful lot of money to offer someone if you think they're lying.
The matter's under investigation, so she wouldn't name names.
But she says the people who offered her money also offered her names to say, magic words to explain to the public why she was loath to go forward.


Psychotherapy Can Help Depressions
I wish to address some of the issues raised in a letter by Dr.
Lehrman.
As a resident in psychiatric training at Hillside Hospital-Long Island Jewish Medical Center, I can safely say that our program emphasizes our being vigilant to the needs of our patients and always considering the risks and benefits of treatment, whether it be medication, or the type of psychotherapy that is employed.
The science (and the art) of psychiatry is knowing the various treatments which are available and tailoring them to what the patient can tolerate while at the same time trying to maximize the benefit.
Medications have unquestionably become an important tool in American psychiatry today; however pharmacotherapy cannot work effectively unless there is a good therapeutic alliance between patient and physician.
DAVID KLEIN, M.D.
Glen Oaks


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about Bangladesh's halting recovery from a cyclone last year misstated the estimated death toll.
It is 100,000, not 140,000.


Memo to the Democrats
George Bush's alpha and omega, the public opinion polls, are now signaling the most potentially important opening of the 1992 campaign: the foreign policy President is vulnerable on foreign policy.
By late January, shortly after he limped back from Japan, polls showed that less than half of Americans approved of the way he was handling foreign policy -- the first time his approval rating had dropped below 50 percent in that vital category, the essence of his Presidential persona.
And yet the Democrats still don't seem to understand the political salience of confronting Bush on foreign issues.
They either defer to his looming image as foreign policy wise man or render easy moral judgments about, say, his China policy.
Both approaches play into the game plan of the Republicans, who will inevitably try to cast the Democratic nominee as weak and soft -- a "carping little liberal," as Bush has said -- incapable of a sustained and vigorous defense of the national interest.


Style Makers; Stephen Milne, Steuben Glass Dealer
Stephen Milne was an interior designer with a Manhattan firm when he went shopping at an antique show two years ago.
Suddenly he did a double-take; he walked over to a display of vividly colored, iridescent glass vases and, in a sense, to a new life.
"I listened to my gut instinct and bought the pieces," he said.
And not long after that, he was in his own business.


TOP CONGRESSMAN SEEKS DEEPER CUTS IN MILITARY BUDGET
In the first detailed Congressional response to the Bush Administration's military plans for the rest of the decade, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee is proposing to cut $48 billion to $121 billion more than the White House by 1997, reductions he says would still leave the United States a superpower.
Representative Les Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat who is chairman of the House military panel, said in an interview that within two years he might be willing to consider cutting the Navy's force of 12 aircraft carriers to 8, cutting the Air Force's 15 tactical air wings roughly in half and slashing the Navy fleet from its current level of 450 ships to 290.


A Man, a Woman and a Voyeur
THE MAN SITTING IN THE CORRIDOR
By Marguerite Duras.
Translated by Barbara Bray. 46 pp.
New York:  North Star Line/Publishers Group West.
Paper, $5.95.


The First Law of Polish Politics: Nobody Trusts Politicians
POLAND'S political leaders acknowledge a crucial failing.
As the country enters a possibly decisive third year of wrenching economic changes, the politicians have yet to persuade the public that the eventual gains are worth the considerable pain.
What is more, the country's most prominent politicians say they have scarcely even tried to counter the confusion and fear aroused by the continuing effort to rip apart the centrally planned system and replace it with free-market capitalism.
"We have no professional political class," lamented Bronislaw Geremek, a medieval historian and senior member of the Democratic Union, the largest party in Parliament.
"In all democratic countries, politicians know they have to obtain political support, that it's not enough simply to be right. After two and a half years of experience, we know this, but we still don't know how to do it."


The Taxpayer as Shareholder
To the Editor:
Politicians, pension fund directors and corporate shareholders -- heeding the advice of Graef Crystal -- now urge that the incomes of chief executives be linked to stock performance so the fortunes of top management would rise and fall with those of the shareholders ("The Gadfly C.E.O.'s Want to Swat").
Democratic Senator Carl Levin of Michigan urges that shareholders be allowed to cast a vote on executive pay scales.


UKRAINE IS GETTING CANADIAN CREDITS
Canada has become the first Western country to provide a line of credit to Ukraine, after receiving assurances that the former Soviet republic is now prepared to accept its share of Soviet debts, Canadian Government officials said Friday.
Canada, where more than 1 million people of Ukrainian background form a potent political force in a country of 26 million, was the first Western country to recognize the independence of Ukraine after a referendum last December.


U.S. Navy's Periscopes Still Follow Soviet Fleet
Americans may no longer consider Russia an enemy, but the United States Navy remains reluctant to pull back from the Arctic waters that have long been a home to the former Soviet Fleet.
Last week, in a reminder of how closely the Navy still patrols the Russian coastline, an American nuclear-powered submarine and a Russian one collided in the Barents Sea little more than a dozen miles from the Russian naval bases on the Kola Peninsula.
And next month, in maneuvers planned more than a year before the collapse of the Soviet Union, scores of NATO ships will exercise in the Norwegian Sea.


Miss Brumberger Weds R. E. Hutton
Andrea Ilyse Brumberger, the daughter of Carol and Alan Brumberger of New York, was married yesterday to Richard Ernest Hutton, a son of Irene Hutton of Ossining, N.Y., and Hubert Hutton of New York.
Rabbi David M. Posner officiated at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Hutton graduated from Duke University and is pursuing a master's degree in teaching at American University.
Her father, formerly a managing director of Drexel Burnham Lambert in New York, is an investor.
Her mother is a business development director for the Knoll Group, a furniture maker in New York.


The Middle East; Why Sounds of Gunfire Haven't Drowned Out Peace Talks
NO matter how much his influence is challenged at home, President Bush can take heart that he is still the principal force to reckon with in the Middle East.
How else, other than his Administration's persuasive powers and occasional veiled threats, can one explain the fact that the troubled Middle East peace talks will, barring last-minute changes, resume in Washington tomorrow?
In another era, i.e., when there were still two superpowers, it would hardly have been reasonable to expect that Israel, Lebanon, Syria, Jordan and the Palestinians would even contemplate going to a peace table after the brutal events of the last week.
Consider the list in chronological order:


Allison Winikoff to Wed J. S. Ziefert
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley A. Winikoff of Pittsburgh have announced the engagement of their daughter Allison Grace Winikoff to Jon Samuel Ziefert, a son of Mrs.
Harriet G. Ziefert of Maplewood, N.J., and the late Dr.
William C. Ziefert.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Winikoff, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from Barnard College and is working toward a master's degree in urban planning at Columbia University.
Her father is a senior partner with the Pittsburgh law firm of Jones, Gregg, Creehan &amp; Gerace.
Her mother is a child psychologist with a private practice in Pittsburgh.


Wooing the Real Stars Behind the Hit Series
The recruits are coming in with such glossy resumes, such impressive stats, that the coach wants to team them up and send them out to play.
Jeff Sagansky, who as president of CBS Entertainment fills the role of programming coach for that network, has been formulating a plan for the next fall television season.
He would like to assemble a second night of what he calls "high quality" series, akin to what the network now has on Mondays, when one strong show follows another: "Evening Shade" to "Major Dad" to "Murphy Brown" to "Designing Women" to "Northern Exposure."


A Crowded Schedule That Pleases
SOMETIMES concerts crowd the schedule in bewildering profusion, and this week is a excellent case in point.
Finally at 3 today there are the Grossman brothers -- Jerry, first cellist of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, and Orin, head of the fine arts department at Fairfield University -- playing Bach, Beethoven, Debussy and Albeniz at the Regina A. Quick Center for the Arts at the university (254-4010).
At 7 tonight the Chamber Music Society of Westport has chosen Beethoven, Telemann and Stravinsky for its concert at the Westport Arts Center (661-4667).
At 8 Schubert's song cycle "Die Winterreise," will be performed by the baritone Frederic Moses and the pianist Raphael Rochet in a faculty recital at the Hartt School of Music in West Hartford (243-4228).


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
America Eats Out By John Mariani William Morrow &amp; Company. 288 pages. $25.


Eunice Johnson To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Coit Johnson 2d of New York have announced the engagement of their niece, Eunice Clapp Johnson, to Vincent J. Panetta Jr., the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Panetta.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Johnson, 25 years old, is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart H. Johnson Jr.
She graduated from Harvard University and is a news producer for the Monitor Channel, a cable station operated by the Christian Science Monitor Publishing Society in Boston.


SPEAK FOR YOURSELF
In "Speak for Yourself" (Hers, Jan. 26), Susan Faludi said precisely what I've always somewhat guiltily felt: "Couldn't they just read what I wrote?" And she provides an important analysis of the forces that keep women from speaking comfortably in public.
But I feel it's wrong to imply that we can't be political, we can't be genuine feminists, we can't make connection with others, unless we engage in public speaking.
I feel most connected, most my feminist self, when I am trying to find the words.
That doesn't happen to me when I speak, only when I write.


Marnie Abbott Is Wed in Ohio
Marnie Louise Abbott and Jeffrey Alexis Kaufman were married last evening at the Queen City Club in Cincinnati.
Rabbi Solomon Greenberg and the Rev.
Paul Tropf, a Methodist minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Kaufman, 26 years old, graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, as did the bridegroom.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Wallace Abbott of Cincinnati.
Her father retired as a senior vice president of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company in Cincinnati.


Ms. Hensel to Wed Craig Beardsley
Dr. and Mrs.
John C. Hensel of Summit, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ann-Elizabeth McKay Hensel, to Craig Russell Beardsley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sterling L. Beardsley of Harrington Park, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hensel, 28 years old, graduated from New York University and is a special-events and training coordinator at Lehman Brothers, the New York investment banking firm.
She is a former member of the United States national figure skating team.
Her father, who recently retired as a physicist with Bell Telephone Laboratories, is a distinguished professor of physics at the New Jersey Institute of Technology.


Dance Floor Wins in a Fast Close
Arazi was home in France today basking in the splendor of his standing as the world's premier 3-year-old colt and the heavy favorite to win the Kentucky Derby on May 2.
Dance Floor, meanwhile, came out of the West, ran away from Pistols and Roses and other stars of the East, swept the Fountain of Youth Stakes by 4 1/2 lengths and sent an early message to Arazi that nothing in life is a sure thing.
This was one giant stride on the road to Louisville, nothing more.
But it provided the first major shakeout of talent of the Triple Crown season and a clear victory for D. Wayne Lukas, the leading trainer in the country for the last nine years, and for Lewis Burrell Sr., the father of the rap star Hammer and the master of the Oaktown Stable, which is also the home of the star filly Lite Light.


Three Savory Vegetable Casseroles as Winter Fare
WINTER is an excellent season for baking vegetable casseroles.
These savory dishes, which combine more than one vegetable and are sometimes layered or seasoned with cheese, are hardy enough to be the focus of a weekend supper.
A form of starch -- noodles or rice, for example -- is all that is needed alongside.
Once such casseroles have been assembled they can be set aside, then baked just before serving.
Or they can be baked and reheated, if that is more convenient.
And while the baking is time consuming, requiring up to two-and-a-half hours, it demands no particular attention from the cook.


POSTINGS: The Landlord: Columbia; Esthetic Brownstone Repairs
There was not enough money to replace the crumbling and falling brownstone on two modest five-story apartment buildings at the northeast corner of Broadway and 109th Street.
And the landlord, Columbia University, was not keen to repeat the esthetic mistakes it made in the 1980's when it stripped masonry ornament from the facades of many of its buildings after a Barnard College freshman was killed by a piece of falling stone.
So the architectural firm of Wank Adams Slavin Associates of Manhattan came up with an unusual solution: Encase the brownstone elements -- pediments, window surrounds, sills and sculptured band courses -- with aluminum panels up to 8 inches deep, painted a sandstone color to match the brickwork.
These are meant to preserve some of the shadow and depth of the original design, as well as to give a cleaner look to a badly deteriorated facade.


Data Bank/February 23, 1992


LEAVE, BUT PAY US, POLES TELL RUSSIA
The Berlin wall has long since been pulverized and the Soviet Union is history.
But Warsaw and Moscow are locked in a bitter quarrel over the withdrawal of the estimated 35,000 Soviet Army troops remaining in Poland.
Although Russia has promised to pull out most of the soldiers by the end of this year, the two sides have confronted each other with astronomical bills for services rendered and the Poles have added claims for environmental damages.
The impasse has brought bitter resentments on the Polish side and awkward feelings about the end of empire among the proud Soviet Army officers.


Making a Difference; Writing Rules for Corporate America
As reporters peppered the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission with questions after an important speech last Tuesday, Linda C. Quinn blended almost anonymously into the crowd and took notes.
But instead of jotting down the answers, as the others were, Miss Quinn was recording the questions about the new proposals by the chairman, Richard C. Breeden, to reduce the regulatory burden on small businesses.


The Mood As G.M. Plant Starts Up Again
RETURNING to his job last week at the General Motors plant on Beekman Avenue here, Pat Martelli was in an optimistic mood.
The 2.5-million-square-foot assembly plant where he has worked for more than 13 years had just reopened after a two-week shutdown, the second since the middle of December.
Although another furlough is scheduled for early March, Mr.
Martelli said he believed the worst of the recession and hard times for the automaker were over and that he and his fellow workers need not fear for their jobs.


HOW TO END THE ABORTION WAR
As a physician for more than 50 years in family practice, I have frequently been confronted with the anguish of desperate women who at all costs would terminate pregnancy.
How can one not feel for them?
Certainly, there is an immorality in destroying a life.
Yet, at the moment of fusion of sperm and egg, it is just a tiny chemical mass of RNA and DNA about to start the long journey from mitosis to maturity.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Players; Tsongas's Top Aide: An Admirer Since '72
In 1970, Dennis Kanin, who was the political coordinator for the Vietnam War Moratorium in Massachusetts, heard that a city council candidate in Lowell, Mass., Paul E. Tsongas, was opposed to the war.
When the two crossed paths again, in 1972, and Mr.
Tsongas was running for Middlesex County commissioner, Mr.
Kanin recalled: "I went up and asked him who he was supporting for President, and he gave me a straight and immediate answer: John V. Lindsay. That is typical of him. I appreciated the answer and voted for him."


Ms. Feingold To Wed in July
Andrea Susan Feingold, a bond analyst in Boston, and Michael Lee Jacobs, a senior analyst at American Express Travel Related Services Company in New York, are engaged to be married in July.
Ms.
Feingold, 28 years old, graduated cum laude from Columbia University and works at Colonial Management Company, a Boston-based mutual fund.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark J. Feingold of West Newton, Mass.
Her father is a principal in the Needham, Mass., accounting firm of Coles &amp; Bodoin.
Her mother, Bette W. Feingold, teaches second grade at Old Post Road School in Walpole, Mass.


Eleanor Tittmann Has Wedding
Eleanor Tittmann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barclay Tittmann of Concord, Mass., was married yesterday to Owen Wood Andrews, a son of Emily C. Wood of Philadelphia and Avery D. Andrews of Washington.
The Rev.
Anna H. Caskey performed an Episcopal ceremony at the Concord Academy Chapel.
Mrs.
Andrews, 34 years old, is a research manager in Boston with Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the New York accounting firm.
She graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in accounting from Georgetown University.
Her father is an investment adviser with Gardner &amp; Preston Moss Inc., an investment management firm in Boston.
Her mother, Lucy Tittmann, is a landscape architect in Cambridge, Mass.


Miss Ottman Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Ottman of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Charlene Dee Ottman to Alain Jean-Pierre Rigal, a son of Annette Rigal Bilsby of Neuilly-sur-Seine, France, and the late Francois Rigal.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Ottman, 37 years old, graduated cum laude from Finch College and is a vice president of Holsted Marketing Inc., a New York marketing management company.
Her father retired as the president and chief executive of Ottman &amp; Company, a meat purveyor in New York.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries; Two Weeks of Campaigning That May Decide Presidency
Presidential campaign strategists in both parties are anxiously surveying the two dozen states that hold primaries or caucuses between now and March 10 to pick out the next key battlegrounds: the richest opportunities to accumulate delegates, demonstrate strength and embarrass a foe.
For Republicans, Georgia, with its primary on March 3, is already emerging as the showdown state, where the conservative commentator Patrick J. Buchanan hopes to demonstrate that his insurgent challenge to President Bush can catch fire in the South, which holds a round of primaries one week later.


A Southwestern Favorite Retains Glory
NEARLY two years ago, the Coyote Grill opened in Island Park and set Long Island's palates and perceptions afire with its innovative Southwestern food and whimsical iconoclastic decor.
An adobe hacienda, outlined in purple neon and sporting a water view, is one of a kind.
As appealing and startling as the decor was, the food inspired the most resounding applause.
Initially, the chef, Brendan Walsh, who had made a name for himself and his trend-setting Southwestern creations at Arizona 206 in Manhattan, was the culinary drawing card.


Affairs to Remember
Wine drinking goes back at least 6,000 years.
Wine writing probably began a year or two later.
The Sumerians wrote about wine; so did the Babylonians and the Egyptians.
Then came Homer and his wine-dark sea.
In our own epoch, the monks kept vineyard and vintage records at Cluny and the Clos de Vougeot, Pepys praised the "Ho-Bryan" he drank at the Pontac Head in London and Jefferson, in Paris, reported on his trips to Bordeaux and Burgundy.
But bookkeeping, diary entries and an ambassador's reports are one thing.
Celebrating wine as a cultural phenomenon is something else.
The British seem to have invented it, along with Port and Sherry.
Wine journalism is an even younger enterprise.


Talking: Roof Gardens; Nurture All Plans Cautiously
OUTDOOR recreational space has always been special to New Yorkers because it is in such limited supply.
Little wonder, then, that one of the most popular workshops at the November annual conference of the Council of New York Cooperatives was "Landscaping and Roof Gardens." Nearly 40 people packed a room to hear panelists and particpants talk about designing or redesigning roof gardens.
Most agreed that such projects are justified because they enhance residents' lives and add to the marketability of their apartments.


POSTINGS: Home Sales Seminar; The Full-Disclosure Law
On Jan. 1, a new disclosure law took effect in New York State requiring real estate agents and brokers to state explicitly at the outset of most negotiations whether they work for the buyer, seller, landlord or tenant.
On Wednesday, the William B. May Company, a brokerage firm, will sponsor a seminar to explain the complex law, its requirements and the potential consequences of not complying.
"It's for anyone planning to be involved in a real estate transaction," said Roberta L. Faulstick, a senior vice president of the company.


Airport Art
To the Editor: "Stuck at the Airport? Then Look at the Art" (Dec. 15), was especially interesting to me for two reasons.
The first is that I think it does take a listing to get people to look at the art around them, and thus by remarking it, to make sure that it is not destroyed or removed or damaged.
Because a fine glass mural over the doorways at the Madison airport was casually destroyed when the airport was being enlarged, I undertook to catalogue all Madison's outdoor sculpture in a booklet "A Common Joy: Outdoor Art in Madison" (1991).
People tell me they look at things they never really noticed before.


Alfred Lunt, Method Actor
To the Editor:
David Richards's comparisons of the current production of "The Visit" and the Lunts' memorable incarnation  [ "When Little Girls Grow Into Dragon Ladies," Feb. 2 ]  reminded me of a backstage story about Alfred Lunt that illustrates why his performances seared indelible images into the memory of everybody lucky enough to have seen them.


Abroad at Home; Where Bush Is Right
President Bush is under such attack these days for lacking principle -- for wavering on issues -- that he is entitled to credit for one area in which he has made a principled commitment and stuck to it.
That is his policy for peace between Israel and the Arabs.
No one can doubt that Mr.
Bush cares about the issue, deeply and personally.
He has worked at it from the beginning of his Presidency.
He seized the moment after the Persian Gulf war to press a new proposal that actually got the parties to the negotiating table.
And in all this he has taken considerable political risk.


Many Miles to Go Before the Next Event
Call these the Spectator Games, too.
There has never been a Winter Olympics spread over more than 600 square miles.
In the bus, out of the bus.
No, you can't get there by car.
Only official business.
Walk?
With inches to spare between you and the village 1,000 feet below?


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Larchmont, N.Y. 418,300
28 Mayhew Avenue
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 76-year-old Tudor; fireplace, formal dining room, breakfast room, family room, deck; taxes $8,678.
North Salem, N.Y. 427,000
Post Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old colonial; deck, eat-in kitchen, screened porch, family room; taxes $10,440.
Waccabuc, N.Y. 445,600
17 Hunt Farm Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, formal dining room, family room, deck, Jacuzzi; taxes not yet assessed.
Cheshire, Conn. 142,000
196 Blacks Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 34-year-old ranch; new kitchen and bath, eat-in kitchen, family room, 0.75 acre; taxes $1,929.
East Haddam, Conn. 139,900
Old Colchester Turnpike
2-bedroom, 1-bath, new Cape Cod; formal dining room, unfinished basement, 1 acre; taxes not yet determined.
Guilford, Conn. 117,000  24 Shore Drive
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old contemporary; greenhouse dining area, private beach association, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,296.
OTHER AREAS Levittown, L.I. 113,500
276 Gardeners Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, aluminum siding; taxes $2,800.
Williston Park, L.I. 157,000
40 Prospect Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, den, 2-car garage; taxes $2,500.
Freehold, N.J. 162,000
53 Hidden Stream Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; c/a, 2-car garage, fireplace, family room; taxes $3,400.


CAMPUS LIFE: Syracuse; Language Project Joins Veterans With Students
A Citizen Solider Project has led Syracuse University students to help Vietnam War veterans talk about their wartime experiences, to teach honors classes and to write a nationally prominent paper.
Prof.
Peter Goldman started the project after reading a United States Government text that called on Central American nationals to engage in terrorism against their governments.


Parallel Threads


Nazli Iqbal to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Mohammad Iqbal of Calgary, Alberta, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nazli Tabassum Iqbal, to Dr.
Humayun Javaid Chaudhry, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hukam Dad Chaudhry of Brooklyn.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Iqbal, who is 26, is a graduate of the University of Calgary, where she is a research assistant in oncology.
Dr.
Chaudhry, also 26, graduated from New York University and received a doctor of osteopathy degree from the New York College of Osteopathic Medicine.
He is an intern at St.
Barnabas Hospital in the Bronx.


Wendy Zimmerman and Richard Camerik Wed
Wendy Anne Zimmerman, a daughter of Phyllis Zimmerman of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Martin Zimmerman, was married yesterday evening to Richard Sloan Camerik, a son of Anita and Gene Camerik of Plantation, Fla.
Rabbi Arnold Turetsky performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Camerik, 25 years old, is an account supervisor at the Rowland Company, a public relations concern in New York.
She graduated from Union College.


As Rates Rise, Stocks May Be Vulnerable
The collapse of short-term interest rates has been the biggest factor in the changing investment outlook over the past year.
With Treasury bill rates below 4 percent, billions have flowed out of banks and into stocks and bonds.
But now there are signs that the fall in short-term rates is ending.
The rate on three-month Treasury bills has climbed to 3.92 percent from 3.72 percentin the past two weeks.


Born With a Trunk
The African elephant -- the world's largest land mammal and one of nature's most majestic creatures -- has become the object of a massive international effort to save an endangered species from extinction.
In the last decade alone, poaching for ivory in Africa has reduced the elephant population from 1.3 million to about 600,000 -- a kill rate that would eliminate the elephant from most of that continent in the next 20 years.
And for what?
The manufacture of ornamental carvings and Asian signature stamps.
In THE AFRICAN ELEPHANT: Last Days of Eden (Voyageur, $27.95), Boyd Norton, who has spent more than 20 years photographing wild animals, gives us a magnificent pictorial essay.
He shows elephants in their African habitat, playing in a dust bath and affectionately entwining trunks and tusks.
His shots depict a wrinkled old matriarch leading a family gathering to a water hole, a calf nestling at its mother's side or trying to stand on wobbly legs, and a bull with ears flapping as he charges.
With these and other images not so pretty (bloodied carcasses, pyramids of tusks waiting to be sold), the book makes a strong case for the preservation of these magnificent animals, as well as other species that share their environs.
More than a dozen countries in 1989 banned the importing of ivory; we can now hope that the African elephant will be protected.


Multi Multi-
MULTI- IS A PREfix that has a special place in my heart.
As a cub reporter for a column in the old New York Herald Tribune, I interviewed the Italian movie actress Gina Lollobrigida, then making her first splash in "Pane, Amore e Fantasia." I was then short of all three -- bread, love and dreams -- and treasured a picture she gave me, which shows her posing in revealing rags and pouting defiantly, and is inscribed "
Molto simpatico
."
Multi-
, like the Italian
molto
, is from the Latin
multus
, "much"; Miss Lollobrigida was offering fans much affection.
Stuck on the beginning of nouns, like
multivitamin
, it means "more than one, several"; on the beginning of adjectives, like
multifaceted
,
multi-
means "many."


In Westport, 'Dr. Cook's Garden'
JUST when it was feared that the Boston Post Road Stage Company would shut down in mid-season, the theater won a reprieve by raising more than half of the $25,000 needed for the next show to go on.
Given such a precarious state, one would expect a company to come up with, say, a conservative comedy or a nice little musical: a crowd-pleaser, something safe, inoffensive.
Not an obscure melodrama with intimations of morality and an emphasis on mortality.
And not a play that mystified critics 25 years ago and flopped in a week.
And certainly not one that, once announced, would provoke anonymous phone callers threatening to bomb the theater, as the producers have reported.


Life Collage


Books of The Times; Why Fang and Claw Are Underfoot
The Covenant of the Wild  Why Animals Chose Domestication  By Stephen Budiansky  190 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $18.
The enemy that Stephen Budiansky lines up in the gunsight of this passionate, indignant book is the advocate of animal rights who argues that it is wrong to kill beasts, wrong to eat them, wrong to use them for scientific research, wrong even to subordinate them to humans as workers or pets.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS When Styles Clash: Time Warner's Rupture -- A special report; A Divorce in the Executive Suite
They were corporate America's odd couple.
On the one hand, there was the steely, guarded N. J. Nicholas Jr., the epitome of the button-down culture of Henry Luce's Time Inc.
A man legendary for his severity, it was said he would turn in his mother if she exaggerated on her expense account.
On the other, there was the suave, garrulous Steven J. Ross, the embodiment of the freewheeling and prodigal style of Warner Communications Inc., the company he built over three decades from a funeral-parlor-cum-rent-a-car business into a global entertainment company.


Boulez and Stein Stage 'Pelleas' With Modern Nuances in Wales
As it approaches its 50th birthday in 1996, the Welsh National Opera is recognized as one of the finest operatic ensembles in Europe.
It is a particularly striking example of the enrichment of regional culture that has been a feature of operatic life in Western Europe in recent decades.
But the triumphant new production of Debussy's "Pelleas et Melisande" represents something larger than even this proud company usually boasts: a remarkable international collaboration, a significant aftershock from Daniel Barenboim's departure from the Bastille Opera in 1989 and, not least, a sign that "Pelleas" may mean more now than it did earlier in the century.
The first night, on Friday, attracted 80 critics from all over the United Kingdom and the Continent, with twice that number scheduled for subsequent performances, and counted as the most prestigious, intensely awaited event of the British operatic season.


Modest Goals for an Energy Bill
With the elimination of major provisions aimed at oil conservation and production, the energy bill passed by the Senate last week focuses mostly on greater efficiency and competition in the electric utility industry, though experts expect its impact to be modest.
The National Energy Strategy, outlined by President Bush during the Persian Gulf war, originally focused heavily on oil issues.
But by the time the bill cleared the Senate, both main oil provisions -- to allow drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and to require cars to use less gasoline -- were stripped because they threatened to sink the whole package.


Dance in Review
Gabriel Masson and Garry Reigenborn
St. Mark's Church
Gabriel Masson and Garry Reigenborn evoked states of expectation and trepidation in the program they presented under the auspices of the Danspace Project on Friday night.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
After stuggling through much of the 1980's to survive Japanese competition, Harley-Davidson and hundreds of American companies are challenging Japanese manufacturers at home.  [ Page A1. ]  Although they conformed to the rules of what many say is required to succeed in Japan, the Haagen-Dazs and Borden ice cream operations there have widely different histories.  [ D4. ]
With consumer electronics sales in a slump and technological shifts complicating the computer chip industry, several of Japan's electronics giants are predicting sharply lower profits.  [ D1. ]


Beach Volleyball Makes Millionaires
Who could have imagined that there was a million dollars to be made in volleyball, let alone beach volleyball?
Not RANDY STOKLOS when he joined the circuit in 1981 and $100,000 was total prize money.
Career earnings for Stoklos topped $1 million when he won the $75,000 Miller Lite Open in Hawaii recently, the first event of the 1992 season for the A.V.P./Miller Lite Tour.


Behind Foreclosed Doors; Troubled Family Strives to Stay Together
Since Theodore Stemberg's death in 1979, the lives of his three emotionally disabled children have gone mostly untended, and, like the trees in the overgrown garden behind their house, now weave inextricably one into the other.
The home Mr.
Stemberg built to shelter Rita, 64 years old, Teddy, 59, and Karen, 38, has been seized by Suffolk County for back taxes.
Potential buyers wander over the property and through its doors now, terrifying the Stembergs with the prospect that for the first time in their lives, they may be separated.


Vietnam Stance Says a Lot About Candidates
To the Editor:
I must take issue with the views of Prof.
Michael Delli Carpini quoted in "When 'the War' Means Vietnam, Politics Gets Muddy" (The Week in Review, Feb. 9): "We as a country have not really come to grips with how we feel about people who did not support the war," and "when something brings it up, we don't really have a set of rules or even a language to evaluate it."
The concept of personal honor provides me with rules and language for evaluating responses to the Vietnam War.
Those I consider honorable:


Farmers Worried as a Chemical Friend Turns Foe
In a state that produces half the country's winter fruits and vegetables, one of the biggest cucumber farmers in Florida has no crop.
"We have 1,150 acres that's not worth a damn to anybody," said the farmer, Ronald Moye, who used to produce bushel after bushel of perfectly shaped cucumbers, cabbages, melons and peppers on his farm here in south central Florida.


C.I.A. Seeks West Virginia Move Because That's Where Money Is
The Central Intelligence Agency's proposal to build an office complex in West Virginia resulted directly from the influence a powerful West Virginia Senator has on winning financing for the compound, an internal agency investigation has concluded.
An examination of agency relocation plans by the agency's inspector general found that C.I.A. officials chose a site in West Virginia over less expensive locations in Virginia because Senator Robert C. Byrd, a West Virginia Democrat who heads the Senate Appropriations Committee, could help the agency receive money for the project.


In Sporting News, the Box Scores Lose
The Sporting News is making a change that might be considered the media equivalent of installing lights in Wrigley Field.
The sports weekly, which began running baseball box scores in 1886, its first year of publication, will eliminate them in favor of additional coverage of baseball, football, basketball and hockey.


Foreign Affairs
Because of a mechanical error, Friday's column incorrectly described Pentagon spending cuts proposed by the Democratic candidates.
Their budgets in five years would be one-third less than the current Pentagon budget, not one-third the current budget.


Mets View a Dazzling Prospect
Julian Vasquez, for all the fractured English and cultural confusion that complicated his first couple of seasons in the minors, always communicated with a language that needed no interpretation: pure, fluent fastball.
The Mets listened and fought hard not to let it drown out what their hearts were telling them: Wait.
Let Vasquez's personal development match his fastball's maturity.
Don't let Vasquez get ahead of himself.


James Scileppi, 93, Federal Prosecutor And L.I. Developer
James G. Scileppi, who was a Federal prosecutor in New York City, a suburban developer on Long Island and a champion horseman, died on Thursday at Holy Cross Hospital in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 93 years old and lived in Fort Lauderdale.
He died of heart failure after suffering a broken hip and stroke, his family said.


San Diego Newspaper Adjusts To Merger
After the walls separating the news rooms of the competing San Diego Union and Tribune recently came down, literally, the staffs of the papers stared across the expanse at one another.
"It was as if we were afraid of moving to the other side, like a border guard might shoot us," said Elizabeth Douglass, a Tribune financial writer.


Accounts
*
Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., New York, has retained the U. S. Army account, with estimated billings of $57 million, which it has had since 1987.
The decision followed a regularly mandated review that also included Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, and Ayer Inc., New York. *
Hartmarx Retail Group, Chicago, to Partners &amp; Shevack, New York, for its $4 million national account.
The agency has handled another Hartmarx division, Kuppenheimer Men's Clothiers, which was merged last month with Hartmarx Specialty Stores to form the retail group.
The account includes the Kuppenheimer, Wallach's, Baskin and Field Brothers chains.


Corrections
An obituary in some editions yesterday about Lawrence Hilford, a pioneer in the videocassette industry, misstated the date of his death.
He died on Friday.
The obituary is reprinted today on page B10.


New Drive For Funds By D'Amato
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said today that he was almost ready to begin a new fund-raising drive to pay off more than $400,000 in legal bills for his defense in the Senate on charges of ethical misconduct.
"The fact is I'm not a Rockefeller and I can't sit down and write a check," the Senator said in an interview from his re-election compaign's volunteer headquarters in Oceanside, L.I.
"I can't afford to personally pay it, so I have to depend on the generosity of others."


CHINA IS SOFTENING ITS ECONOMIC LINE
In a strong sign of shifting political winds in China, the official press is abruptly attacking the hard-line attitudes it espoused for the last two years and has instead started to call on the nation to emphasize economic growth and even adopt useful elements of capitalism.
The pirouette was reflected in a front-page essay today in People's Daily, which in the past carried mostly dour warnings against Western subversion.
Today's article, headlined "Opening up to the world and using capitalism," was the boldest in a monthlong flurry of signals that change-minded leaders may be gaining the upper hand over ideologues.


Beer Shipments Off 2.3% in 1991
Domestic beer shipments in 1991 fell 2.3 percent from 1990, to 190.5 million barrels, a decline that is expected to intensify the industry's fight for market share, according to an industry newsletter publisher.
"Total shipments for the industry were down in 1991," said Jerry Steinman, publisher of Beer Marketer's Insights of West Nyack, N.Y.
"People are drinking less beer, and there was an increase in the excise tax."


Rome Journal; Politics Are Turning Volatile: Enter a Mussolini
Alessandra Mussolini says she realized that it was time to shed history's burden ever since her grandmother visited her in a dream and told her not to worry about her lineage.
And so, when Italians vote in April in parliamentary elections billed by some as a watershed, Ms.
Mussolini, a 29-year-old TV and movie actress and physician in training, will run for office on the neo-Fascist ticket, reviving a political dynasty that withered in the bud when her grandfather, Benito Mussolini, perished along with his mistress, Claretta Petacci, at the end of World War II, while his wife, Rachele, survived.


Athletes Increase Liquid Assets
The 1992 Winter Olympics may have ended yesterday, but we have not heard the last of speed skater BONNIE BLAIR and figure skater KRISTI YAMAGUCHI who, among other things, will advise us to drink water in future months.
Evian, one of more than 40 firms that are official Olympic sponsors, signed Blair and Yamaguchi in advance on the good chance they would be gold-medal winners at Albertville.
It came to pass for both, and now these two athletes will tour the United States extolling the merits of Evian water in maintaining a healthy life style.


Essay; Welcome, Gorby!
Warner's Man of the Decade, Mikhail Gorbachev, has begun a monthly column in Italy's La Stampa that is being distributed outside Europe by New York Times Syndication Sales.
On behalf of Russ, Flora, Scotty, Abe, Anna, Tony, Les and all the Op-Ed gang: Welcome, Gorby!


Market Place; Some Big Profits In Junkiest Bonds
FOR a quick profit, buy bonds from companies that can't pay their bills.
If that sounds absurd, then you are not with the current spirit of Wall Street.
Profits are accumulating for investors in defaulted bonds as the prices of such securities are rapidly bid up.


Lincoln Fueled the Railroad Era's Engine
To the Editor:
The discovery of new Lincoln documents offers fascinating new information about Lincoln the lawyer, but any idea of Lincoln the "hick" lawyer was demolished long ago ("Under the Dust, a New Luster for A. Lincoln, Esq.," news article, Feb. 9).
Lincoln promoted the railroads in, for instance, the Effie Afton case, in which he defended a company against the owners of a steamboat that had collided with one of the railroad's bridges.


Is Seattle Major League? Film at 11
It is major league baseball's owners who must decide whether or not to approve Nintendo's $100 million-plus offer to purchase the Seattle Mariners.
But it is Seattle that really must make the ultimate decision: whether it has the wherewithal and the will to save the franchise for the Pacific Northwest.
Guaranteed, the first is the more intriguing drama for Americans.
Should baseball let Japanese interests, or any other non-North American interests, for that matter, buy a part of the American pastime?
It is an emotional question being played out against a larger, more volatile issue as baseball remains an unwitting and unwilling player in the current United States-Japan trade imbroglio.


One American Victory Playing by Japan's Rules
If ever there were two American companies that conformed to the rules that many say are required to succeed in the tough Japanese market they were Haagen-Dazs and Borden ice cream.
They found strong local partners, pursued a clear niche in the market and labored to build an image of quality.
The results?
Today the once-dominant Borden is struggling to hold on to its share of the premium ice cream market after a messy divorce from its Japanese partner, while Haagen Dazs is expanding rapidly.


For the Homeless, Practicality
All the raucous shouting about how and where to house the homeless can now stop.
The commission Mayor David Dinkins appointed to sort through this tense tangle of problems has met his charge brilliantly, laying out a practical program for New York City -- and principles that can guide every community.
If Mr.
Dinkins can now implement the recommendations of his Commission on the Homeless with the same authority, he could finally make City Hall's response intelligent and effective.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: South; Support for Clinton Appears Firm in Home Base
Mildred Bryson, who sells fruit from the back of her truck in the nearby town of Social Circle, is not an expert on politics, but she can sense a politician she likes, and she likes Bill Clinton.
"I don't think his character is a problem," she said.
"He seems like a good man to me. He doesn't brag like some of the other candidates."


Round and Round At the Garden
Kenya's MOSES KIPTANUI and NOUREDDINE MORCELI of Algeria broke world indoor track records last week just in time for their coming duel at Madison Square Garden.
At a meet in Seville, Spain, on Thursday, Kiptanui ran 3,000 meters faster than anyone ever had under a roof, 7 minutes 37.21 seconds.
On Saturday, in Birmingham, England, he set a record for 1,000 meters, 2 minutes 15.26 seconds, to go with his 1,500 meter indoor world record.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.


Olympic Medal Winners


CHRONICLE
"The Ladies Who Lunch," a group of women including LESLEY STAHL, COKIE ROBERTS, NINA TOTENBERG, ELLEN GOODMAN, GAIL SHEEHY and DOTTY LYNCH, have been meeting for lunch every month in Washington for 15 years.
So when PATRICIA O'BRIEN's first novel, "The Candidate's Wife," was published last week by Simon &amp; Schuster, they did the sisterly thing: they joined forces to plan parties for her in New York and Washington.
The guest lists they assembled were a veritable "Who's Who" of the media and politics.
Last week in New York, for example, DAN RATHER, MIKE WALLACE, MORTIMER ZUCKERMAN, CARL BERNSTEIN, CALVIN TRILLIN, KATI MARTON and PEGGY NOONAN were among the 80 guests who gathered in Ms.
Stahl's apartment to toast Ms.
O'Brien, a former political reporter for the Knight-Ridder newspapers and press secretary for MICHAEL DUKAKIS.


Student Slain As a Robbery Fails in Bronx
In a quiet courtyard in the Bronx Saturday night, a German exchange student's adventure in New York City came to an abrupt end with a fatal knife wound to the chest.
The student, Stefan Groppel, was killed by a would-be robber who did not give him a chance to resist, the police said.
A second man had grabbed Mr.
Groppel's girlfriend seconds earlier and had tried to rob her as the couple walked to a party at a nearby apartment.


Blackburne Steps Down From the M.T.A.'s Board
Laura D. Blackburne, who resigned under fire as chairwoman of New York City's Housing Authority on Saturday, has also resigned as a board member of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, where her spending habits have also come under criticism.
Ms.
Blackburne's lawyer, Linda Imes, said yesterday that her client had submitted her letter of resignation to M.T.A. chairman Peter E. Stangl on Saturday.
Ms.
Imes declined to give Ms.
Blackburne's reasons for leaving the board.


Shiite Guerrillas Starting Pullout From Villages in South Lebanon
Lebanese Shiite Muslim guerrillas began to withdraw from southern Lebanon today after they agreed on Saturday to end attacks against Israel.
An estimated 200 fighters from the Party of God and Amal, the two main Shiite factions, were seen leaving the villages of Kafra and Yater in 50 vehicles heading north, signaling the end of a week of artillery and rocket fire into Israel.
The intense fighting began after the Israelis ambushed and killed Sheik Abbas Musawi, leader of the pro-Iranian Party of God, a week ago.


Rangers Don't Fall Through the Cracks
When National Hockey League executives meet with the representatives of the Players Association in New York this week, they might add an item to the negotiation agenda for the next Collective Bargaining Agreement: the work conditions at Madison Square Garden.
Last night, they weren't very good.
A chronic problem of ice quality reached a new low as the game was delayed many times for repairs of several holes and cracks.
The mending added about 30 minutes to the playing time.
The problem overshadowed everything else except, perhaps, for the winning goal.


INSIDE
At Top of Time Warner, A Clash of Personalities
They were a corporate odd couple: N. J. Nicholas Jr., from buttoned-down Time Inc., and Steven J. Ross, of freewheeling Warner Communications.
In the wings was Mr.
Nicholas's archrival, Gerald M. Levin, who now moves to the forefront.
Page D1.
Accord in Talks on Haiti
Haiti's exiled President and legislative leaders reached agreement that may lead to a restoration of democratic government.
Page A3.
United Way Chief Under Fire
The nation's largest charity network began an internal inquiry as its president faced accusations over spending and management.
Page A12.
The Mrazek Juggernaut?
You still may not recognize the name, but the Long Island Congressman is making progress in his low-budget campaign for Senate.
Page B1.


Brooklyn Businesses Are Aiding Academy
While arts organizations throughout the country struggle to find ways to replace revenues lost in government cutbacks, a group of corporations in Brooklyn will announce today the establishment of a fund to contribute a total of $1.5 million over three years to the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The announcement of the Metrotech Downtown Fund is to be made by Robert B. Catell, the president of Brooklyn Union Gas, at a lunch attended by Brooklyn community leaders and Mayor David N. Dinkins on the first day of his temporary moving of City Hall to Brooklyn.


Corrections
A front-page article on Saturday about the withdrawal of Israeli forces from villages in southern Lebanon after a brief raid misstated the rank of an Israeli general, Yitzhak Mordechai.
He is a major general, not a brigadier general.


CS First Boston Has a Gain Of $215 Million for the Year
CS First Boston Inc. said yesterday that it earned $215 million last year, largely on the strength of Wall Street's big year in trading and underwriting.
The profits marked a striking turnaround from 1990, when the firm lost $500 million from a series of loans that went sour and required a huge cash infusion from its parent, CS Holdings, which is controlled by the Swiss banking giant Credit Suisse.


The Winter Olympics Come to a Close


Barr Has Surgery on Wrist
Dave Barr, the Devils' forward, had surgery on his right wrist yesterday for a severed tendon and damaged artery.
The operation at New York Medical Center was performed by Dr.
Charles Melone and the injury is expected to keep Barr out for at least three weeks.


From Sap to Syrup: a Primer


American Business Starts A Counterattack in Japan
After spending much of the 1980's struggling to survive against its Japanese competitors, Harley-Davidson Inc. has joined hundreds of American companies in doing something that would have seemed unthinkable a decade ago: it is challenging the Japanese manufacturers that almost put it out of business by revving up its sales on their home territory.
Following an increasingly familiar pattern, the motorcycle maker has acquired the Japanese company that distributed its products, so that Harley can take a stronger hand in expanding its sales network.
It has beefed up its staff and it is concluding a deal to market a line of clothing to the Japanese who, despite growing disillusionment with the United States, still have a romantic attraction for the kind of muscular American image the Harley-Davidson name still evokes.


Regional Chief Gets McCann's No. 2 Spot
McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York has named John J. Dooner Jr. to become its No. 2 executive at the relatively tender age of 43.
Mr.
Dooner will assume the presidency of the giant agency from Robert L. James, who remains chairman and chief executive, and will also take the additional, new title of chief operating officer.
"I've had a great run and a lot of luck," Mr.
Dooner said.
He added that he would continue as president of McCann-Erickson North America, one of McCann-Erickson Worldwide's four operating regions, though at some point he would probably turn over that post to someone else.
Mr.
Dooner's advertising career began 22 years ago at Grey Advertising Inc.
He joined McCann-Erickson in 1984.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Tsongas Economic Plan Suggests Few Sacrifices
Paul E. Tsongas, who won the Democratic primary in New Hampshire with a campaign that emphasized personal sacrifice to revive the economy, is actually quite vague about the ingredients of the bitter medicine he would prescribe.
As he campaigned across New Hampshire, Mr.
Tsongas, a former senator from Massachusetts, managed to distinguish himself from the other candidates of both parties, who promised tax cuts for families or popular new public works projects, or both, and who stressed mainly painless solutions to the economic problems in the state and the nation.


Changes in Canada May Convince Quebec to Stay
Haltingly and with many barriers yet to surmount, Canada appears to be moving toward a consensus on constitutional changes that would keep Quebec, the largest geographically and the second most populous of the nation's 10 provinces, within the 125-year-old confederation.
Helping the process along are widely published scenarios showing that a breakup would severely worsen economic conditions, not only in Quebec but in English-speaking Canada.


Longer School Day Won't Improve Education
To the Editor:
Here we go again.
Another "new" idea proposed by New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez: to extend the school day, as well as the school year, to solve the city's failing educational system (news article, Feb. 10).
Comparing one aspect of our educational system, the time spent in school, with that of Japan, Germany, Korea and Israel makes it easy to ignore the real reason they produce better educated students.


Model Athlete Chooses Role Model
GEA JOHNSON, whose first name is pronounced Gee-AH, is all of these: an athlete with Olympic potential; a tall, blonde model who does television commercials; a recent Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Arizona State University; the wife of a pro football player; "a mom's girl" by her own description and somewhat of a newcomer to Los Angeles, who moves around the city clutching a road map.
Johnson is also fortunate.
A chance acquaintance with a coach at U.C.L.A., ART VENEGAS, brought her to the U.C.L.A. track at Westwood by invitation.
She works out daily there with one of the world's great athletes, JACKIE JOYNER-KERSEE.


L. B. Hilford, 57, A Pioneer in Sales Of Videocassettes
Lawrence B. Hilford, a pioneer in the videocassette industry, who founded the Orion Home Entertainment Corporation, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 57 years old.
He died after a long battle with lymphoma, his family said.


Vietnam Stance Says a Lot About Candidates; Clinton's Principle
To the Editor:
Gov.
Bill Clinton's anguished letter to his Reserve Officer Training Corps director, written 22 years ago (news article, Feb. 13), reminds us of a time of pain and torment for thousands of young Americans.
Even those who lived through those years subject to the same pressures as young Bill Clinton may prefer not to remember the terrible moral and practical choices his generation faced.
Many have forgotten -- or never knew -- that the system of "draft deferments" was consciously designed to encourage young men into careers and occupational tracks, and not coincidentally to defuse antimilitary sentiment by making the articulate middle class safe from the draft.
The publication in 1967 of the famous "Channeling" memo by Gen.
Lew Hershey, the Selective Service director, made college students aware of their intimate involvement in the prosecution of the war through complicity in the draft deferment system.


Taking Part in a Winter Sport on a Summer-Like Day


United Way Awaits Inquiry On Its President's Practices
The United Way of America, the nation's largest charity network, is conducting an internal investigation after its president was accused of lavish spending and free-wheeling management practices.
The accusations have caused a few of the network's larger members to delay a decision on paying dues until the inquiry is completed on April 2.


San Francisco Journal; Shaky Edifice Sits Atop A Neighborhood Crisis
From the deck of his Telegraph Hill apartment, with its bridge-to-bridge views, Michael Freedman has spent countless happy hours watching the ships pass, the moon rise, the gulls wheel across the sky and the bay turn from slate blue to milky gray.
Nourished by the beauty spread before him, Mr.
Freedman and the other four tenants at 22-30 Alta Street counted themselves blessed to be perched on this sandstone cliff in an enchanted aerie in a city beloved for its steep hills and wide vistas.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BLACKBURNE RESIGNS FROM M.T.A. BOARD
Laura D. Blackburne, who resigned under fire as chairwoman of New York City's Housing Authority on Saturday, has also quit as a member of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority board, where her spending habits had also come under criticism.
Ms.
Blackburne's lawyer declined to give her client's reasons for leaving the 17-member board she has served since 1985.
Her proposed successor has been waiting in the wings for over a year.
B3.
SCANDALS THAT HIT MAYOR'S SORE POINTS
Any mayor might have been duped by the financial behavior that culminated in a guilty plea by David N. Dinkins's campaign finance chairman two weeks ago and in the resignation under fire of his Housing Authority chairwoman over the weekend.
But the scandals transcend the inevitable human failings that torment every administration because they revive two issues from which Mr.
Dinkins seems unable to escape: lapses in personal finances and questions of race.
News analysis, B3.
YES, HE'S BROOKLYN'S MAYOR, TOO
Mayor Dinkins is set to move into his transplanted office at in Brooklyn Borough Hall, in a week-long attempt to get closer to a borough that sometimes feels far from the city's halls of power in Manhattan.
It was probably inevitable that the move has presented his aides with some logistical problems -- along with skepticism from the people he hopes to meet.
B3.
FINDING THE MUNICIPAL NERVE CENTER
With the Dinkins administration moving the "nerve center" of city government to Brooklyn this week, the question arises: Where has the nerve center been up to now?
Metro Matters, B2.
TWO HOUSE PARTIES END IN GUNFIRE
The host at a Brooklyn party turned away a group of teen-age boys after frisking them for guns.
The boys retaliated by firing through the door, wounding two girls at the Canarsie apartment.
And in Flatbush, a 15-year-old boy was killed and another grazed when gunfire erupted outside a birthday party as 100 young people spilled out on the streets to go home.
B2.
CARDINAL DENOUNCES RACISM IN CHURCH
Speaking on the last full weekend of Black History Month, John Cardinal O'Connor delivered a homily that amounted to a chastisement of all white Roman Catholics, including himself.
He told an almost entirely white congregation at St.
Patrick's Cathedral that he was disappointed to see empty pews "on the one Sunday I'd like to have the greatest attendance," and then delivered a bitter message about racism among churchgoers, black and white.
B3.
Rocks are thrown at bus carrying yeshiva students in Brooklyn.
B2.
REGION  GOVERNING THE PINELANDS
A 10-year policy agenda for governing the million-acre preserve drawn up by the New Jersey Pinelands Commission includes enough nods toward the concerns of builders, farmers and quarry operators to worry some environmentalists that profits may win out over preservation in the state's premiere nature reserve.
It is the first full-scale review of the Pinelands' plan since rules to limit development and regulate industry in the preserve were adopted in 1981.
B5.
D'AMATO SEEKS TO PAY LEGAL BILLS
Sen.
Alfonse M. D'Amato plans to begin a fund-raising drive to pay off more than $400,000 in legal bills for his defense in the Senate on charges of ethical misconduct.
He said he cannot afford the bill himself, and cannot spare his regular campaign money because he faces a tough fight for re-election.
"I can't afford to personally pay it, so I have to depend on the generosity of others," he said.
The Senator has already sold more than 200 tickets to a $1,000-a-plate fund-raiser tonight in New York City.
B5.
NO COMMUTER TRAIN IS A MODEL TRAIN
There were no tiny commuter cars at the 18th Annual Spring Train Meet in Old Greenwich (51 mintutes by express from Grand Central, 59 on the local).
People there already spend enough time on the way to and from work.
"I don't think of these trains as commuter trains," said one man who spends 500 hours each year commuting, "and if I did, I probably wouldn't collect them." Old Greenwich Journal, B5.
The Traffic Map B4


Giant-Killer Notre Dame Is Eyeing N.C.A.A. Berth
When Notre Dame fans started shouting "N-C-A-A, N-C-A-A" near the end of the Irish's stunning 84-71 upset of U.C.L.A. on Saturday in South Bend, Ind., it may have seemed a bit premature.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament doesn't have a lot of openings for teams with .500 records.
But with six games to go, and very few quality independent teams left to choose from, it may have been a more plausable chant than it seems on face value.


Review/Television; Ambitious if Dim Lawyer, And Chaos in the Cockpit
Now that CBS is finished brandishing the 1992 Winter Olympics as a ratings club, the other commercial networks are hauling out what they evidently consider their top programming weapons to salvage what's left of the month.
NBC is going with soapy melodrama in "Grass Roots," a four-hour movie being shown at 9 P.M. today and tomorrow.
This evening at 9 ABC goes for the disaster market in "Crash Landing: The Rescue of Flight 232." If CBS's "Murphy Brown" thinks a bit of worrying might be in order, forget it.
Spinning off a 1983 mini-series titled "Chiefs" and also adapted from a Stuart Woods novel, "Grass Roots" continues the story of the Lee family of Georgia through the earnest but rather dim character of Will Lee, played by Corbin Bernsen ("L.A. Law"), who seems to be becoming a specialist in dimness.
When Will's boss, one of Washington's most powerful senators, has a stroke, the ambitious lawyer decides to run for the seat, even though he is embroiled in a sticky court case defending a white man (James Wilder) accused of raping and killing a black woman.
Complicating matters further, Will is having a secret affair with Kate Rule (Mel Harris), who works for the Central Intelligence Agency.


Review/Music; A Two-Fisted Pianist Who Bridged Legacies
James P. Johnson didn't just want to be remembered as the father of stride piano, the two-fisted style that transformed ragtime into jazz and turned the piano into an orchestra.
While he was playing the blues or writing Broadway shows, he also composed orchestral works with such titles as "American Symphonic Suite." Like other 20th-century American composers, Johnson hoped to bridge home-grown jazz and the European classical legacy.
"The James P. Johnson Jubilee," on Friday night at Avery Fisher Hall, brought together Johnson's stride-piano masterpieces, played by Marcus Roberts, and his orchestral works, played by the Concordia chamber orchestra and conducted by Marin Alsop.
She had unearthed and reconstructed some of the compositions with Concordia's pianist, Leslie Stifelman.


Israel Says, 'Wait Here'; Gaza Calls It Oppression
Ibrahim Satari used to work as a cook in Jewish-owned restaurants near Tel Aviv.
Now he is unemployed, having spent much of the last eight months sitting outside the military government building here on orders of the Shin Bet, Israel's internal security service.
Mr.
Satari has a brother who is wanted by the security forces.
Seeking his surrender, the Shin Bet for months summoned Mr.
Satari and his other brothers several days a week to the military government compound, where they sat for hours, sometimes from morning to night, until they were told they could go home.
They were joined by more than a dozen other men with fugitive relatives.


Arts Figures Fear For the Endowment After Frohnmayer
Artists, arts administrators and Government cultural officials were divided yesterday in their reactions to President Bush's dismissal of John E. Frohnmayer, chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts.
But they were united in one thought: that the endowment is once again in serious jeopardy.
"I don't think there's any doubt that the support of the White House for the arts endowment is slipping," said Representative Sidney R. Yates, Democrat of Illinois.
Mr.
Yates, chairman of the House of Representatives subcommittee in which the Federal arts budget originates, has long been an outspoken proponent of Government support for the arts.


Prague Turns on Those Who Brought the 'Spring'
In the depressed days after the Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, liberal Communists who had sought to create socialism with a human face were looked upon as heroes.
Many signed Charter 77, the human rights document that became the focus of resistance.
But in the two years since Communism was swept out, the so-called Generation of '68 has come under growing attack as democracy and market economics have pulled younger Czechs and Slovaks to the right.
Last week the Interior Ministry accused 18 former Communists of treason in connection with the invasion.
Most were hard-line bureaucrats, but one was Zdenek Mlynar, a Communist official in 1968 who was a strong supporter of the reform leader, Alexander Dubcek.


Jamie Buckingham, 59, Preacher Who Criticized TV Evangelists
The Rev.
Jamie W. Buckingham, a leading charismatic Christian preacher and author who criticized the excesses of television evangelists, died Monday at the Holmes Regional Medical Center in Melbourne, Fla.
He was 59 years old and lived in Palm Bay, Fla.
He died of liver cancer, his family said.


Skier Doesn't Miss A Day on Slopes
PAUL SCHIPPER is an oh-so-familiar figure on the ski slopes of Sugarloaf Mountain at Carrabassett Valley in Maine.
Schipper, a 69-year-old retired airline pilot, has skied Sugarloaf every day it has been opened for the past 11 years.
Before this season began, that came to 1,630 days, and he expects to reach 1,800 the first week of April.


A Magazine's Trials, Now on Home Video
Steven Brill, who revolutionized legal coverage in the 1980's with The American Lawyer magazine, is now revolutionizing courtroom coverage.
Last July, Mr.
Brill became president and editor in chief of Court TV, a new cable channel that provides 24-hour coverage of trials and is available in almost six million homes.


Dance Floor Has Look Of a Derby Contender
If the racing world was looking for a national star to challenge the international star Arazi in the Kentucky Derby, it may have found one: Dance Floor, who came out of the West and outran a bunch of Eastern horses in the Fountain of Youth Stakes on Saturday.
And Dance Floor pranced onto the road to Kentucky surrounded by stars: notably his trainer, D. Wayne Lukas, who has won more races and money than any other trainer in the world in the last decade, and his owner, the rap-music giant Hammer.


The Mayor Plays Brooklyn, And the Reviewers Await
The trappings of Mayoralty have already arrived at Brooklyn Borough Hall -- a stately desk and swivel chair, four computers, three fax machines, 35 telephones, a photocopier, a metal detector, a lectern, some flags -- almost every conceivable thing, in fact, that Mayor David N. Dinkins could need for his "government in exile."
But it seemed at times around Court Street that word of the Mayor's visit was getting out about as quickly as rush hour traffic on the Brooklyn Bridge.


Anti-Yeltsin Demonstrators Clash With Moscow Police
Several thousand assorted opponents of the Russian Government marked Armed Forces Day today by tangling with the police and demanding the restoration of a united Soviet Union.
The protest was the latest of several by groups opposed to the new order, primarily staunch Communists but also clutches of nationalists, monarchists and soldiers.
Many demonstrators were elderly, pensioners who shouted that they had worked their entire life for the Soviet state and had been left penniless.


Foreign Affairs; Treeing Mr. Shamir
As Mideast talks resume, President Bush and Secretary of State Baker seem to have decided on a go-for-broke strategy aimed at Israel's June elections: bring about the outright defeat of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel, whose Likud bloc they believe stands in the way of peace.
Or force him into a coalition government with Yitzhak Rabin, the new Labor Party leader whom they regard as far more reasonable.
Their chosen vehicle for this high-risk strategy is to confront Israel with completely unacceptable choices on U.S. loan guarantees and Israeli settlement activity in the occupied territories.


Haitian Legislators and Aristide Agree on His Return
Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and leaders of the country's Parliament signed an agreement just before midnight Sunday paving the way for a restoration to democratic government and his return as President.
For the agreement to take effect, it must be ratified by the Haitian Parliament.
The accord sets no timetable for ratification or his return.
No members of the military were present at the talks, casting doubt about whether the agreement would be carried out.


World Economies


Jane Pickens Hoving Dies at 83; Led Pickens Sisters Singing Trio
Jane Pickens Hoving, a popular singer on Broadway, radio and television for 20 years and later an organizer in numerous philanthropies and society events, died on Friday at her home in Newport, R.I.
She was 83 years old and also had a home in Manhattan.


Electronics Slump in Japan
Slowing sales of consumer electronics goods and shifts in computer chip technology are cutting profits at Japan's electronics giants.
Page D1.


Knicks Are Out West For an Emotional Trip
Memories, both pleasant and unpleasant, will be aroused during the Knicks' three-game road trip this week.
On Monday, Xavier McDaniel will play here against the Suns, the team that traded him after he had been with them just 10 months.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:


Serbian Leader in Croatia Agrees to Cooperate With U.N. Troops
A major obstacle to the United Nations peacekeeping plan for Yugoslavia appears to have been removed with the decision by the hard-line leader of Croatia's main enclave of ethnic Serbs to cooperate with the United Nations troops and monitors that are likely to move in late next month.
Under pressure from Serbian leaders in Belgrade, Milan Babic, leader of the Krajina region of Croatia, has reversed his opposition, bringing Krajina into line with enclaves of Serbs in eastern and western Slavonia.
Both regions have now agreed to accept peacekeeping forces to monitor parts of Croatia that were home to about 600,000 Serbs until refugees fled the civil war there.


Georgetown Takes Its Show on the Road
Maybe they just don't get it.
Maybe most of the Georgetown Hoyas have not been around long enough to understand a basic truth about the Big East.
You seldom smile at the end of a road game.
Especially not in the great orange North, where Syracuse fans sit nearly far enough away from the court to be in a neighboring ZIP code.
Or maybe the Hoyas know all they need to know.
This afternoon, they repelled several Syracuse second-half comeback attempts that reduced their lead to 3.
They avoided a last-minute frenzy.
And they came away from the Carrier Dome with a convincing 72-68 victory that quieted the orange-clad mob of 32,996 spectators, the third-biggest on-campus crowd in history.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  U.S.
Pro to Sampras  Pete Sampras fired 21 aces in beating Amos Mansdorf, 6-1, 7-6 (7-4), 2-6, 7-6 (7-2), yesterday in Philadelphia and winning his second U.S.
Pro Indoor championship in three years.
Sampras won his first tour title two years ago at Philadelphia, beating Andres Gomez.
Last year, he was runner-up to Ivan Lendl, losing in five sets.
Sampras climbed to the No. 3 world ranking, his best since joining the pro tour in 1988. (AP)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Maine; Brown and Tsongas Divide Democratic Spoils in Maine
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California won, at the least, a symbolic victory today in Maine's Presidential caucuses, vying unexpectedly for first place with former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts as the final votes were counted.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, originally thought to be Mr.
Tsongas's main opposition, finished well back, struggling with "uncommitted" to eke out a distant third place.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Feb. 24, 1992:  MONDAY
American Precision Inds  Bre Pptys Inc  Detroit Edison  General Mills  San Diego Gas &amp; Elec Co  United Illum Co  TUESDAY
Angelica Corp  Burnham Pac Pptys Inc  Calmat Co  Century Tel Enterprises  Gannett  Ipalco Enterprises  Merck &amp; Co  New England Elec Sys  Westvaco Corp  WEDNESDAY
Ametek Inc  Belding Heminway Inc  Cigna Corp  First Va Bks Inc  Pennsylvania Pwr &amp; Lt Co  Scana Corp
THURSDAY
Ashland Coal  Bowater Inc  Centel Corp  Eastern Entrps  Ethyl Corp  Laclede Gas Co  Pepsico Inc  Sequa Corp
FRIDAY
Dexter Corp  Harris Corp  Nashua Corp  Yankee Energy Sys


U.S. CRACKS DOWN ON HEALTH DEVICES MADE BEFORE 1976
The head of the Food and Drug Administration is making clear to manufacturers of more than 100 untested medical devices already in use that they must present data from rigorous safety tests or face restrictions on their products.
Like breast implants, which were restricted earlier this month, these products were in use before 1976, when a law went into effect governing Federal approval of new medical devices.
The law also required Federal review of the older products but set no time table.
Now the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, David A. Kessler, is making a priority of such reviews.


O'Connor Calls on Catholics to Strive for Racial Unity
In what began with a mea culpa and ended with a plea to black Catholics to bring the races together within the church, John Cardinal O'Connor yesterday acknowledged the last full weekend of Black History Month with a homily that amounted to a chastisement of all white Roman Catholics, including himself.
The Cardinal, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, told an almost entirely white turnout at St.
Patrick's Cathedral on Fifth Avenue that he was disappointed to see empty pews "on the one Sunday I'd like to have the greatest attendance." He then delivered a bitter message about racism among churchgoers.


The House's Tactician of Taxation
Dan Rostenkowski will be leading the fight for the Democrats' middle-class tax cut in the House this week, but that does not mean he expects it to become law.
Or even that he necessarily thinks it should be.


Critic's Notebook; Lincoln Center's 100th Telecast, With Pavarotti
Being taken for granted: for a series of consistent quality, that's probably the ultimate nightmare.
Just ask John Goberman, the producer of public television's "Live From Lincoln Center," now getting ready to celebrate a milestone, its 100th telecast, tonight.
A "Pavarotti Plus" concert performed by Luciano Pavarotti may be seen at 8 P.M. on Channel 13; the broadcast is live, showing viewers what is happening in the concert hall.
The program is well rehearsed, of course, but anything can happen.
"Live From Lincoln Center" made its debut on Jan. 30, 1976, with the pianist Van Cliburn performing with the New York Philharmonic, conducted by Andre Previn.
Actually, the idea for the series began near the end of 1971, when Mr.
Goberman persuaded Teleprompter to carry a live Manhattan-only telecast of the New York City Opera's production of "Le Coq d'Or" from the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
Impressed with the results, center officials hired Mr.
Goberman, whose official title is director of media development, to initiate a regular series.
More than three years of experimenting was required to work out technological problems that would enable performances to be telecast live without disturbing either performers or audiences.


After Grueling Sales Race, Industry Seems Refreshed
With year-end sales figures now in hand, publishers are looking back at last year, and the overall picture that emerges looks a little like a marathon run in reverse.
The early months into the spring were the toughest, like hitting the 23d mile hot and panting, with leg cramps, side stitches and a feeling that collapse will come before the finish line.
But moving forward and through the Christmas season, things picked up, like the burst of energy at the start of a race.


Hold the Fire on Pyongyang's Nukes
The Bush Administration's sound strategy of coaxing North Korea to give up its nuclear ambitions seems to be succeeding.
Alarmist voices in Seoul and Washington claim that Pyongyang is just stalling.
But they'd do better to keep cool for now in the expectation that North Korea will soon open its nuclear sites to inspection.
At the same time the Administration is right to register displeasure over Pyongyang's delivery of Scud missiles to Syria.
While such sales violate no commitments by North Korea, they irresponsibly increase risks in the Middle East.


The Human Peace Dividend
Large cuts in the defense budget threaten to dump hundreds of thousands of demobilized veterans on a soft job market, raising fears of social and economic distress.
But creative ideas now circulating in Washington could turn that potential problem into a rewarding opportunity.
Defense Department officials recently predicted the discharge of one million military and civilian personnel by 1996.
Yet the United States has produced only 20,000 new jobs in the last three years.
Even a recovering economy may find it hard to absorb the human military surplus.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly  INTERGOVERNMENTAL NEGOTIATING COMMITTEE FOR FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE SCIENCE AND TECHNICAL SUBCOMMITTEE -- 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Tokyo Stocks Lower
Japanese stock prices were sharply lower today after steep gains on Friday.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed at 20,973.24, down 318.57 points, or 1.5 percent.
At midday, the index was down 75.16 points.
The fall extended into the afternoon on profit taking, a weak yen and fading hopes of lower interest rates.


Treasury Sets 2 Note Auctions This Week
Among the Treasury offerings set for this week, the Treasury plans to hold its regular weekly auction of three-and six-month bills today.
On Tuesday, it will offer two-year notes, followed by an auction of five-year notes on Wednesday.
Late in the day on Friday, the three-month bills traded at a bid price to yield 3.92 percent.
The six-monthbills were bid at 4.03 percent.


U.S. Only as Good (or Bad) as LeBlanc
Ray LeBlanc ended his Olympic hockey tournament Saturday night on the bench, a star goaltender whose net had been pulled from under him.
Such irony was lost on LeBlanc.
He packed his bags today in La Tania and bade farewell to American teammates in purple cowboy hats.
LeBlanc, with his wife and children, would head soon for Chicago, and to different scenery.


Charles H. Page, 82, Professor of Sociology
Charles H. Page, a noted sociologist and educator, died Feb. 9 at his home in Northampton, Mass.
He was 82 years old.
He died of cancer, his wife said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; The Checks Are in the Mail, And Made Out to Buchanan
So far in mounting a rebellious campaign for the Republican nomination, Patrick J. Buchanan has relied on conservative anger with President Bush, his own biting television and radio commercials and the largess of people like Beverly Dobbs.
Mrs.
Dobbs, who along with her husband ran a bookbinding business in St.
Augustine, Fla., until they retired, says that shortly after Mr.
Buchanan announced his intention to run in December she received a mailing asking her to contribute money.


Bridge
There are many sensible guidelines in defensive play, but deals crop up occasionally that turn them topsy-turvy.
This makes the game both intriguing and irritating, and the diagramed deal, reported by John Beshara of Manhattan, is an example.
South reaches four spades after East has opened with a weak two-bid in diamonds.
Now West's opening lead is crucial.
Conventional wisdom insists that a player should not seek a ruff when he has a natural trump trick, for the ruff will not gain him anything.
So most experts would lead the heart king, as West did in practice.


Pate Emerges From Fog With No Fury, Just Victory
As all around him were in various stages of collapse, Steve Pate reached out and grabbed victory at the Buick Invitational of California today with clutch birdies on three of the last five holes.
The 30-year-old Pate earned his fifth career victory with a final-round 67 over the Torrey Pines Golf Course that gave him a 54-hole total of 16-under-par 200, one shot better than Chip Beck.
The tournament was shortened to three days after a cancellation of play Saturday because of extremely heavy coastal fog.


The Rides and Falls of an Emperor Named Cordero
Everything was bright orange.
The horses were orange.
The sky was orange.
The other jockeys were orange.
The stands and crowd and track were orange.
Then everything went black.
"For five nights in a row in the hospital, I had this nightmare," Angel Cordero, the jockey, said last week.
"All I could remember was orange, because I was wearing orange silks when the spill happened, and I went somersaulting through the air. I don't remember anything else for days afterward, not being hit by the horse, not slamming into the pole, but later I was told that I kept calling out, 'Doctor, give me something for the pain.' "


Quotation of the Day
"The Afghan war is going down, and so the price is going down. When the war was going up, the price was going up." -- KHUSHAL KHAN, gun dealer in Pakistan.  [ A6:1. ]


Environmentalists Fear Favors to Builders in Trenton's Pinelands Plan
A 10-year policy agenda for governing the million-acre preserve drawn up by the New Jersey Pinelands Commission includes enough nods toward the concerns of builders, farmers and quarry operators to worry some environmentalists that profits may win out over preservation in the state's premiere nature reserve.
It is the first full-scale review of the Pinelands' plan since the rules to limit development and regulate industry inside the preserve were adopted in 1981.
Prominent among the public comments on the new agenda were complaints from builders that too few buildings were allowed per acre, from sand and gravel operators that the allowable size and depth of their quarry holes were too limited, and from farmers that wetlands regulations were too severe.


CHRONICLE
CLAUDIA SCHIFFER, the 21-year-old fashion model, has signed a multiyear contract with Revlon, making her the second photographic superstar to lend her face exclusively to the cosmetics giant.
She joins 26-year-old CINDY CRAWFORD, who has been under contract for three years.


European Channel Takes a Stab at CNN
Spawning the latest of CNN's international clones, a dozen state-backed European television stations have decided to create an all-news satellite channel that should begin broadcasting in five languages early next year.
Euronews, as it is to be called, has been under discussion for more than a year, but the final approval came last week when its Geneva-based directors chose Lyons, France, as the station's headquarters.


Where Government Sits: Leaders and Geography
ONE problem with moving the "nerve center" of New York City government to Brooklyn Borough Hall, as Mayor David N. Dinkins is doing today, is that the largely symbolic shift raises an embarrassing question: Where has the nerve center been until now?
Obviously, the center part was never in doubt.
What government at all levels often lacks is nerve.


Massachusetts College Offers Free Classes to Unemployed
Chet Gallup's story begins like many others these days: For 30 years he was an electrical engineer for a General Electric plant in Pittsfield, until the day he was laid off, April 19, 1990.
But instead of polishing his resume and making the rounds of employment agencies, Mr.
Gallup has been driving 80 minutes round trip two evenings a week to discuss life according to Plato and health among today's elderly.


Chiding Won't Stop Mobutu's Brutality in Zaire
To the Editor:
"Soldiers Open Fire in Zaire, Killing 13" (news article, Feb. 17) reports that at least 13 people, marching peacefully with their Bibles and rosaries, were shot dead by President Mobutu Sese Seko's troops in Kinshasa.
The demonstrators were demanding resumption of Zaire's National Conference.
Those brutalized by Mr.
Mobutu's enforcers will not be encouraged by the pap offered by Washington in response to the killings.
The State Department spokesman, after having pointed out that the Bush Administration considered the "military reaction entirely without justification," wagged a finger at "the authorities" in Zaire, urging them, yet again, "to reconvene a national conference" and to conduct themselves "in a manner consistent with their protestation of democratic values."


Inquiry in Chicago Breaks Silence On Sex Abuse by Catholic Priests
Shaken by a succession of disclosures that have led to the indictment of a parish priest and the removal of five others, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Chicago is undertaking the nation's most extensive inquiry into one of the most painful subjects facing the Catholic Church in the United States: the sexual abuse of minors by priests.
A special commission appointed by Joseph Cardinal Bernardin, Archbishop of Chicago, is re-examining decades of accusations against these and other priests amid evidence that the church's safeguards against abuse are insufficient despite strengthening in recent years.
The panel's three members, including a judge and a social services official from outside the church bureaucracy, are expected to complete their report in the spring.
Many church leaders hope that it will set a standard for the entire country.


Mrazek Plays the Tortoise in Senate Race
Never mind that no one can pronounce his name or that polls show him at the bottom of the heap.
Bob Mrazek will tell you he is doing quite nicely, thank you, playing the tortoise to some very big hares in New York's race for United States Senate.
True, his race for the Democratic nomination isn't exactly sizzling, especially in the New York City area.
But upstate the five-term Long Island Congressman, crawling from town to town with only a rental car, a driver and a map, has scored some upsets.
Finally, his poor man's whistle-stop campaign is getting noticed.


A Stamp to Honor The Happiness Boys?
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 12 letters for and against the Elvis postage stamp are all off the mark.
For one thing, Washington and Lincoln will be terribly upstaged if one simply considers the face values -- 1 and 2 cents -- against 29 cents for a pop singer.
And Washington and Lincoln were long gone before they made it onto postage.
This leads to the main consideration.
Elvis (if he has really left us) is being pushed to the head of the line.
Deborah F. Reese claims Elvis would afford her "a pleasant reminder of happy days gone by."


Teen-Ager Killed and 3 Are Hurt in Brooklyn Shootings
At one Brooklyn house party, efforts to keep guns out were met early yesterday by bullets fired through a steel door.
A few miles away, the gunfire began as a crowd of 100 young people spilled onto the streets, heading home from a birthday party for a 14-year-old girl.
Four teen-agers were shot, one fatally, in the two incidents, which investigators said yesterday were signs of the increasing lethal mix of guns and youths in New York City.


Winners Don't All Get Medals
Some are world famous, like Alberto Tomba, the Italian extrovert and modern-day Casanova who also skis.
Some are famous only in their worlds, like Herschel Walker, a football star who bobsleds, and Donna Weinbrecht, who has studied art and applies her free-form theories to skiing.
Some are journeymen, like Ray LeBlanc, a minor league goalie who played major league hockey here.
These are the heroes and heroines of the XVI Olympic Winter Games, which ended today.
Some won gold medals and some won no medals.
But all will come away with positive achievements, on or off the playing field.
Alberto Tomba
"I am the messiah of skiing," he proclaimed, and why not?
He won the gold medal in the giant slalom and the silver in the slalom, and he soaked up the idolatry with insouciance and good humor.
Asked after his giant-slalom victory how he would express his feelings in English, he said: "Congratulations, Alberto. Thanks very much. Me." Julie Parisien
A month before the Olympics, this American skier lost four teeth in one accident on the slopes, and three days later she broke a wrist in another.
Her teeth hurt so much on the cold Olympic slopes that she wore a mask when she raced.
When she finished fourth in he slalom, missing a medal by 5-hundredths of a second, she was furious.
"Fourth is absolutely the worst place to finish in the Olympics," she said.
Raisa Smetanina
Two weeks before her 40th birthday, this Russian cross-country skier won her 10th medal, a record, in her fifth Winter Olympics.
"It's a hard battle," she said.
"It gets harder with the years." Vegard Ulvang
This Norwegian from north of the Arctic Circle won three gold medals and one silver in his first four cross-country skiing races.
In his fifth race, he finished despite a painful hip injury.
Through the pressure of trying for five medals, he kept loose.
Maurilio de Zolt
When a 41-year-old Italian wins a silver medal in cross-country skiing, is he ready to retire?
Not this one.
"I started late, only seven years ago," he said.
"I do not feel old at all, and I would like to continue that way." Cathy Turner
The 29-year-old American won a gold and a silver medal in short-track speed skating.
Now she's talking about a book, a movie and a return to her singing career in casino lounges.
"When I went into the last race," she said, "I was thinking that if I won a gold medal, I wouldn't have to skate again. And I won the gold medal, so . . ." Toni Nieminen
The 16-year-old Finn won two gold medals and a bronze in ski jumping and became the youngest male gold medalist in Winter Olympic history, by one day.
"I hope to be able to lead the same kind of life," he said.
"I hope nothing will change in my life." Fabrice Guy
Nordic combined skier with the matinee-idol looks gave a grateful France its first gold medal.
"They can't take the title away for four years," he said proudly.
Donna Weinbrecht
In the debut of freestyle moguls skiing as an Olympic medals sport, she won the gold for the United States.
But her thoughts went out to other freestyle skiers whose specialties were still demonstration events, not fish, not fowl.
"This is a dream come true," she said.
"But I would be happier if they gave medals for ballet and aerials, too." Bonnie Blair
The Blair Bunch -- those 50 relatives and friends from Champaign, Ill. -- had much to cheer as Bonnie added two speed-skating gold medals to the one she won in 1988.
"She is the best pure skater in the world, man or woman," said Peter Mueller, the American coach.
Dan Jansen He won no speed-skating medals, but he did shake off his nightmare from 1988, when his sister died and he then fell in two races.
"One of my personal goals was to come in here and see if that was in my mind at the line or during a race," he said.
"It wasn't. I didn't play games in my mind." Herschel Walker
Two days before the four-man bobsled competition, the football star and neophyte sledder was dumped from the United States sled.
He showed more grace than the people who let this happen at the last moment.
"This hasn't soured me," Walker said.
Ray LeBlanc
For six years he had been a minor league goalie for such hockey capitals as Indianapolis, Fort Wayne and Flint.
In the Olympics, he allowed only 8 goals in 6 games for the Americans before the bubble burst in the semifinals and the bronze-medal game.
"You always want to do what Jim Craig did in 1980 and be a hero," he said, "but I'm trying not to get too excited." Bonnie Warner
The Grande dame of luge, if there can be a 29-year-old grande dame.
After more than 5,000 runs in 12 years, she is retiring.
"I'd like to have a family, and how can you do it with the life I've been living?" she said.
"So it's time to quit." Paul Wylie
For years he was the nice-guy figure skater who always looked good but never won.
Here, on a night when others skated badly, he skated magnificently and won the silver medal.
Then, at age 27, he quit, saying, "I don't want to endure going down the tubes." Kristi Yamaguchi
The word in figure skating was that if Midori Ito, the Japanese jumping jack, didn't win the women's gold medal, Surya Bonaly, the French jumping jack, might.
Instead, Yamaguchi combined athleticism with elegance and added a gold medal to her world and United States titles.
"I never expected all this to happen so soon," she said.
Sergei Ponomarenko and Marina Klimova
While the avante-garde ice-dancing team of Paul and Isabelle Duchesnay of France skated almost conservatively, Ponomarenko and Klimova won with sensuous, even steamy dancing and writhing to music by Bach.
"They could not skate like that," Ponomarenko said of the Duchesnays.
"They are brother and sister. We are husband and wife."


Ships Group Seeks TV Deal
The Operation Sail organization, preparing for the onslaught of 250 tall ships honoring the quincentennial of Christopher Columbus's voyage, is seeking to designate an official broadcaster for its July 4 weekend celebration in New York.
ABC paid $10 million for rights to televise the last Operation Sail in 1986, which celebrated the 100th anniversary of the Statue of Liberty.


As Afghan Veterans Limp Into Town, Pakistan's Gun Traders Are Buying
Cradling his automatic rifle comfortably, the bearded, turbaned man slipped off his shoes and stepped with a retiree's languid stroll into Khushal Khan's shop.
After a few quiet words of greeting and the delivery of small cups of sweet green tea, the visitor set to work.
Almost distractedly, keeping a banter of conversation with Mr.
Khan in the air like a juggler's balls, he disassembled his weapon, arranging a long spring, the barrel, and other mechanisms before him, all of which he systematically wiped with an oily rag.


Dance in Review
Eliot Feld  Joyce Theater 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street Through March 22
Eliot Feld likes to explore his dancers' gifts, teasing their distinctive bodies and movement styles into new shapes and through new challenges or simply having another go at what intrigues him.
Mr.
Feld's sexy new "Clave," presented by Feld Ballets/ NY on Saturday night, is the third solo he has created for Buffy Miller to music by Steve Reich.
It is a dance that makes clear his fascination with her.


CBS Delayed Hockey Game
CBS's broadcast of the Unified Team's gold-medal victory over Canada yesterday in the final event of the Winter Olympics looked live and sounded live.
But the game was on tape delay.
The game began at 8:15 A.M., Eastern time.
CBS came on the air at 9 A.M. without saying whether the game was live or taped.
No graphics during the game said it was taped; nothing was said between periods to indicate it was taped.


Protesters Call for Taiwan's Entry Into U.N.


Some Money Managers See Opportunity to Buy
Although many credit-market participants feel that the recent rise in interest rates may continue, some portfolio managers are not nearly as pessimistic.
Rather than sit on the sidelines, these money managers say they have used the rise in rates since mid-January as an opportunity to buy more securities.


The Final Act: Unified Team Takes Gold, 3-1
Viktor Tikhonov, the stern hockey coach with the brown shoes and gray suit, was near the blue line, being tossed in the air by his players as a teen-ager might be flung from a beach blanket.
Near him, by the boards, climbing on top of a net and waving to nobody in particular, was left wing Yevgeny Davydov.
And everywhere, there were hockey gloves and sticks in the air, flying into the crowd.


Police Classify Attack on Bus As a Bias Case
A school bus carrying young yeshiva students from Crown Heights was attacked yesterday with rocks and a brick by two black teen-agers as it waited at a traffic light in Brooklyn, and the police have classified the attack as a bias incident.
The attack, which occurred about 4 P.M. at the intersection of Parkside Avenue and St.
Paul's Place on the southern edge of Prospect Park in Flatbush, shattered a side and rear window on the bus, spraying the students with glass, the police said.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Warnaco Group, New York, an apparel company, arranged $350 million in credit with GE Capital Corp., Union Bank of Switzerland and the Bank of Nova Scotia to refinance most of its debt.
It also announced a common stock offering, with proceeds to be used to cut debt and redeem preferred stock. *
Kroger Co., Cincinnati, the grocery company, filed a shelf registration covering $750 million of debt securities.
No underwriter was named.
Common  *
Green Tree Acceptance Inc., St.
Paul, filed for three million shares to be sold through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. *
Bank of Boston Corp., Boston, filed for eight million shares to be offered through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Ratings  *
Alexandria, Va., had the rating on $34.7 million of general obligation debt raised to AAA, from AA+, by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Newmont Mining Corp., Denver, the gold mining company, said $300 million of senior debt filed recently as a shelf registration had received a Baa-2 rating from Moody's Investors Service Inc.


The End: France Turns Off Flame and Puts Out the Light


The Trains Are Small but on Time
THE trains were small and powerless-looking, confined to boxes or miniature tracks.
They chugged past trim little well-painted depots, and even the tiny people waiting for them looked happy, if a little petrified and plastic.
There were no delays, plenty of seats, and the whole scene was a kind of railroad Utopia.
Perhaps that was why dozens of people who have spent thousands of hours of their lives aboard commuter trains were among the 1,100 who turned out Sunday for the 18th Annual Spring Train Meet, a display of model trains and equipment held here at the Greenwich Civic Center.
Commuting, often described as the biggest fly in the ointment of suburbia, is different in real life.


Canseco All Ink And No Talk
Oakland A's outfielder JOSE CANSECO signed autographs for $25 each yesterday at a baseball card show in Morristown, N.J., and left town refusing to talk to reporters.
A crowd of 1,357 attended the show and approximately 1,000 bought autographs, according to promoter MIKE KUSHNER of Howell Baseball Cards in Freehold, N.J.
That would make Canseco's take approximately $25,000.


U.S. Weighs Broadening Of Antitrust
The Justice Department is actively gathering information on foreign groups of companies to determine whether their buying practices are illegally restricting exports of American products, a senior department official said today.
American officials are trying to determine whether to prepare antitrust lawsuits in some cases, said James F. Rill, the Assistant Attorney General for Antitrust.
But he added that the effort was being made informally and that no subpoenas had been issued and no task force assembled.


The Echo of Scandals; Two New Problems Revive Questions About the Mayor: Finances and Race
Any mayor might have been lulled by the behavior that culminated in a guilty plea by David N. Dinkins's campaign finance chairman two weeks ago and in the resignation under fire of his Housing Authority chairwoman over the weekend.
But even though Mr.
Dinkins responded with what for him was unusual speed, the two scandals that embarrassed his administration in recent weeks may reverberate more deeply than they would for most other elected officials.
In his case, the scandals transcend the inevitable human failings that torment every administration because they revive two issues from which Mr.
Dinkins seems unable to escape: lapses in personal finances and questions of race.


Breast Implants: Not for Everyone
During the last 30 years at least one million American women have undergone breast implant surgery.
The figure is inexact, but then so is everything that's known, or suspected, about the procedure.
In fact, the most important information arrived at during last week's Food and Drug Administration hearings on silicone implants was how little information there is.
Which means that not one of those women made a truly informed decision.
Faced with evidence from plastic surgeons, implant manufacturers, oncologists, rheumatologists and other interested parties that neither proved nor disproved implant safety, the F.D.A.'s advisory panel decided to split possible recipients into two groups.


U.S. Food Is Flown to Nuclear Siberia
A United States Air Force jet emerged from the polluted clouds above this frigid Siberian outpost today, and became the first American plane ever to land at a city that had been closed to Westerners for decades.
The C-141 jet carried a cargo of donated food, part of an intensive American effort to ship 5,000 tons of relief aid to the former Soviet Union over a 15-day period.
Today's shipment included some American standbys -- granola bars, Campbell's Vegetable Beef Soup and Kellogg's Frosted Flakes.


Tarkanian Rescinds His Decision to Resign
The strife-torn relationship between Jerry Tarkanian and the University of Nevada-Las Vegas took yet another bizarre twist yesterday when the 61-year-old head basketball coach announced that he was rescinding the resignation he tendered last June.
Tarkanian, citing internal forces within the university that he claims sabotaged the basketball program, said he was essentially drawing battle lines to "let the truth come out."


Arms Factory Can Make Bricks, But, Russia Asks, Is That Smart?
Guns have always been Izhevsk's business, even when this city on the western edge of the Ural Mountains was a ramshackle outpost of the czar's empire.
In 1947, the city produced the first AK-47 rifle, which became perhaps the world's most popular automatic and arguably one of the best known products of the Soviet Union's vaunted and secretive military-industrial complex.
Today, nine months after officially opening its doors to the outside world, Izhevsk finds itself on the edge of an economic void.
Military contracts, which once accounted for more than 70 percent of local production, have been cut back to practically nothing, leaving factories that produce guns, rockets, anti-aircraft systems and other sophisticated equipment to fend for themselves in an empty marketplace.


Can a New Ethiopia One Day Feed Itself?
With cowhides strapped to their backs, bunches of fresh herbs slung over their shoulders, and live chickens balanced on their heads, the peasants from the parched land around the source of the Blue Nile in the Ethiopian highlands streamed on foot into the town's weekly market.
At the heart of the dirt square, the most important vendors, small-scale farmers like 38-year-old Mersha Sentayehu, arrived after a two-day trek.
By early morning, bulging sacks of grain were unloaded from their donkeys, and their bags of lentils and wheat were ready for sale.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  BEATING SWORDS INTO SWORDS
Guns have always been the business of the Russian city of Izhevsk.
But with military orders disappearing, economic collapse loomed.
Now, a plan to turn the military-industrial complex into a money-making operation offers hope.
A1
Government opponents clash with the Moscow police.  A10
A U.S.
Air Force jet delivers food to a formerly closed Russian city.
A10  WINDS OF CHANGE BLOW IN CHINA
After espousing hard-line attitudes for the last two years, China's official press is emphasizing economic growth and the need to adopt some elements of capitalism.
A front-page essay in People's Daily is the latest signal that leaders who favor change may be gaining the upper hand over ideologues.
A1  ETHIOPIA LOOKS INSIDE AND OUT
The hungry country still needs much outside aid.
But if peace holds and peasants are given proper encouragement, officials say, Ethiopia could feed itself in 10 years.
A8  GUERRILLAS WITHDRAW IN LEBANON
A day after they agreed to end attacks against Israel, Shiite Muslim fighters began pulling out of villages in southern Lebanon.
The move signaled an end to a week of intense artillery and rocket exchanges that began with Israel's assassination of a Party of God leader.
A8
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip feel removed from peace talks.
A8  A BREAKTHROUGH ON HAITI
After five months of political stagnation, leaders of Haiti's Parliament and exiled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide reached an unexpected agreement paving the way for a return to democratic government.
A3  WHEN HEROES BECOME VILLAINS
The pursuit of former Communists in Czechoslovakia has led to charges against some men who were seen as heroes of the 1968 reforms.
A9  FOR MUSSOLINIS, IT'S IN THE BLOOD
The granddaughter of Il Duce is running for a seat in Italy's Parliament on the neo-Fascist ticket.
A4  GUN SELL-OFF IN PAKISTAN
As the Afghanistan war winds down, guerrillas are selling guns, not buying them.  A6
Canada moves towards a constitutional inclusion of Quebec.  A3
Croatian leader says he will cooperate with U.N. force.
A3  National A12-17  CRACKDOWN ON MEDICAL DEVICES
The head of the Food and Drug Administration told makers of more than 100 untested medical devices already in use that they must present data from rigorous safety tests or have restrictions placed on their products.
A1  PRIESTS, MINORS AND SEX ABUSE
Amid evidence that the church's safeguards are insufficient, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Chicago ordered the nation's most extensive inquiry into the sexual abuse of minors by Catholic priests.
A1  BROWN SURPRISES IN MAINE
Former Gov.
Edmund Brown Jr. of California made a surprisingly strong showing in the Maine caucus, running about even with the expected winner, Paul Tsongas.
Gov.
Bill Clinton was well behind in third.
A1  CLINTON STILL A FAVORITE SON
Heading for the Southern primaries of Super Tuesday, Bill Clinton the son of the South seemed to count more than Bill Clinton the tabloid target.
A16  VAGUENESS IN THE FINE PRINT
Paul Tsongas, who won over New Hampshire voters by emphasizing personal sacrifice to revive the economy, has given few details about the bitter medicine he would prescribe.
A17  HIS CHECKS ARE IN THE MAIL
Unlike candidates who drew heavily on large fund-raisers or telephone campaigns, Pat Buchanan raised about 80 percent of his campaign money from mail solicitation.
A16  UNITED WAY CHIEF UNDER FIRE
The United Way of America began an internal investigation as several publications accused the charity's president of lavish spending and free-wheeling management practices.
A12  AFTER RAIN, IT'S PARADISE LOST
Heavy rain turned five San Franciscans' enchanted aerie into a shifting structure that could come tumbling down the face of Telegraph Hill.
A12  KILLING CROPS ALONG WITH WEEDS
Florida farmers said that a Du Pont fungicide that for decades gave them unblemished produce has caused their fields to become wastelands.
A1  A KILLER'S BREAKING POINT
Lawyers and psychologists sought to figure out what made "an ordinary man living an ordinary life in an ordinary town" gun down four people in December.
A14
The C.I.A. discovers pork barreling close to home.  A13
A Massachusetts college offers free classes to the jobless.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1 Sports C1-12  Baseball: Dazzling prospect for Mets.
C4  Basketball: Tarkanian rescinds his planned resignation.
C2  Georgetown tops Syracuse.
C3  Wake Forest upsets Duke.
C3  Column: Claire Smith on Baseball.
C4  Anderson on Albertville and Alps.
C9  Features: Sidelines.
C2  Golf: Pate wins Buick Invitational.
Hockey: Rangers edge Flyers, 2-1 C4  Horse Racing: Cordero mends and ponders future.
C1  Dance Floor emerges.
C12  Olympics: Finishing with a flourish.
C1  Unified Team wins hockey gold.
C1  Norwegians smiling.
C7  Heroes of the Games.
C7  Sense of isolation in Alpine skiing.
C8  U.S. followed LeBlanc's fortunes.
C9  Obituaries B10  Jane Pickens Hoving, singer who led Pickens Sisters Trio  Arts/Entertainment C15-20  Reactions to the endowment chairman's dismissal.
C15  Reza Abdoh, speaking on his new theater piece.
C15  Brooklyn businesses back the Academy of Music.
C15  Music: "Pelleas et Melisande" at the Welsh National Opera.
C15  "The James P. Johnson Jubilee" at Avery Fisher Hall.
C17  Word and Image: Celebrating 100 telecasts, "Live From Lincoln Center." C18  "Grass Roots." C18  "The Covenant of the Wild." C20  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials A18  For the homeless.
Implants: Not for all.
Pyongyang's nukes.
A human peace dividend.
Letters A18  Leslie H. Gelb: Treeing Mr.
Shamir.
A19  William Safire: Welcome, Gorby!
A19  Mikhail S. Gorbachev: No time for stereotypes.
A19  Christopher Lasch: How television deflates politics.
A19  Arthur T. Hadley: Coming to terms with "friendly fire.  A19


Ms. Levin Wed To Jon Wallach
Resa Levin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Levin of Monticello, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jon Wechsler Wallach, a son of Associate Justice Richard W. Wallach and Elinor Levin, both of New York.
The groom's father, who serves on the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court, First Department, officiated at the Concord Hotel in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y.
Mrs.
Wallach, 33 years old, graduated from Sullivan County Community College.
She owns the Celebration Connection, a catering service in Forestburgh, N.Y.
Her father is the coordinator of the dining room at the Concord.


Islanders Lose Game and Victory Streak
Midway through the second period of tonight's game between Washington and the Islanders, with New York trailing by 1-0, Peter Bondra of the Capitals slipped past the New York defense and skated in alone toward Glenn Healy, the Islander goaltender.
Bondra closed in, and from point-blank range let loose a shot to Healy's right.
The goaltender barely got a piece of the puck with his blocking pad and the puck deflected off the right post and went over the net, not into it.


From a Distance, Skiers Feel Isolated
She competed in four Winter Olympics, from Lake Placid in 1980 to Albertville in 1992.
On her fourth attempt, Blanca Fernandez-Ochoa finally won a medal, the bronze in women's slalom, and then wanted to go home.
"I won't have good memories of Albertville," the Spaniard said.


Theatrical Director's Calling Card: Sex and Death
Reza Abdoh is back, and more provocative than ever.
The enfant terrible of sex and death has created yet another demonic work of experimental theater.
By now, though, the "enfant" label is greatly in need of revision.
"I'm almost 28," he said on a recent afternoon, as he navigated his way through the moldering elegance of a faded hotel.
"If you're still an enfant terrible at that age, well, you're in deep trouble."
Mr.
Abdoh has transformed the abandoned ballrooms of the Diplomat Hotel in midtown Manhattan into what he terms "a landscape of the mind of the serial killer." The world premiere of his multi-media event, titled "The Law of Remains," was last week on the mezzanine of the Diplomat, 116 West 43d Street.
Tickets are available at the door or can be reserved by calling (212) 826-6585 for the show, which will be performed until March 14.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; In Ads in South Dakota, It's Prairie Roots for All
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa will be a President "who knows exactly where we're coming from -- 'cause that's where he's coming from." South Dakotans won't have to guess "whose side he's on," his radio advertising assure listeners; it's "ours."
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska is similarly in touch with "our" feelings.
He is "from the Great Plains" and "fighting to save the family farm." Most importantly, as his advertisements say, he is "one of us."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: South Dakota; Democrats, in Midwestern Debate, Aggressively Court the Farm Vote
In a free-wheeling, often chaotic debate that was marked by personal barbs, six Democratic candidates for President virtually tripped over one another tonight trying to assure South Dakotans that they were most sympathetic to the needs of rural America.
While the primary election on Tuesday is viewed as a showdown between two farm state Senators, Tom Harkin of Iowa and Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, neither wasted any time in attacking his rivals as insensitive to family farmers.
The other Democrats insisted that they understood the importance of agriculture to the nation's economy.


ALBERTVILLE: Sports of The Times; Bidding Au Revoir to Albertville and the Alps
BEFORE the opening ceremonies, Jean-Claude Killy, the co-president of these Winter Olympics, spoke of how he wanted visitors to go home with "the feeling of having spent a fortnight of their lives on another planet: the planet of the French Olympics." But by last night's closing ceremonies, it had evolved into the planet of the French Alps Olympics.
With jagged snow-capped peaks kissing a canopy of crystal-blue sky, the views on the trips to the mountain venues will endure in the distant replays of the mind.


Dance in Review
EM/R Dance Company
Dia Center for the Arts SoHo
The EM/R Dance Company, which encourages collaborations between choreographers and musicians, is lucky to have David Wolfson as a composer.
The scores that he provided for the works offered by Frank Roth and Lynn Wichem on Thursday night were emotionally apt and theatrically forceful.
But the choreography and dancing were sometimes uneven.


Quayle Denies Bush Violated His 'No New Taxes' Pledge
Vice President Dan Quayle denied today that President Bush violated his 1988 campaign pledge of "no new taxes" when he agreed with Congress two years ago to raise the top personal income tax rate.
On the NBC News program "Meet the Press," the Vice President also denied that the most controversial television commercial of Mr.
Bush's 1988 campaign, which featured a convicted murder, Willie Horton, was an example of negative political advertising.


Soldiers of Destiny
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 31 article on the resignation of Charles J. Haughey as Prime Minister of Ireland referred to his party, Fianna Fail, as the Warriors of Destiny.
Please note that the party translates its Irish name as the Soldiers of Destiny.
DAN DONOVAN Brooklyn, Feb. 1, 1992


Holmes Next for Holyfield?
Larry Holmes, 42 years old, is expected to be named today as the next opponent for the undisputed heavyweight boxing champion, Evander Holyfield.
While the final details of the match are still to be worked out, if the deal is settled as expected, Holyfield would fight Holmes at Ceasars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., probably June 5.
Holmes is said to be guaranteed about $7 million and Holyfield about $19 million.


Shaken Town Wonders What Led to 4 Killings
Until the grisly events that terrorized this little town two weeks before Christmas, James R. Johnson was "an ordinary man living an ordinary life in an ordinary town," as his lawyer put it -- a man who liked tinkering with cars and was friendly and helpful to his neighbors.
Now he is in a ward for the criminally insane at a state mental hospital, awaiting trial in the fatal shootings of three law-enforcement officers and the wife of the sheriff.
The prosecution is seeking the death penalty.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball  American League


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: South; Clinton in the South: Still a Favorite Son
Bill Clinton is counting on a strong showing in the series of Southern primaries that culminate on March 10, and many analysts have been asking whether the widely publicized accusations of draft evasion and marital infidelity will hurt his campaign there.
In interviews around the South, some voters said they were troubled by those reports.
But many more said Bill Clinton the son of the South counted more than Bill Clinton the tabloid target.
Article, page A16.


Slump Hits Japanese Electronics
With consumer electronics sales in a slump and technological shifts complicating the computer chip industry, several of Japan's electronics giants are predicting sharply lower profits.
The Sony Corporation, which has come to symbolize Japan's ascendance in consumer electronics, said recently that its Japanese operation would suffer its first yearly operating loss ever.


A Big Payout For Nicholas
N.
J.
Nicholas Jr., the ousted president and co-chief executive of Time Warner Inc., is expected to receive payments over several years that were valued yesterday at about $18 million.
Graef S. Crystal, a leading compensation expert, estimated yesterday that Mr.
Nicholas's Time Warner stock options, depending on how the company's board finally resolves his employment contract, could be worth $6 million to $20 million.


Take a Deep Breath, It's on to Lillehammer
As the Olympic Winter Games of the French Alps closed today, Norwegian officials looked forward to a new way of regarding competition in their country.
The Winter Games will be staged in Lillehammer, Norway, in two years.
But they admitted that not too long ago they had been concerned: What if they gave an Olympics and nobody in Norway cared who won?
Thus, the residents and athletes of that country of 4 million people have been given a crash course in the philosophy of winning.


Demonstrators in Moscow Demand Restoration of Soviet Union


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Can Levi Strauss Extend Its Success With Dockers?
FOR a marketer, changing a successful long-running advertising campaign is always a difficult decision.
But Levi Strauss &amp; Company and its agency, Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco, felt the time had come.
Beginning March 3, they will make the first significant changes in their campaign for Dockers apparel since that best-selling line startled consumers in 1987 with unusual television commercials starring casually dressed men engrossed in casually hip conversations.


Key Genetic Off Switch In Fruit Fly Embryo
ENGRAILED, sevenless, bride of sevenless, hunchback, fushi tarazu -- these strangely poetical names are the creation of the biologists who try to decipher the sequence of genetic instructions by which a fruit fly's egg develops into an adult fly.
Researchers at the Max-Planck Institute and the Institute for Genetics and Microbiology in Germany have discovered an unexpected genetic off switch that operates at a critical early stage of development.
The colorfully named genes already discovered are control genes that set the paths of development of cells from egg to adulthood in Drosophila melanogaster, the common fruit fly.
One of the first of these control genes, named bicoid, tells part of the blob that develops from the fruit fly egg to organize itself into cells destined to form the fly's head and thorax.
Bicoid is known to do this by switching on a lower-level gene dubbed hunchback, and biologists assumed that matters at the tail end of the developing blob would be governed by a pair of similar genes.


New Post of Vice Chairman Is Filled by Dayton Hudson
The Dayton Hudson Corporation, which operates the Target, Mervyn's and Marshall Field's store chains among others, yesterday named Henry T. DeNero to the newly created position of vice chairman.
Mr.
DeNero, who will join the Minneapolis-based retail company from McKinsey &amp; Company Inc., the management consulting firm, will also serve as Dayton Hudson's chief financial officer, a position that has been vacant since September.


Students as Leaders
"What's the catch?" 16-year-old Francis Clement asked when told that his Bronx high school, James Monroe in Hunts Point, had been chosen.
Students at George Washington High School in Harlem asked, "Why us?" And disbelief blended with pride at Brooklyn's Automotive High School, where students complain that outsiders often stereotype them as grease monkeys.
Now, three weeks into the program, skepticism has faded over the unexpected windfall -- grants from the wealthy Surdna Foundation to create student-run foundations to improve neighborhood life.
In its place, students are discovering an almost heady sense of power.


Vast Burial Site May Hold Pyramids' Laborers
THE ancient tombs are humble by Pharaonic standards, often small mounds of limestone and granite chunks.
The funerary statues are plain when placed next to the glittering treasures of the boy King Tutankhamen.
And the names, scratched hastily in hieroglyphics onto mud vaults over the sepulchers, mean nothing to historians.
But a vast cemetery under excavation at the edge of Cairo may hold the remains of thousands of artisans and laborers who produced perhaps the greatest of all ancient monuments: the pyramids.


Intel Rival Is Favored In Ruling
In a surprising and unusual decision, an arbitrator today awarded Advanced Micro Devices Inc. the rights necessary to continue producing its own version of the Intel Corporation's 386 microprocessor, perhaps the most profitable computer chip ever developed.
The decision by the arbitrator, who found that Intel had breached a contract between the two companies, could help Advanced Micro attract more orders for its 386 chip and defend itself from a pending Intel copyright suit.


Ex-Soviet Nations May Join I.M.F. Soon
Russia and at least half a dozen other former Soviet republics will most likely join the International Monetary Fund at the group's spring meeting in Washington on April 27, executives at the fund and foreign officials said today.
The officials said the Group of Seven nations and the I.M.F.'s 156 members were still debating how large a share of the bank's capital the republics should supply.


As for Contract Talks, Franco Is Already Warmed Up
John Franco sat at his locker, paging through the statistical record of last season.
Through the numbers, Franco said, he was trying to make sense of 1991.
With those numbers, though, the left-handed closer for the Mets said bluntly that he was not trying to make an argument for 1993 and beyond.


Aging Bull II: First Foreman, Now Holmes
Evander Holyfield's promoter, Dan Duva, confirmed it yesterday.
Holyfield, the undisputed heavyweight champion, has chosen to make his next title defense against 42-year-old Larry Holmes.
All that's left to do is to complete the deal and that could happen before the week is out.
Holyfield's decision has forced Riddick Bowe and George Foreman to reconsider their future plans.
Both fighters had been mentioned as possible foes for Holyfield but now must map out a new course.


U.N. Aide Holds Beirut Talks On South Lebanon Situation
A senior United Nations envoy, Marrack Goulding, held talks here today with Government leaders on ways to reduce tension in southern Lebanon after the fighting there last week between Israeli and Shiite Muslim forces.
They discussed the possibility of sending more Lebanese Army units to the area, Foreign Minister Fares Bouez said after the talks.
Mr.
Goulding, a Briton, who is to submit his recommendations to Secretary General Boutros Ghali, also held separate talks with Prime Minister Omar Karami; the Speaker of Parliament, Hussein al-Husseini, and Nabih Berri, Minister Without Portfolio.


Q&amp;A
The Ancient Albatross
Q.  What is the longest-living bird species?


Stanford Medical School Official Is Ousted After Sexism Complaint
A neurosurgeon who was accused of sexism by a female colleague at the Stanford Medical School said today that he had been removed as acting chairman of the department and that he would not be considered for the permanent post.
Dr.
Gerald Silverberg said he was told of his demotion at a meeting last week with Donald Kennedy, the president of Stanford University, and Dr.
David Korn, the dean of the medical school, after the two men had reviewed the report of a committee assigned to investigate the accusations of sexism.


Second Reporter Silent In Senate Leak Inquiry
A reporter for National Public Radio was questioned for more than four hours today by a special counsel on who may have leaked a statement last fall by Anita F. Hill, who accused Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment.
The reporter, Nina Totenberg, was one of two journalists who first reported Professor Hill's accusations during Senate hearings on Judge Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court.


Chrysler Succession Picture Seems Clearer
Robert S. Miller, vice chairman of the Chrysler Corporation and one of the architects of its financial restructuring in the early 1980's, has resigned to join the Wall Street firm of James D. Wolfensohn Inc., it was announced yesterday.
Mr.
Miller's move apparently clears the way for Chrysler's president, Robert A. Lutz, to succeed Lee A. Iacocca as chairman when he retires by the end of the year.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Disconcerted, Kerrey Changes Course
As he struggles for survival, hoping that a victory in South Dakota will give him the lift he needs to remain in the Democratic race for President, Senator Bob Kerrey seems to have cast off some of his skepticism about conventional political behavior.
The candidate who entered the campaign late, acting on impulse, and who often seemed as much at war with himself as with any of his Democratic rivals, has shed some of his quizzical detachment from the contest.


Third World Growth Poses Threat to Ozone; Warming vs. Thinning
To the Editor:
"Can Capitalism Save the Ozone?" (Economic Scene, Feb. 7) confuses two major environmental crises: global warming and the thinning of the ozone layer.
Carbon dioxide and methane are the primary heat-trapping gases that cause global warming which, unchecked, will lead to rising sea levels and consequent population dislocations, widespread extinction of plant and animal species, the desertification of the world's bread baskets, and profoundly affect water resources.


St. John's Rebounds To Win in Overtime
The St.
John's Redmen somehow found a way to escape the Providence Civic Center tonight, beating the outmanned but relentless Providence Friars, 72-68, in an overtime game that easily could have gotten away.
Struggling with a ninth-place Friar team that had not been outrebounded in a Big East game this season, St.
John's overcame its problems by controlling the backboards.


Third World Growth Poses Threat to Ozone; Damage to Marine Life
To the Editor:
When discussing the destruction of the ozone layer, the probable increase in the incidence of skin cancers is always cited -- the least of its consequences; the most ominous of consequences is the probable damage to marine plankton and terrestrial plants including crops.
Although some skin cancers would be malignant melanomas, most would be relatively benign basal cell carcinomas.
In contrast, damage to marine plankton and terrestrial plants would be catastrophic inasmuch as each is a base supporting all other life.
STUART WACHS New York, Feb. 13, 1992


Brown Says His Message Is Getting Through


British Aerospace In McDonnell Pact
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said it would work with British Aerospace P.L.C. to develop technology for an advanced fighter plane capable of taking off from short runways and landing vertically like a helicopter.
The companies said they planned to study designs and technologies for the new plane, and possibly to design and manufacture a demonstrator aircraft.
The studies amount to the first steps in the program, which is years away from any possible Pentagon orders.


Chernovtsy Journal; A Garden of Yiddish, With a Soil That Bred Poets
'I'm the last of the Mohicans of the great Yiddish tradition in Czernowitz," Josef Burg said.
The shine in his eyes under a shock of white hair and the vigor of his gestures seemed to contradict the calendar, which says that this year Mr.
Burg, the author of many books and tales, will celebrate his 80th birthday.


Alfred L. Scheinberg; Art Dealer, 43
Alfred L. Scheinberg, a private dealer in African art, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 43 years old.
He died of brain cancer, said Walter Perini, his companion.


'Grand Canyon' Wins The First Prize At Berlin Festival
Lawrence Kasdan's "Grand Canyon," about a diverse group of people in Los Angeles and the impact of violence on their lives, was awarded the top prize, the Golden Bear, at the 42d Berlin International Film Festival today.
The award, greeted with a mixture of applause and booing at a crowded news conference at the Haus der Kulturen der Welt, gave Americans a sweep of the top prizes at this year's festival.
American films have also won the top prize at the Cannes International Film Festival for the last three years.


The G.M. Cutbacks; Auto Maker Posts Deficit Of $2.5 Billion
Closing the books on its worst year in history, the General Motors Corporation today reported a fourth-quarter net loss of $2.5 billion, a record quarterly loss for the company.
The deficit reflected a one-time pretax charge to income of $2.8 billion to close 21 plants over the next several years.
Excluding all extraordinary charges, the auto maker's loss for the fourth quarter was $519.8 million, on revenues of $33.6 billion.
That represents a significant improvement from the fourth quarter of 1990, when G.M. posted a $1.62 billion loss on revenues of $29.9 billion after war in the Persian Gulf shattered consumer confidence and dried up auto sales.


N.H.L. and Union Face Off
Bargainers for the National Hockey League and the N.H.L.
Players Association met in New York yesterday and reported progress on reaching a collective-bargaining agreement to replace the one that expired on Sept. 15.
The parties set March 9 for further formal discussions at a site to be determined.


Eldon Cessna; Airplane Designer, 84
Eldon Cessna, who designed airplanes that saved the Cessna Aircraft Company in the 1930's, died Saturday in a hospital.
He was 84.
Mr.
Cessna was the son of the company's founder, Clyde Cessna.
Cessna Aircraft, of Wichita, Kan., specializes in making small planes.


Accounts
*
The Connector Set Toy Co., Hatfield, Pa., to Elkman Advertising and Public Relations, Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., for a national advertising and public relations campaign.
Billings were not disclosed. *
British Airways, New York, to Saugatuck Direct Westport, Conn., for direct marketing for its executive club frequent-traveler program in the United States, following a review that included Rapp Collins Marcoa, New York, the incumbent, which continues on other assignments for British Airways.
Billings were not disclosed.


Justice Thomas's Late Hit
The Senate that confirmed Clarence Thomas as a Supreme Court Justice last fall did not know that he had nearly finished a judicial opinion striking down -- as unconstitutional discrimination against men -- Congress's policy of giving women a slight edge in competing for broadcast licenses.
It knows now, and has fresh cause to regret its 52-to-48 vote of approval for a judge who shows no respect for the work of Congress.
Returning briefly last week to the U.S.
Court of Appeals in Washington, Justice Thomas finally issued the decision in a case that had been under advisement since January of last year.
On that court, even major cases like this are routinely decided in two or three months.
Circumstances suggest that the decision was delayed lest it hurt the nominee in his confirmation fight.


Listening to the Way Movie Characters Look
"A tiny, light gray elephant opens his blue eyes. He gazes up at his mother. The baby elephant grins and rubs his eyes. . . . The baby wrinkles his short trunk. Two huge, floppy gray ears flap out from his head."
Most viewers do not require such a detailed account of their first glimpse of Dumbo.
But a visually impaired child exposed to the Disney movie without this description would hear only female voices cooing "Ohhhhhh," followed by a single voice exclaiming, "Look at him!"


Sign on Capitalist Road: --&gt; Recessionary Bumps
Ever since the 1930's, towns like this one in the soft valleys of the White Carpathian mountains have housed Czechoslovakia's biggest arms forges, hidden deep from enemies in east and west.
Now, two years after the collapse of Communism and the resulting wave of disarmament, the Slovak workers who once turned out many of the heavy weapons for Warsaw Pact armies are still awaiting their peace dividend.
"We once sent 75 percent of our production to the old Soviet Union,," said Ivan Juttner, personnel director at the huge Heavy Machinery Works.
"Now it is about 8 percent. This is our reality, and it is having a tremendous effect on employment."


U.S. DETAILS TERMS ISRAEL MUST MEET FOR DEAL ON LOANS
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today laid out the Bush Administration's conditions for granting loan guarantees to Israel.
In his first public description of the terms, he said Washington would back $10 billion in loans over five years only if Israel agreed to freeze all construction of Jewish settlements in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.


Meulens's 2d Chance Could Come at Third
He arrived in camp last week, before most of his teammates, and has been taking ground balls every day since then, hoping that it will all come back to him by April.
If it doesn't, what will the Yankees do with Hensley Meulens?
They won't say.
They told Meulens to bring his third baseman's glove with him to training camp and then they acquired Charlie Hayes from the Phillies to create competition for the job.
It begins Wednesday when the full squad conducts its first workout.


China's New Turn; Easing of Economic Hard Line Aims At Providing Not Liberty, but Money
Deng Xiaoping is a master strategist in politics, military campaigns and even the game of bridge -- and the recent calls in the official Chinese press for more rapid change seem to reflect his view that the Communist Party needs a new strategy for the future.
The new strategy that he and many younger party leaders favor is to worry less about ideological correctness and more about cultivating public support by making people richer, giving them such a stake in the system that they will not challenge it.
Of course, if they still do try to take on the Communist Party, there is no doubt that the regime is still prepared to imprison, torture and perhaps kill its enemies.


EXECUTIVES
*
Coastal Refining and Marketing Inc., Houston, a unit of the Coastal Corp., has named James L. Lawrence senior vice president. *
Deluxe Corp., St.
Paul, check printers for the banking industry, named Harold V. Haverty chairman, succeeding Eugene R. Olson, who will remain on the board.
Mr.
Haverty retains the titles of president and chief executive.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Incumbent; Bush Sounds Patriotic Theme in Maryland
President Bush drove seven miles to a financially comfortable suburb of Washington today to open his Maryland re-election campaign, declaring that "the fight for the future has just begun and it will continue for four more years."
To a crowd of 2,500 people in a high school gymnasium, Mr.
Bush offered what is becoming a stock campaign address.
It is an upbeat melange of allusions to last year's military victory over Iraq, attacks on Democrats in Congress, calls for passage of his legislation to boost the economy and scornful comments on "professional pessimists" who fear America's claim on world leadership is ebbing.


Quotation of the Day
"I've done one thing in my life. Since I was 19 years old I've worked for a company. It's been great, but I want a change. I want to own my own store." -- BARRY DILLER, explaining his decision to resign as head of the Fox studios.  [ A1:6. ]


Corrections
An article on Sunday about a campaign trip to Georgia by former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts misidentified a member of Congress who helped introduce the Democratic Presidential candidates at a Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner in Atlanta.
It was Senator Wyche Fowler, Democrat of Georgia, not Representative Newt Gingrich, a Georgia Republican.


Japan Seen Passing U.S. In Research By Industry
JAPAN has equaled or surpassed the United States as the world's top patron of industrial research and development, according to a growing number of science analysts.
If so, Japan has a powerful weapon in the trade wars of the 1990's and beyond as it uses research discoveries to launch a new wave of innovative goods and services.
The analysts take issue with the Federal Government's Japan-watchers, who calculate that the United States still leads in research spending by business, while acknowledging that America's edge in this area is eroding.


Review/Television; Roving Through Russia, A Dissatisfied Land
In 1989, Hedrick Smith, a former Moscow correspondent for The New York Times, traveled around what was then still the Soviet Union in search of the political, economic and social changes wrought by the famous team of glasnost and perestroika.
The result was an enlightening PBS series, "Inside Gorbachev's U.S.S.R."
A few weeks ago Mr.
Smith returned to see how some of the people he met on that earlier trip were getting along.
"After Gorbachev's U.S.S.R.," at 9 o'clock tonight on Channels 13 and 49, digs into the reasons for the hardships and disarray in the lately separated republics and comes up with emphasis on the tensions between entrenched bureaucrats, a new cadre of ambitious so-called privatizers and reform-minded but cautious young officials.
It is a timely tour with a practiced guide.


Merrill Lynch Begins Orderly Shift at Top
An orderly transition is going on at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, apparently lacking the intrigue and backstabbing that so often accompanies change at the top of a large American corporation.
Merrill Lynch announced yesterday that Daniel P. Tully, the chosen successor of the chairman, William A. Schreyer, would replace Mr.
Schreyer on May 1 as chief executive of the firm, Wall Street's largest brokerage.
The move had been expected.


Saudis Ready a Council Intended to Loosen a Closed Society
King Fahd is expected this week to announce the long-awaited creation of a consultative council, as well as other administrative and legal changes intended to give Saudi citizens a forum to debate the country's policies.
While few details have emerged, the Saudi press has led up to the announcement over the last few days, saying it will be timed to coincide with the 10th anniversary Tuesday of Fahd's reign.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about a charismatic Christian preacher and author rendered his name incorrectly in some copies.
He was the Rev.
Jamie W. Buckingham.


CUNY Trustees Act to Control Student Senate
The trustees of the City University of New York tightened their grip on campus organizations yesterday, canceling an 85-cent-a-student activity fee that provided money for a citywide student government group.
The decision was aimed at giving administrators and faculty members more of a say over the University Student Senate, whose president, Jean C. LaMarre, hired his twin sister to be his assistant for $26,000 a year, or about what a beginning instructor is paid.


Books of The Times; The Dreams and Yearnings of a Family of Exiles
Dreaming in Cuban  By Cristina Garcia  245 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $20.
In Cristina Garcia's dazzling first novel, three generations of women dream about Cuba.
Their birthplace haunts their memories and reveries, shapes their hopes and ambitions.
For Celia del Pino, the matriarch of the clan, Cuba means both separation from her lover in Spain and the promise of revolutionary changes.
She has waited for Fulgencio Batista's departure and cheered the ascension of Fidel Castro (or El Lider as she calls him) and she sees herself as "part of a great historical unfolding."


2 Japanese Banks Get Debt Ratings
Nomura Bank International P.L.C. has been given an A-1+ rating on its short-term certificates of deposit by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
The ratings agency said the rating reflected the bank's ownership of the Nomura Securities Company, the largest securities firm in the world.
The bank focuses its lending on the commercial market.


Avraham Harman Is Dead at 77; Head of University and Diplomat
Avraham Harman, chancellor of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem and former Israeli Ambassador to the United States, died Sunday at the Hadassah University Hospital in Jerusalem.
He was 77 years old and lived in Jerusalem.
He died of complications from pneumonia, a family member said.


This Trip, Knicks Get Early Dose Of Reality
The Knicks will not go undefeated on this West Coast trip.
Trailing throughout the second half, the Knicks fell to the Phoenix Suns tonight, 104-95, before a capacity crowd at Veterans Memorial Coliseum.
The Knicks (34-20) had a perfect 3-0 West Coast trip last month, and they had hoped to duplicate that.
But the Suns (35-21), who are 23-4 at home, claimed the Knicks as their latest victims.
New York continues its trip Wednesday night against the Los Angeles Lakers and Thursday night against Sacramento.


O'Rourke Proposes Low-Income Housing
The Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, tonight proposed an ambitious program to create 5,000 units of affordable housing over five years.
But rather than building public housing projects, Mr.
O'Rourke said, the county will help build low-cost homes that civil servants, the elderly and others can buy.


Business Scene; Odd Economics Of Russian Cars
ZHUGULIS and Ladas, Russian cars that look like Fiats, roll off the assembly line at the Vaz Auto Works every few minutes.
Despite huge public demand for new cars, this steady, unhurried pace has not risen in years and does not seem likely to now.
The workday remains two shifts, not three.
And twice a day, the lights dim, the mile-long assembly line stops cold and thousands of workers take 45 minutes to eat.
But underachieving at the commonwealth's largest auto maker has its payoff.
If a General Motors or a Ford were to increase car prices by 750 percent in a single day, as Vaz did on Jan. 2, they would undoubtedly suffer a severe drop in sales.
Vaz cars are selling as well as ever -- the difference being that while American auto companies make more cars than Americans buy, the Russians don't begin to meet the demand within the Commonwealth of Independent States.


Third World Growth Poses Threat to Ozone; No CFC's in Aerosols
To the Editor:
"The Ozone Hole Over Mr. Bush's Head" (editorial, Feb. 5) identifies "chlorofluorocarbons from refrigerants and aerosol sprays" as ozone-thinning "precursors" that might soon expose the North American population to harmful ultraviolet rays.
What you fail to make clear is that aerosols no longer contain CFC propellants in the United States, and that they have not since 1978.
That was the year in which three United States Government agencies banned their further use, with the exception of a minute percentage deemed exempt for medical reasons.


Third World Growth Poses Threat to Ozone; Call Military to Account
To the Editor:
Had our ecology class not been studying Lester R. Brown's "State of the World 1991," we too would have attributed the hole in the ozone layer to the use of chlorofluorocarbons in styrofoam, industrial solvents, and coolants for refrigerators and air conditioners ("Senate Backs Faster Protection of Ozone Layer as Bush Relents," front page, Feb. 7).
RUTH ROSENBERG Adj.
Asst.
Prof., Kingsborough Community College, CUNY Brooklyn, Feb. 7, 1992


Review/Ballet; A Forward-Looking Company in Mostly Classics
As George Balanchine and Lincoln Kirstein, the New York City Ballet's co-founders, liked to note over the decades, their troupe was created to perform the "classics of the future."
Why, then, were the classics of the past, in truncated or distilled form, popping up all over the closing program of the City Ballet's season on Sunday night at the New York State Theater?


Japan Seen Passing U.S. In Research By Industry
JAPAN has equaled or surpassed the United States as the world's top patron of industrial research and development, according to a growing number of science analysts.
If so, Japan has a powerful weapon in the trade wars of the 1990's and beyond as it uses research discoveries to launch a new wave of innovative goods and services.
The analysts take issue with the Federal Government's Japan-watchers, who calculate that the United States still leads in research spending by business, while acknowledging that America's edge in this area is eroding.


INSIDE
Dinkins Strikes Back
As he moved City Hall to Brooklyn, the Mayor stepped up his attack on efforts by prosecutors to scrutinize his 1989 campaign records.
Page B1.
Japan's Gain in Research
Japan has equaled or surpassed the United States in industrial research and development, American science analysts say.
Science Times, page C1.
Justice Stevens Has Cancer
Justice John Paul Stevens has prostate cancer but is expected to recover and is continuing to work.
Page A14.
The Most Dangerous Game
It may be a game, but mah-jongg is a seen as a vice that the Shanghai authorities want to stamp out.
Page A8.


United Technologies Appoints a President
United Technologies Inc. said yesterday that George A. David, an executive vice president with many years of experience with the company's Otis elevator division, had been named president and chief operating officer of the large aerospace and multi-industry company.
The naming of the 49-year-old Mr.
David to the position places him as the heir apparent to Robert F. Daniell, the company's 58-year-old chairman and chief executive officer.
The positions of president and chief operating officer had previously been held by Mr.
Daniell.
Mr.
David, whose experience with Otis placed him as head of a division with operations in more than 160 countries, was selected in part because of that international experience.
Mr.
Daniell said that Mr.
David's activities as chief operating officer would be focused primarily on the huge restructuring of the Hartford-based company.
The company, which is also the producer of Pratt &amp; Whitney aircraft engines, Carrier air-conditioning products and automotive products, is in the midst of a full-scale reorganization and recently announced a series of plant closings and cutbacks that will eliminate nearly 14,000 jobs.


E.P.A. Urged to Ease Rules On Cleanup of Toxic Waste
In response to President Bush's call to review Federal regulations, a top official of the Environmental Protection Agency has proposed changes in laws for cleaning up toxic waste sites that would reduce the Government's enforcement of standards and eliminate some environmental safeguards.
The official, Don R. Clay, the assistant administrator of the Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response, proposes to "significantly decrease the regulatory reach" of the hazardous waste laws.


Sports of The Times; A Champ Named Desiree
SHORTLY after Mike Tyson was convicted of rape, the Rev.
Dr.
Theodore J. Jemison said: "Mike Tyson is a brother in need of help. He is an Afro-American role model."
Jemison heads the National Baptist Convention U.S.A.
Inc., the largest black Baptist denomination in the country, with some 8.5 million members.
The organization's official position is that Tyson should receive a suspended sentence in his rape conviction.
It is leading a national petition drive to secure 100,000 signatures to try to influence the judge, Patricia J. Gifford, who is expected to pass sentence on the former heavyweight champion on March 27, in Indianapolis.


Olympic Players Announced
The International Tennis Federation yesterday released its list of 40 approved direct nominees for the Summer Olympics at Barcelona, Spain.
As expected, John McEnroe, who is ranked below the top 20, and Andre Agassi, who chose to play Davis Cup but not the Olympics, were noticeably absent.
Germany, with Boris Becker, Michael Stich and Steffi Graf, a 1988 gold medalist, appears to have the best credentials, but the slow, clay surface could compromise their power.
Graf is bolstered by the ineligibility of top-ranked Monica Seles, No. 3 Gabriela Sabatini and No. 4 Martina Navratilova, who all skipped the 1991 Federation Cup.


Rutgers's Quote-a-Matic Keeps Professors Talking
Obscene corporate salaries in the news?
Prof.
Charles Fay is a Rutgers University expert on the history of executive pay.
How about the legend of the New Jersey Devil around Halloween, or the shifting social rules of dating on Valentine's Day?
Dr.
Angus Kress Gillespie is the resident sage in the American Studies Department on campus.


The G.M. Cutbacks; Michigan Workers See Politics in Closing
Workers at General Motors' Willow Run plant in Ypsilanti Township, Mich., today disputed the assertion by the company that its decision to shut their plant in 1993 was made solely on economic grounds.
Officials of Local 1776 of the United Automobile Workers, which represents workers at Willow Run, said their plant had several economic advantages over its sister plant in Arlington, Tex., which will remain open and will be refurbished to handle increased output of large rear-wheel-drive cars.


A Unified Feeling Of Ambivalence
Most were proud that their team was no longer competing as a heavily subsidized tool of Communist propaganda, that the medal count was no longer an ersatz cold war.
But for Russia's sports fans, commentators and reporters, there was still something intrinsically sad about watching their athletes in Albertville, France, performing without a flag, a state or a hymn.


Court Technology Goes On-Line
After a querulous semifinal outing recently in Chicago, where she later made history by securing her 158th career title, Martina Navratilova mused on the outbursts tennis professionals often direct at the linesmen who pass judgment on their shots.
"Until you have robots instead of players, these arguments are going to happen," she said, and shrugged.
Actually, there's a more realistic technological innovation at hand, one that could cause linesmen to go the way of the white tennis ball, and it's already pitting tennis traditionalists against the computer-programmed perfectionists.


Chess
There is an awful lot of speculating going on these days.
That might be because the standard time limit has been changed from 40 moves in two and a half hours to 40 moves in a flat two hours, the thought behind the faster play being, "My opponent will never find the right defense to my complicated attack in that short a time."
And most of the time, the gambiteers are right.
The great virtuosos of the defensive game are mostly in or close to their retirement years.
Sammy Reshevsky is over 80 years old and cannot give these pirates their comeuppance as in the old days.
Viktor Korchnoi is finally declining at the age of 61.
Anatoly Karpov is probably the last top player whom no one takes liberties with (except, of course, the world champion, Gary Kasparov).


Magazine Dropping Column By Expert on Executive Pay
Financial World magazine yesterday severed its relationship with Graef S. Crystal, who writes on executive pay issues for the magazine, because of complaints about his column.
Geoffrey N. Smith, the magazine's editor, said Financial World had decided not to renew Mr.
Crystal's contract when it expires in September.
He said Mr.
Crystal would be allowed to submit one more column for publication, on a pre-approved topic, after the current issue, which just went to press.


Digital's Chip of the Next Century
The Digital Equipment Corporation, whose last big overhaul of its computer designs helped turn an $800 million company into a $14 billion one, plans to try again on Tuesday by introducing what it bills as the technology to carry it through to the next century.
With its hardware sales shrinking and profits scarce, the long-term prospects of Digital rely heavily on its new Alpha line of products, beginning with the ultra-fast microprocessor it will initially display.


Devils Give Fans Plenty to Jeer About
When a player takes a shot from the top of the circle and then goes in front of the net to collect his own rebound and score, it is a strong indication the defending team is in deep lethargy.
That is what the Devils allowed Gaetan Duchesne to do tonight early in the third period tonight in a poor performance that resulted in a 3-1 loss to the North Stars at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Conner Peripherals Inc., San Jose, Calif., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $300 million of convertible subordinated debentures, due 2002, to be sold through Montgomery Securities.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Agree to Hear Appeal of Impeached Judge
Accepting an appeal from an impeached and convicted Federal judge, the Supreme Court agreed today to examine the shortcut the Senate has used three times in the past five years to remove Federal judges from office.
The Court's action was unexpected because all challenges to the procedure have been rejected in the lower courts.
Both the Senate and the Bush Administration opposed the latest appeal, filed by Walter L. Nixon Jr., formerly the chief judge of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi.


Review/Pop; The Lilting Sounds of Brazil
This year's winter series of Brazilian concerts at the Ballroom has offered several happy musical discoveries.
The latest is a performer known simply as Joyce, a free-spirited Brazilian singer, composer and guitarist who appeared with a four-member folk-jazz ensemble.
More than any other artist who performed in the series this year, she carries forward the light, lilting style of the 1960's bossa nova craze as personified by Astrud Gilberto.
Far from a nostalgic echo of the queen of jazz-samba, however, Joyce presents a more full-bodied and musically sophisticated refinement of the same carefree spirit.


Market Place; For Tokyo Stocks, Many Cure-Alls
AFTER six years in which the Japanese stock market was liberalized at a snail's pace, the financial industry has suddenly been hit with a flood of ad hoc proposals that could produce the most thorough restructuring of the market here in decades.
Yet the proposals are so varied that to the investor who is wondering what kind of market Tokyo will have in a year or two, the answer today would have to be: it is not clear.


Youth or Maturity: People to Pick Image of 'King'


Corrections
An article on Feb. 17 about David Osborne, a political consultant, incorrectly described the Pacific News Service, for which he once worked.
The service provides articles from countries around the world about social policy and international issues; it is not an avowedly left-wing organization.


South African Referendum Is Set for Next Month
South Africa's whites will decide on March 17 whether they want President F. W. de Klerk to continue negotiating an end to apartheid on their behalf.
In setting the date of the referendum that he called last Thursday, Mr. de Klerk also released the wording today of the crucial question that he is putting to white voters.
It asks:


Study Sees Problems In Oregon Rationing Of Health Services
A Congressional research agency has criticized Oregon's novel effort to ration health care by ranking all services according to their costs and benefits.
The agency, the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, said in a confidential draft of a report to be issued this spring that the rankings were largely subjective and would deprive some low-income people of Medicaid services to which they are now entitled.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the New Hampshire primary and another article about it on Saturday misstated the margin between the write-in votes received by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Ralph Nader.
When votes cast in both the Democratic and Republican primaries are combined, Mr.
Cuomo received 7,375 votes and Mr.
Nader 6,311, for a difference of 1,064, according to the New Hampshire Secretary of State's office.


Dow Struggles to Advance 2.23, to 3,282.42
Stock prices were mixed yesterday, as trading eased with investors expressing concern over a weak bond market and rising interest rates.
Still, blue chips drew some interest, nudging the Dow Jones industrial average to another high, 3,282.42, up 2.23 points.
The bellwether average of 30 industrials was the only index to reach a closing high yesterday -- its 12th record this year.


The G.M. Cutbacks; G.M. Picks 12 Plants to Be Shut As It Reports a Record U.S. Loss
The General Motors Corporation announced today the first stage of its plan to close 21 plants over several years, identifying 12 plants to be closed in the United States and Canada within three years, affecting 16,300 workers.
It also detailed a sweeping reorganization of its troubled North American operations.
The company, the world's largest auto maker, had announced in December that it would begin to overhaul its operations to restore its profitability.
Its reorganization plan represents an attempt to unscramble a previous restructuring in the 1980's, which had sought to increase efficiency and reduce costs, with mixed success.


CHRONICLE
It's not easy having a bicentennial birthday in the same year as Mozart.
But Gioacchino Rossini will have a moment in the musical sun this week.
Lincoln Center is taking note of his 200th year with concerts, operas, recitals, television programs and even with the presentation of his favorite foods.
After all, Rossini, who was born on Feb. 29, has had only a quarter of his fair share of birthdays.
ROCKWELL BLAKE, a tenor who is performing in two of the concerts and presiding over a "Meet the Artist" tasting event on Thursday, has a particular fondness for Rossini.


City Hall in Brooklyn: A Preoccupied Mayor?
He marched out of Brooklyn's Borough Hall, surrounded by cameras and deep in conversation with Borough President Howard Golden.
As Mayor David N. Dinkins passed through downtown Brooklyn toward the Metrotech Center office complex, a few passers-by gaped at him.
"Hi, Mayor," someone called out tentatively.
"Have a nice day, sir!," another man shouted.
The small entourage passed a firehouse that had been converted into low-income housing, and a woman said quietly: "Mayor Dinkins, come to my firehouse here. It's messed up." He glanced at her and said hello.


Careers; Bolstering Interest in Engineering
A TWO-HOUR nationwide teleconference via satellite opened National Engineers Week last week, with its organizers hoping to encourage more students to consider engineering as a career.
The broadcast, called "Discover Engineering," was transmitted to more than 375 sites around the country and was viewed by at least 8,000 students, according to the organizers, the Massachussetts Institute of Technology, the National Technological University, the Hewlett-Packard Company and Motorola Inc.


Thomson-Carlyle Bid For LTV Unit Is Seen
Thomson CSF, the big French military electronics company, is preparing a competing bid with the Carlyle Group for the aerospace and missile division of the LTV Corporation, according to people close to the LTV bankruptcy negotiations.
LTV, based in Dallas, recently reached agreement on the broad outlines of a settlement with five creditor groups that would end the long-running bankruptcy reorganization that began in 1986.
The settlement plan included the proposed sale of the aerospace and missile division to a joint venture recently formed by Lockheed and Martin Marietta.


McCarthy Barely Beats Deadline, and Vincent Isn't Pleased
Beating the deadline by 20 minutes, the man designated as the Yankees' managing partner reversed his position yesterday and informed Commissioner Fay Vincent that he was willing to meet with him in a meeting recorded by a court stenographer.
Daniel McCarthy's decision, however, did not assure him of having a meeting, and his status still appeared to be in jeopardy.
"This is not the way to do business," Vincent said.
"I'm not terribly pleased about this. I'm going to think about it overnight."


People
*
Garry Neel has been named senior vice president and management supervisor, and Bob Ancona has been named senior vice president and associate creative director, at the newly formed West Coast Chevrolet/Geo automotive group at Lintas Campbell-Ewald, Los Angeles. *
Tom Watson has been named vice chairman of Diversified Agency Services in New York, a unit of the Omnicom Group.
Succeeding him as president will be John Wren, who had been executive vice president and general manager.


By Design; Avant-Garde Hemlines
Word of longer lengths at the Paris spring couture shows and of hemlines dropping in the first American fall collections previewing on Seventh Avenue has set fashion antennae quivering.
Are we looking at a style revolution in the making?
The answer is no, though we are witnessing a fashion evolution.
By last fall, above-the-knee hemlines had become the length of choice.
But avant-garde young women were yearning for something different.
They started experimenting with longer looks.
The fashion seers noticed and began their own downward shift. (This is fashion following its inevitable course. When any idea becomes completely acceptable, it's de rigueur to twitch it.)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Record in Congress; In House and Senate, Tsongas Went His Own Way
As a member of Congress, Paul E. Tsongas described the Federal budget deficit as the nation's "No. 1 economic problem," criticized labor unions as an obstacle to increased industrial productivity and led efforts to help the guerrillas who were resisting the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan.
He consistently sided with liberals when they sought to protect the environment and the civil rights of women and homosexuals.
But he often sided with moderates and conservatives when they moved to curb the growth of Federal spending.


Classical Music in Review
Orchestre Symphonique Francais  Alice Tully Hall
Residents of capitalist countries like the United States like to complain about governmental niggardliness toward the arts.
Yet Saturday's all-French program by l'Orchestre Symphonique Francais could give them something to think about.
While heavily supported and loudly promoted French orchestras have earned reputations for dubious quality around the world, this ensemble, with private backing and rare independence, plays with great elegance and sophistication.
French music might think harder about giving free enterprise a chance.


Mayor Fights Bid for Data On '89 Race
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday escalated his attack on prosecutors' demand to review reams of financial records from his 1989 mayoral campaign, calling it "improper."
But he stressed that he would cooperate with prosecutors, even as he repeated his complaint that they were "fishing" for purported wrongdoing that, he said, did not occur.


Brooklyn Man Convicted In Stabbing of Sharpton
A Brooklyn man was convicted of first-degree assault yesterday in the stabbing attack on the Rev.
Al Sharpton early last year as Mr.
Sharpton was preparing to lead a protest march.
The man, Michael Riccardi, 28 years old, of 2045 73d Street in Bensonhurst, was also found guilty of third-degree criminal possession of a weapon by the jury in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Riccardi could face 5 to 15 years in prison when he is sentenced by Justice Francis X. Egitto on March 16.


Treasuries Off Again in Slow Day
Gloom continued to shroud the credit markets yesterday, and prices of Treasury securities moved lower again.
Repeating a theme struck for the last week, traders said lack of demand for outstanding issues, coupled with auctions this week of two-year and five-year notes, continued to push down prices.


Review/Music; A Mezzo Rising Star Celebrates Rossini
The 25-year-old Italian mezzo-soprano Cecilia Bartoli has built a large following since 1989, largely on the strength of a handful of Mozart and Rossini recordings.
Her timing was undoubtedly serendipitous: With the Mozart and Rossini bicentennials back-to-back, she was bound to be in great demand.
Her voice is wonderfully suited to the music of both composers, and she brings a welcome freshness to it.
But bicentennials notwithstanding, the appearance on the scene of a coloratura mezzo with true star quality is rare enough that Miss Bartoli was bound to attract attention.
Her all-Rossini recital at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday evening was a bona fide event: The audience included several performers (among them the baritone Thomas Hampson and the pianist Andras Schiff), along with voice teachers, managers and record-company executives.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  EX-GOTTI JUROR IS INDICTED
The foreman of the jury that acquitted the reputed Mafia leader John Gotti in his 1987 Federal racketeering trial was indicted on charges that he conspired with the mob to sell his vote and influence the jury for $60,000.
And at Mr.
Gotti's current Federal racketeering trial in Brooklyn, a reputed member of the Gambino crime family said on a tape recording that any Gambino member caught dealing in drugs would be killed for fear he might turn informer.
A1 and B4.
SHARPTON'S ASSAILANT CONVICTED
A Brooklyn man was convicted of first-degree assault in the stabbing attack on the Rev.
Al Sharpton early last year as Mr.
Sharpton was preparing to lead a protest march.
B3.
HOUSING CHIEF'S FIRST DAY
The new chairwoman of New York City's Housing Authority, Sally Hernandez-Pinero, said she planned to adopt strict new spending guidelines at the agency, which has come under sharp criticism for lavish spending.
B3.
MAN KILLS A CHILD, THEN HIMSELF
A 31-year-old Brooklyn man sprayed his former girlfriend's apartment with semiautomatic weapon fire, killing her 9-month-old son and then wounding her and their 6-year-old daughter, the police said.
The man then pointed the weapon at his own chest and killed himself.
B3.
NEW RULES ON CUNY STUDENT GROUPS
The trustees of the City University of New York tightened their grip on campus organizations, canceling an 85-cent-a-student activity fee that provided money for a citywide student government group.
B2.
Foundation grants encourage students to aid their communities.
B3.
REGION  THE FIRST VETO TEST
In a vote that could set up the first test of the Republicans' veto-proof control of the New Jersey Legislature, both chambers passed a bill that would postpone this year's school elections for three weeks.
Angry Democrats immediately asked Gov.
Florio to use his veto for the first time in the 205th Legislature to quash the legislation.
B6.
AND NOW FOR SOMETHING DIFFERENT
They have not been able to produce a budget on time in seven years, but Governor Cuomo and legislative leaders in Albany said they might get the job done early this year.
B6.
HOUSING PLAN FOR WESTCHESTER
The Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, unveiled an ambitious program for creating 5,000 units of permanent affordable housing over five years.
B5.
THE POWER OF THE FAX
Using the advanced facsimile machine's ability to send the same message to dozens of other machines automatically, the Rutgers University News Service has developed a state-of-the-art, on-top-of-the-news supply of quotable experts ready to meet a reporter's most urgent need, an authority to quote, and to soothe a skeptical editor's doubts.
B6. 2 Cornell students charged with spreading computer virus.
B6.
Leona Helmsley loses appeal in tax case.
B6.
Our Towns B4


Shaking Up the Ways of Hollywood
Perhaps no other Hollywood executive has left so strong a mark on a company in the last decade as Barry Diller, who built the Fox television network into a formidable challenger to the Big Three networks.
In resigning yesterday as chairman of Fox Inc., the parent of the Fox network and the 20th Century Fox film studio, Mr.
Diller cast uncertainty on whether that challenge would continue.


Home Depot Says It Had A 63% Gain
The Home Depot Inc., a chain of stores selling home-building and renovation supplies, yesterday reported a 63 percent gain in fourth-quarter earnings and record profits for the year.
The company, based in Atlanta, earned $67.6 million, or 31 cents a share, in the fiscal quarter that ended Feb. 2, compared with $41.5 million, or 23 cents a share, in the fourth quarter last year.
Sales for the company, which now has 174 stores, rose 29 percent, to a record $1.30 billion, from $1.01 billion in the corresponding period in 1990.


A Rossini Mass
In honor of the bicentennial of Rossini's birth, the Ascension Music Chorus is to perform the composer's Petite Messe Solennelle tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Church of the Ascension, Fifth Avenue at 10th Street.
Dennis Keene is to conduct the work, which is scored for soloists, chorus, piano and harmonium or organ.
Soloists are Carolyn Braden, soprano; Jennifer Lane, mezzo-soprano; Charles Walker, tenor, and Kevin Deas, baritone.
Tickets are $12.
Information: (212) 254-8553.


Head of Fox Studio Resigns To Pursue His Own Ventures
Barry Diller, the durable Hollywood studio executive who has successfully taken on the big three television networks at their own game, stunned the entertainment industry today by resigning as chairman of Fox Inc., parent of the 20th Century Fox movie studio and the Fox television network.
Mr.
Diller's resignation reverberated from sound stages here to the corporate offices of the television networks in New York, where there was considerable speculation that Mr.
Diller plans to lead a bid for NBC or CBS.


Executives Appointed To I.B.M.-Apple Venture
The software joint venture between Apple Computer and I.B.M., outlined its senior management team and board members at a news conference here today.
As expected, Joseph M. Guglielmi, a vice president from the International Business Machines Corporation, was named chairman and chief executive of the venture, Taligent Inc.
But most of the executives who will report to him are from Apple Computer Inc.


U.N.L.V. vs. Tarkanian
Officials at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas say that the resignation of its basketball coach, JERRY TARKANIAN, is binding and cannot be revoked.
On Sunday, Tarkanian told a rally that he was rescinding a resignation he submitted last June in the wake of continuing problems with the school's basketball program.


Cooling With Sound: An Effort to Save Ozone Shield
AS fears mount that global depletion of the atmospheric ozone layer may lead to catastrophic medical and economic consequences, scientists and engineers are hastening development of new refrigeration technologies that do not depend on ozone-destroying chemicals and may even be more efficient than conventional cooling machines.
One of these technologies abandons the complicated moving parts of conventional refrigerators and uses sound energy blasted into a kind of organ pipe to achieve cooling.
Developers of sound-driven refrigerators at Los Alamos National Laboratory, N.M., and the Naval Postgraduate School at Monterey, Calif., say such thermoacoustic devices could chill nitrogen to its liquefaction temperature of minus 320 degrees Fahrenheit, or cool the air in a room or car by only a few degrees.
One of these new refrigeration devices was tested aboard last month's space shuttle mission.


Jury Foreman in 1987 Gotti Trial Is Indicted in Plot to Sell His Vote
The foreman of the anonymous jury that acquitted the reputed Mafia leader John Gotti in his 1987 Federal racketeering trial was indicted yesterday on charges that he conspired with the mob to sell his vote and influence the jury for $60,000.
The indictment held no new formal charges against Mr.
Gotti, the flamboyant, 51-year-old reputed leader of the Gambino crime family, the largest underworld group in the nation.
Mr.
Gotti has been acquitted in repeated state and Federal cases in recent years and is now on trial in Brooklyn on murder, loan sharking, tax fraud and other Federal racketeering charges.


New Housing Chief Plans Stricter Rules on Spending
The newly appointed chairwoman of New York City's Housing Authority, Sally Hernandez-Pinero, said yesterday that she planned to adopt strict new spending guidelines at the agency -- which has come under sharp criticism for lavish spending in the last week -- and to focus on improving the city's deteriorating housing projects.
"I am a fiscal conservative," Ms.
Hernandez-Pinero said in an inteview yesterday.
"These are the most austere times we have seen, and I plan to make sure that every agency dollar is spent wisely on public housing tenants and not bureaucrats." She said she would devise the new guidelines in the coming weeks.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary on Friday about Roberto d'Aubuisson, the Salvadoran rightist leader, misidentified his second wife and misstated his relationship with his first wife.
His widow, his second wife, is Marta Luz Angulo de d'Aubuisson; he was divorced, not separated, from his first wife, Yolanda, who is the mother of his four children.


Gotti Jury Hears Tapes Outlining Drug Dealings
Anyone in the Gambino crime family dealing drugs would be killed for fear he might turn informer, a reputed Gambino member said on a tape played yesterday at the trial of John Gotti.
Laying the groundwork for charges that Mr.
Gotti became the Gambino boss by ordering the murder of his predecessor, Paul Castellano, the prosecution played the tape to show that the Castellano murder grew out of a drug dispute.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Saturday about Kristi Yamaguchi's Olympic gold medal for figure skating misstated her accomplishment in some copies.
She became the first American woman, not the first American, to win the gold medal since 1976.
Brian Boitano won the men's gold medal in 1988.


Fake Fixes for the Economy
America suffers from two economic problems at once: in the short term, recession, and in the long term, stagnation.
President Bush and the House tax-writing committee propose to remedy both with tax cuts.
The Senate Finance Committee will propose a bill to do the same this week.
Each bill will promise to spur recovery -- and long-term growth.
Each promise clanks with falsity.
The sponsors mix up the short- and long-term needs of the economy and thereby provide for neither.
The bills provide no quick-hitting burst of tax cuts or spending hikes; they offer no permanent incentives for saving and investment.


On My Mind; Mideast: Forgotten Realities
The other day I picked up the newspaper and read an article on Israel.
I could not believe what I was reading.
The article, by Cynthia Ozick on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times, actually set forward some of the reasoning and historic logic behind the Israeli positions about settlements, the West Bank and peace talks.
Right there in print was an article that you might even call pro-Israeli.


Condition of Garden Ice Creates One-Rink Circus
There are several good places to ice skate in Manhattan.
Nice rinks can be found in Rockefeller Center and Central Park.
But they don't have 18,200 seats.
Madison Square Garden has 18,200 seats for hockey.
But what it doesn't have, much of the time, is smooth, hard ice.
Sunday night, when the Rangers beat Philadelphia, 2-1, in overtime, the ice was as bad as most people can ever remember it being.
Players skated over and around cracks and holes of various sizes, including one large flaw inside one of the blue lines in which gray concrete could be seen.


In a Rare Display of Optimism, Albany Talks of an Early Budget
They have not been able to produce a budget on time in seven years, but today Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and state legislative leaders said they might get the job done
early
this year.
After meeting in the Capitol this morning, Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin and Mr.
Cuomo both noted, somewhat jovially, that they now agree on spending levels in all but four general areas of the budget: Medicaid, education, transportation and criminal justice.
Of course, these represent somewhere between 85 percent and 90 percent of all state spending and, except for perhaps the Department of Agriculture and Markets, it was hard to see today where they had reached an accord on much of anything.


Review/Fashion; Welcome Glimpse Of Summer
Hooray for summer!
After the fizz of spring fashions, summer clothes look positively wholesome.
These are the styles that will be in the stores in May and June, when vacations and long weekends loom ahead, when attention is divided between surviving in the heat of the city and playing at the beach or in the country.


Group Invests $5 Million To Hedge Bets in Lottery
There is a dream common among regular lottery players: to wait until the jackpot reaches an astronomical sum and then to buy every possible number, guaranteeing a winner.
Sure, it would cost millions of dollars. But the payoff would be much richer.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; It's Time to Get Tough, Bush's Advisers Declare
For weeks, White House strategists put out bullying talk about "going negative" on Patrick J. Buchanan.
After New Hampshire, the President's strategists concluded they had talked too hard and hit too softly.
This week, they say, they really mean it.
They are ready to spend whatever they have to on commercials, including attack ads, and to accuse Mr.
Buchanan of "cheating" and question his patriotism to show how tough they can be.


Rhode Island Banking Deal
The Northeast Federal Corporation said today that it had received approval from the Office of Thrift Supervision to take over three credit unions and a bank in Rhode Island that were closed Jan. 1, 1991, and put in receivership.
All had been insured by the Rhode Island Shared Indemnity Corporation and were among 45 financial institutions closed by the state when Shared Indemnity's financial strength was called into question.


Gains Reported By Omnicom
The Omnicom Group reported yesterday that its net income rose for the fourth quarter and for the full year.
For the fourth quarter, net income was $20.2 million, or 72 cents a share, up 18.1 percent, from $17.1 million, or 66 cents a share, in the fourth quarter of 1990.
Revenues for the quarter rose 16.2 percent, to $376.2 million from $323.8 million.


The G.M. Cutbacks; A Surprise Cuts Deep in Westchester
The announcement today that General Motors will close its huge assembly plant here sent waves of surprise and anguish across Westchester County, where auto workers and Government officials had expected the plant to survive a spate of closings by the world's largest auto maker.
G.M. said the North Tarrytown plant, which has been producing cars since 1900 at a factory that sprawls along the Hudson River shore, would close permanently in the summer of 1995, eliminating nearly 3,500 jobs and one of the few major manufacturing operations that were spared during the steep industrial decline in the New York City region during the 1970's and 1980's.


An Israeli Buys Maxwell Paper
Yaacov Nimrodi, an arms dealer and former Israeli intelligence official, is buying Robert Maxwell's Israeli newspaper, Maariv, after beating out the Canadian publisher Conrad Black, Maxwell representatives said today.
Israeli news reports said Mr.
Nimrodi would pay $14.5 million for Maariv and its subsidiaries, which include a record and video company, a printing company and cable television.


Mardi Gras Bias Law Didn't Cause Tensions
To the Editor:
A disturbing premise marks a Feb. 7 Reuters article on New Orleans' Mardi Gras bias law.
Purportedly, an antidiscrimination ordinance, which banned and penalized carnival organizations that discriminate by race, sex, national origin, religion or sexual preference, "has deepened racial animosity in New Orleans."
The assumption that the law caused racial animosity is unfortunate when, according to the article, "most of the oldest such clubs bar membership to everyone except white male Christians." Serious conflict already exists when a holdover from Jim Crow manifests itself as alleged tradition in 1992.
Racial tension does not dissipate, as the article suggests in discussing the law's effect, when city officials "try to lessen the hard feelings it had caused in the white community." Blacks in New Orleans had justice and formerly the antibias law on their side, but there's no mention of their views.


Living History in a Broadcast Booth
THIS just in: Bob Wolff is packing this morning, including sun block and a battered baseball encyclopedia.
For generations of Easterners that means only one thing: spring training.
Bob (in sports, only team owners are called Mister) is a New York-area institution and probably the nation's longest-talking sportscaster.
In his 46th spring training, he estimates spending nine days of his life standing for the National Anthem.
Bob was Madison Square Garden's voice for 36 years, covering everything (O.K., not wrestling) from the Knicks, Rangers and boxing to tennis, horses and college hoops (sportscaster talk is contagious).
Bob covered Rose Bowls for the networks, championships in football, baseball, basketball, hockey and surfing (the latter not in the Garden).


Third World Growth Poses Threat to Ozone
To the Editor:
As the new evidence of ozone layer damage reported by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration shows, we have yet to experience the full impact of chlorofluorocarbons and other ozone-destroying emissions on the earth's atmosphere.
A ban on chlorofluorocarbons is a first step toward reducing even worse atmospheric damages.
But with the world's population growing by 95 million a year, and 90 percent of this growth occurring in the world's poorest countries, future human demands threaten to outpace environmental regulations.


Words and Pictures That Work For a Child
KID WORKS and Picture Wizard take two different approaches to software for children, and both do it well.
Kid Works is a word processor with graphics and sound modules.
Picture Wizard is a graphics program with word-processing elements.
Kid Works, from Davidson &amp; Associates of Torrance, Calif., is suggested for children from 4 to 10 years old.
For younger users, there is a big on-screen font; older users will probably switch to the smaller type.


Kenyans Will Be in the Running for Garden Honors
It is their first visit to the United States and their first time competing on a tight, board track, but when Moses Kiptanui and David Kibet of Kenya make their American indoor debut Friday night at Madison Square Garden, sparks should fly.
Kiptanui and Kibet will challenge Noureddine Morceli of Algeria in the mile at the U.S.A./Mobil Indoor track and field championships.
Morceli, ranked No. 1 in the world, is considered a threat to the world indoor record of 3 minutes 49.78 seconds set in 1983 by Eamonn Coghlan of Ireland.


Many Minds Were on N.H.L.
The same six teams dominated, and a familiar red machine won the championship.
But the 1992 Olympic hockey tournament, which ended on Sunday with a third gold medal for Coach Viktor Tikhonov of the Unified Team, was very different in one respect.
Whenever a player scored, or stick-handled the puck around a defenseman, or knocked an opponent off his skates with a rattling body check, reporters and scouts shuffled papers and scoured National Hockey League draft histories.
"Which team owns his rights?" became the unofficial slogan of the Meribel ice rink.


Rising Gang Violence Terrorizes Jamaica Capital
Even as a force of police officers and soldiers assembled around an armored personnel carrier to begin its patrol one recent morning, a scrappy bare-chested man of 26 just half a block away declared a defiant will to violence.
"There won't be any peace at all until we get a big machine gun and wipe all of them out over there," the man, Winston Peters, said in a thick patois as he peered through a bullet-pocked barricade across the patch of turf that separates his area of West Kingston from that of a rival gang.


Stocks Rise in Tokyo
Stock prices were up slightly in Tokyo today after a thin and directionless trading session.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues moved up 52.31 points, or 0.25 percent, to 21,025.55.
An estimated 160 million shares were traded.
On Monday, the index lost 318.57 points.


BRIEFS
*
Automatic Data Processing Inc., Roseland, N.J., agreed to purchase the Business Services payroll-processing division of BankAmerica Corp., San Francisco.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Brandon Systems Corp., Secaucus, N.J., a supplier of technical services for computer operations, acquired Informatix Corp. of America, a provider of computer training and consulting services.
Terms were not disclosed.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with Cleveland Gary, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.


A Few Winners in the Olympic Slush
The hundreds of commercials that were briefly interrupted by the Olympic coverage on CBS seem to have followed the route taken by the skiers in Albertville: downhill.
To this bleary-eyed viewer, most spots that appeared in the 16 days of telecasts ending Sunday proved as disappointing as the United States hockey team.


Trenton Votes to Delay School Board Elections
In a vote that could set up the first test of the Republicans' veto-proof control of the Legislature, both chambers today passed a bill that would postpone this year's school elections for three weeks.
Angry Democrats immediately asked Gov.
Jim Florio to use his veto for the first time in the 205th Legislature to quash the legislation.
"What we have with this bill is a stall, and everybody knows it," said the Senate minority leader, John A. Lynch.
"It's no secret the Republicans are desperate for time to find the money to balance the budget. This is a campaign-driven ruse to skim school aid so they can lower the sales tax."


Discovery of Worsening Family Ills Spurs Rush to Tap Potential Bonanza
RESEARCHERS' imaginations have been set on fire with the recent discovery of a new form of genetic mutation that makes genes expand as they are passed on from parent to child.
Rushing to their labs, the scientists have already deciphered the molecular details of the mutated genes and are embarked on a quest to see how far the new discovery can carry them in their search to understand human diseases.
The excitement grew in the last year among investigators studying a syndrome called "fragile X," the most common inherited form of mental retardation; myotonic dystrophy, the most common form of muscular dystrophy to strike adults, and X-linked spinal and bulbar atrophy, a rare neurological disease.
They noticed that the genes causing all three diseases grew larger with subsequent generations.
And the larger the gene, the more severe the disease symptoms.


India's Plan to Overhaul Government Provokes a Storm of Protest


A Hollywood Tell-All Author, One Year Later
It is 4 P.M. in the near-empty Polo Lounge of the Beverly Hills Hotel, and Julia Phillips, the author of "You'll Never Eat Lunch in This Town Again," is ordering a late lunch of eggs Benedict and vodka on the rocks.
"Nothing I did in my book is as mean as any of the people I wrote about," she says.
"These people are mean, really mean. Look, let's face it, it's a very funny kind of guy who comes to Hollywood. Short guys. Half-gay guys. Guys with club feet. Guys who felt they had a hole in their soul and could fill it up with money and power and glamour. And these women, these power women, they have this sweet gracious way of coming on to everyone and they kill you behind your back. So I'm considered bad-mannered because I stab you in the chest."


Aquarium, Set to Open in New Jersey, to Be Named After Former Governor


Life or Death for Russian Children
No aspect of the cataclysmic economic breakdown afflicting the former Soviet people cries out for help as poignantly as the probable fate of millions of children, should the West not give them emergency medical aid.
Americans can trust that U.S. medical professionals who administer vaccinations and medications are competent, that hospitals and clinics are sanitary, the needles sterile, the drugs safe.


Quintana Has Surgery After Auto Accident
Boston Red Sox first baseman CARLOS QUINTANA underwent surgery yesterday after breaking his left arm and his right big toe in an automobile accident while rushing to a hospital in Venezuela with two of his brothers, both of whom had been shot.
DAMASO BLANCO, a friend of Quintana's, said doctors believe Quintana might not be able to play for several months.
Quintana, who throws right-handed, hit .295 with 11 home runs last season.


High Court Rejects Leona Helmsley's Appeal in Tax-Fraud Case
The Supreme Court today rejected Leona M. Helmsley's appeal of her 1989 conviction for Federal income-tax fraud.
The Court's unanimous order, issued without comment, would ordinarily spell the end of the line for the self-styled Queen of the Helmsley hotel chain, who according to the testimony of a former housekeeper once declared that "only the little people pay taxes."


Why Cave on Honest Food Labels?
With great fanfare just three months ago, David Kessler, Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, unveiled a sweeping plan for overhauling the nation's food labeling system to eliminate misleading claims and hype.
But now, under pressure from the Office of Management and Budget, Dr.
Kessler seems ready to weaken a key portion of his plan.
At issue is the standard for allowing manufacturers to emblazon claims like "reduced fat" or "less sodium" on their packages in an effort to attract health-minded consumers.
Dr.
Kessler's original proposal, instituting a 1990 Congressional mandate for food labeling reform, sought to confine use of such nutrition claims to products that really did incorporate substantial reductions.
But his new "alternative approach," awaiting publication in the Federal Register, lets the companies qualify with minor tinkering.


Where AIDS Is a Stranger; 11 Years Into the Epidemic, Few Outside Urban Areas Find Help or Support
When Carmen D. Rivera, who has AIDS, needed a prescription filled recently, she had to wait five days.
The drug she wanted, DDI, is commonly used by AIDS patients, but she could not find a pharmacist near her home in Rockland County, N.Y., who carried it.
Some had not even heard of it.
Ms.
Rivera, who is 36 years old, also has no doctor to call her own.
Few in her area specialize in H.I.V.-related illnesses and even fewer accept Medicaid patients.
Her most consistent care has been on an emergency basis: she has been hospitalized six times in the last 10 months.
"Having to tell a new doctor you have AIDS is hard," she said.
"You shouldn't have to go through this every time."


Fatal Insomnia
A rare and fatal form of insomnia has been classifed as a prion disease, an inherited disorder that leaves spongy holes in the brains of its victims.
The finding, reported in the Feb. 13 issue of The New England Journal of Medicine, adds a strange twist to the puzzle of prion diseases, said Dr.
Pierluigi Gambetti, a neuropathologist at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland who was the lead author of the report.


Global Warming Threatens to Undo Decades of Conservation Efforts
GLOBAL warming, if it proceeds as many scientists predict, threatens to undo decades of conservation work and could mean the destruction of the monarch butterfly, the edelweiss, the polar bear and innumerable other species living in fragile ecosystems, an emerging body of scientific evidence suggests.
Even more ominous than the prospect of the extinctions, some scientists and conservationists say, is the possibility that the vast global web of life that plays a key role in keeping the planetary earth-atmosphere system stable could ultimately be weakened and made less resilient.
Plants, animals and microbes are essential to the system's functioning through the transfer of energy and the emission and absorption of critical gases like oxygen and carbon dioxide.


BUSH TO EASE RULES ON PRODUCTS MADE BY ALTERING GENES
The White House issued a new policy on biotechnology products today, saying that genetically engineered products are not dangerous in themselves and should not get too much scrutiny from Federal regulators.
The new statement is intended to spur the biotechnology industry and keep Federal regulators from singling out its products, including medicines, pesticides and crops, for extra regulatory procedures.
It would put the stamp of policy on practices that have been evolving in the Federal agencies for years, assuring that fewer and fewer biotechnology companies need special approval to release new organisms in the world.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The G.M. Cutbacks
General Motors listed the 12 plants it will close in its sweeping reorganization of its troubled North American operations.
It also reported a $4.45 billion loss for 1991 -- the largest in American corporate history.  [ Page A1. ]
Without $2.8 billion in one-time pretax charges for plant closings, G.M.'s fourth-quarter loss represents a significant improvement from the fourth quarter of 1990.  [ D6. ]


Olson Settles Suit
The sportswriter LISA OLSON settled her sexual harassment lawsuit against the New England Patriots, their owner, VICTOR KIAM, and several current and former employees, her lawyer said today.
The terms of the settlement were not disclosed.
Olson filed suit in April 1991, naming Kiam; the former general manager, PATRICK SULLIVAN ; the former public relations director, JAMES OLDHAM, and three players -- tight end ZEKE MOWATT, wide receiver MICHAEL TIMPSON and running back ROBERT PERRYMAN.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  LOAN GUARANTEE CONDITIONS SET
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said Israel would get $10 billion in loan guarantees only if it agrees to freeze settlement-building in the occupied territories, something Israel is not prepared to do.
A1  FIRST STEPS ON HAITI'S LONG ROAD
While there is still a long way to go before the ousted President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, returns to Haiti, he met with his Prime Minister-designate to flesh out a plan to restore an elected government.
A1  SHANGHAI'S WAR ON TILES
As decadent as chocolate cake and as addictive as blackjack, this vice of the masses, even when practiced in the privacy of the home, is the target of a crackdown in Shanghai.
A8  ANOTHER 'NO' TO MACEDONIA
The European Community has once again postponed recognizing the independence of the Yugoslav republic of Macedonia but has left open the possibility of doing so later.
A3  I.M.F.
LIKELY TO GET NEW MEMBERS
Russia and other former Soviet republics will most likely be admitted to the International Monetary Fund at the group's spring meeting in Washington.
A3  SOUTH AFRICA REFERENDUM SET
President F. W. De Klerk set the wording and the date of a referendum for white voters on who will determine the future of South Africa after apartheid.
A8  BEIJING'S NEW POLITICAL FLAVOR
Deng Xiaoping's new recipe for reforms, studded with bold challenges and glazed with watered-down capitalism, seems less a move for real change than an attempt to preserve Communism by making it more palatable.
A9  AN AMERICAN IN TOKYO
The United States Ambassador to Japan fears strife between the countries is exaggerated while success stories are unfolding quietly.
A7  REFLECTIONS OF A CULTURE
Chernovtsy Journal: An author reflects on a "little mirror of classical Austrian culture" and works to preserve its memories.
A4
Czechoslovakia has no market for its mammoth arms industry.  A10
King Fahd plans changes to give Saudi citizens a policy forum.  A6
Gang violence is swelling in Jamaica.  A10  National A12-18  THE G.M. AX FALLS
General Motors announced the first stage of its plan to close 21 plants over several years by selecting 12 plants in the U.S. and Canada, affecting 16,300 workers.
A1
The auto maker posted a fourth-quarter deficit of $2.5 billion.  D6
Workers in Michigan saw politics in their plant's closure.  D6
The decision to close the North Tarrytown plant cut deep.  D7  A HOLLYWOOD SURPRISE
Barry Diller stunned the entertainment industry by resigning as chairman of Fox Inc., parent of 20th Century Fox and the Fox TV network.
A1  BUYING THE JACKPOT
Investors in Virginia came tantalizing close to realizing a lottery player's dream: to wait until the jackpot reaches an astronomical sum and then to buy every possible number, guaranteeing a winner.
A1  NOVEL HEALTH PLAN CRITICIZED
A Congressional research agency criticized Oregon's effort to ration health care by ranking services as largely subjective and possibly unfair to low-income patients.
A1  LOOSENING ENVIRONMENTAL LAW
A top official of the Environmental Protection Agency proposed changes in laws for cleaning up toxic waste sites that would reduce enforcement and eliminate some environmental safeguards.
A12  HIGH COURT HEARS JUDGE'S APPEAL
Accepting an appeal from a Federal judge who was impeached and convictd, the Supreme Court agreed to examine the streamlined procedure the Senate has used to remove three Federal judges from office.
A14  CONGRESS QUESTIONS REPORTER
A reporter for National Public Radio was questioned by a special counsel on who may have disclosed Prof.
Anita Hill's statement accusing Justice Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment.
A13  STANFORD NEUROSURGEON OUSTED
A neurosurgeon who was accused of sexism by a female colleague at the Stanford Medical School said he had been removed as acting chairman of the department.
A13  KERREY SHIFTS HIS STRIDE
Struggling for survival in the Democratic Presidential race, Senator Bob Kerrey shed some of his quizzical detachment and donned more conventional political behavior as he stumped in South Dakota.
A16  BUSH SIDE STARTS BOXING
President Bush's supporters began a tougher assault on Patrick Buchanan, accusing him of dishonest advertising and less than true-blue patriotism.
A16  GOVERNOR'S TURN TO TAKE A SWING
Gov.
David Walters of Oklahoma accused the news media of ruining his reputation with articles about his political troubles and of driving his son to suicide with articles about a drug-related arrest.
A12
New Orleans Journal: Despite tension in clubs, Mardi Gras lives.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 GOTTI JURY TAMPERING CHARGED
The foreman of the anonymous jury that acquitted the reputed Mafia leader John Gotti in his 1987 Federal racketeering trial was indicted yesterday on charges that he conspired with the mob to sell his vote and influence the jury for $60,000.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-11  BIOTECHNOLOGY'S GO-AHEAD
Genetically engineered products are not inherently dangerous, the White House said, and should not have to undergo excessive Federal regulatory scrutiny.
The new policy covers uses from crops to medicines.
A1
A cool sound as an alternative to ozone-destroying chemicals.  C1
Retracing Teddy Roosevelt's perilous Amazon explorations.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Hollywood tell-all author.
C13  Berlin film festival winners.
C13  Theater: "Akin," at La Mama.
C14  Word and Image: "Dreaming in Cuban." C17  Fashion Page B7  Obituaries D22  Avraham Harman, chancellor of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem  Sports B9-15  Baseball: McCarthy to meet with Vincent.
B9  Basketball: Knicks fall to Suns, 104-95.
B9  Column: On Tyson's accuser.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  Fake fixes for the economy.
Why cave on food labels?
Justice Thomas's late hit.
Letters A20  A. M. Rosenthal: Mideast -- forgotten realities.
A21  Larry Doyle: For the digitally compressed.
A21  Jean Strouse: How economic empires are born.
A21  Arthur Hartman: Life or death for Russian children.
A21


Police Link Computer Virus To 2 at Cornell
Two Cornell University undergraduates were arrested last night and charged with developing and spreading a computer virus that disrupted computers as far away as California and Japan, Cornell officials said.
M.
Stewart Lynn, vice president for information technologies at the university in Ithaca, N.Y., identified the students as David Blumenthal and Mark Pilgrim.
Mr.
Lynn said that both Mr.
Blumenthal, who is in the engineering program, and Mr.
Pilgrim, in the college of arts and sciences, were 19-year-old sophomores.


Honorary Play for Dr. J
JULIUS ERVING insists that his one-on-one game against KAREEM ABDUL-JABBAR, which will be shown on Friday night on pay-per-view, is not a vehicle to turn back the clock on a career that ended five years ago.


Europeans Put Off Macedonia Issue
Bowing to Greek pressure, the European Community has once again postponed recognizing the independence of the Yugoslav republic of Macedonia but has left open the possibility of doing so in the coming months.
Greece has strongly opposed recognition of the southern Yugoslav republic on its borders as long as it uses a name that Athens sees as historically Greek.
Athens also fears that nationalist groups next door will rekindle the violent fights of earlier this century over reuniting the fractured parts of Macedonia.


New Orleans Journal; Behind the Fears, Mardi Gras as Usual
Claudia Glassman muttered to no one in particular, "I must remember to act like a grown-up." Then the mother of two, enveloped in the spirit of Mardi Gras, jumped up and down like the rest of the crowd.
After all, the city is celebrating its way toward Fat Tuesday on March 3, the day that ushers in Lent.
The city is teeming with parties, dress balls, glittering parades with celebrity guests and ragtag processions that stop at every corner bar.


Venezuela's Rating
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation yesterday reaffirmed its BB rating with positive outlook on $1.2 billion of Eurobonds issued by Venezuela.
The rating service noted the country's improving economic performance, commitment to stabilization and slower inflation rate.
S.&amp; P. also pointed out that after a recent coup attempt, the Government has outlined a $4 billion social spending program in an effort to deal with public dissatisfaction.


Review/Performance Art; Diamanda Galas Explores Pain, Obsession and Faith
A girlish giggle.
An old crone's cackle.
A medical technician's cool, impersonal tones.
A Southern preacher's confident oratory.
An opera singer's vibrant soprano.
A manic babble.
A piercing scream.
Those are some of the voices in Diamanda Galas's "Vena Cava," the solo work she is performing at the Kitchen (512 West 19th Street) through March 8.
The program notes say "Vena Cava" (the name of two major veins into the heart) draws on "the relationship between the dementia of severe depression and what is referred to as AIDS dementia." Although "Vena Cava" was originally to be a part of Ms.
Galas's "Plague Mass," which is explicitly about AIDS, it has become a separate work; any references to AIDS are indirect.


Bitter Oklahoma Leader Strikes Back at the Press
When Oklahomans watched reports of Gov.
David Walters's 1992 State of the State Message earlier this month, they were confronted with an extraordinary political and personal drama that began unfolding soon after he took office a year ago.
Instead of beginning with the usual budget review, Mr.
Walters spent 17 minutes of the 32-minute address asserting that his reputation had been ruined by malicious reporters covering a Federal investigation of his campaign finances and he implied that when the bright lights were later turned on his teen-age son after minor drug charges, suicide was the result.


Envoy Says U.S. Has Plenty of Successes in Japan
At a time when the United States' relations with Japan are growing more rancorous and fears are mounting that some sort of a crisis is in the offing, one American in Tokyo is urging that the situation not be seen as worse than it really is.
"When people talk about a rapid deterioration in our relationship, I don't know quite what to make of it," said Michael H. Armacost, the United States Ambassador to Japan.
"I'm concerned about these perceptions. At the official level, I must say that our relationship with Japan is good."


Review/Theater; A Medieval Troubadour Is Brought to the Present
In his haunting new musical play, "Akin" (at La Mama Annex), John Kelly brings to life the world of the medieval troubadour, then, through a split-frame narrative, moves his story centuries ahead into our present.
In characteristic Kelly fashion, he unifies mime, modern dance, music and music-hall variety into a living tableau of images.
Mr.
Kelly is one of the most intensely personal of performance artists even as his subjects range widely in classical history and mythology.
Through his alchemic art, he manages to identify himself with figures as disparate as Egon Schiele (in "Pass the Blutwurst, Bitte"), Orpheus and the Mona Lisa.
Each becomes an extension of the tragic poet personality he projects on stage.


Brooklyn Man Fatally Shoots an Infant and Himself
A 31-year-old Brooklyn man sprayed his former girlfriend's apartment with semiautomatic weapon fire yesterday morning, killing her 9-month-old son and then wounding her and their 6-year-old daughter, the police said.
The man then pointed the weapon at his own chest and killed himself.
The shooting came on the same day that the man, David Power, was to have met with a pastor to discuss his problems -- a series of stresses and disappointments that had overwhelmed him in recent months, one of Mr.
Power's brothers said.


In T. R.'s Footsteps, Scientists Embark on Amazonian Expedition
WITH Brazilian suspicions high over foreign designs on the Amazon, 19 American and Brazilian scientists and explorers embark today on a re-creation of a historical high point of binational cooperation: the perilous 1914 descent of the River of Doubt by Theodore Roosevelt and Candido Rondon.
Almost forgotten today, the first descent of the rapids-choked wilderness river nearly killed the 56-year-old former American President.
Delirious from malaria and a leg infection, he repeatedly begged to be left behind to increase his companions' chances for survival.
Three men died during the two-month ordeal.
But Mr.
Rondon, Brazil's premier Amazon explorer, brought the "bull moose" to safety, albeit 50 pounds lighter.


Shanghai vs. Mah-Jongg: What Odds?
In the evening, after folks here have emptied their rice bowls and put down their chopsticks, the criminal instincts overwhelm the most unlikely people -- high-school students, white-haired old women, even longtime Communist Party members.
As if by compulsion, someone locks the door and they prepare for an evening of law-breaking.
It is mah-jongg time.


Group Invests $5 Million To Hedge Bets in Lottery
There is a dream common among regular lottery players: to wait until the jackpot reaches an astronomical sum and then to buy every possible number, guaranteeing a winner.
Sure, it would cost millions of dollars. But the payoff would be much richer.


Bridge
Guessing the location of a missing queen, in the absence of any technical clues, is a common problem.
Many players rely on some arbitrary rule that has little or no technical merit.
Some, mainly in England, depend on "queen over jack," believing that the cards will be placed in that way if the queen captured the jack on the previous deal and the cards were not separated in the shuffle.
In Belgium it used to be believed that "the younger opponent has the queen," a rule that may involve a different sort of guesswork.


Nets' Mood Improves as Blaylock Practices
Topic A in the National Basketball Association's Atlantic Division all season has been the health and welfare of the Boston Celtics' Big Three: Larry Bird, Kevin McHale and Robert Parish.
The Nets, however, are more interested of late in topic B, as in Blaylock, Mookie Blaylock.
Blaylock, New Jersey's 6-foot-1-inch, 185-pound point guard, has missed his team's last nine games with slightly torn cartilage in his right knee, but he practiced today for the first time since he was sidelined.
He could play Tuesday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena against the Celtics, who are still without Bird.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Challenger; In Georgia, Buchanan Plays Up His Role as a Republican Outsider
In his most extensive day of campaigning in Georgia since his strong showing last week in the New Hampshire primary, Patrick J. Buchanan said today that President Bush and the "Republican establishment" were seeking to shut him out of the race for the party's Presidential nomination.
Mr.
Buchanan, the conservative commentator who received 37 percent of the vote in the New Hampshire Republican primary last Tuesday, complained that he was being kept off the ballot in several states by Mr.
Bush's supporters and that he was being denied opportunities to speak to Republican gatherings like the Southern Republican Leadership Conference meeting last week in Charleston, S.C.


Study Cites Way to Lower Infection After Surgery
SIMPLE alterations in hospital practice can greatly decrease the rate of infection after surgery, researchers say.
A new study has examined the timing of the use of antibiotics in patients undergoing operations.
Doctors have known for some time that the two hours before surgery is the optimum time, but even if drugs are prescribed to be given then, many factors can interfere with their prompt use, researchers at LDS Hospital in Salt Lake City found.


Firefighter Killed In Blaze in Queens
A New York City firefighter was killed early this morning fighting a three-alarm fire in Queens, fire officials said.
Deputy Commissioner Tom Kelly identified him as Lieut.
Thomas Williams of Rescue Company 4, a 30-year veteran of the department, who would have been 52 on Friday.
He said he was the first firefighter killed in the line of duty this year.


BASEBALL;
Continuing to forge stunning new economic ground, major league baseball clubs will pay more than 40 percent of their players $1 million or more this year.
Barring trades, the Yankees will have the greatest number of those players on any one team, 16.
With the salary-arbitration season completed and only lower-paid players left to be signed, 273 players are set to earn $1 million or more in 1992, a 21 percent increase over the 226 who were in that position at the close of salary arbitration a year ago.


The Ridiculous to the Snow-Blind
And so, the 7,110 minutes of CBS's Winter Olympics broadcast are over.
So are the 2,700 minutes of TNT's coverage.
Share a moment with the world?
How about share a never-ending marathon?
Or an Iditarod across all of the Arctic?
Devoted Albertville watchers deserve a documentary made of them by the Olympic filmmaker, Bud Greenspan.
Imagine the narration: "The relentless Mr. Couch Potato Head . . . weary from his previous night's labors . . . arises once more at 7 A.M. . . . to challenge anew the murderous course before him . . . to watch many more hours of slalom and skiing with guns . . . For he is a champion . . . spending 164 hours seated quietly on his sofa . . . taking copious notes . . . wearing out the tape heads of his video cassette recorder."


Siemens in Deal With Picturetel
Siemens A.G. of Germany, one of the world's largest makers of telecommunications equipment, and the Picturetel Corporation, a small but leading maker of video-conferencing systems, announced yesterday that they planned to jointly develop a picture phone for business use.
The device could be operated on a desktop, they said, yet retain the performance of much larger systems.
Price and availability were not disclosed, because the system is still under development.


Many Whose Disabilities Are Not Apparent Use Transit Passes
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 6 news article on abuse of New York City transit half-fare passes cites as "flagrant abuses" the case of a pass holder who ran for a train and another who carried an infant and stroller up a flight of stairs.
My wife, whose hands, arms and upper body are crippled by fibromyasitis, is quite capable of running for a train.
She is not capable of dressing herself, cutting her food, turning a doorknob, dialing a phone, opening a soda can or bottle, writing, typing or turning her head more than a few degrees.
Her physical therapy bills are $350 a month, but The Times feels that even the modest help a half-fare pass gives her is a "flagrant abuse" because her legs and feet still function normally and she is capable of running for a train.


College Will Soon Be Only for the Few
To the Editor:
Unless our institutions of higher education significantly change the way they operate, the children of most families will be unable to attend college by the end of this century (front page, Feb. 3).
Our studies at the Massachusetts Higher Education Assistance Corporation show that it could cost today's kindergartner more than $300,000 when he or she is ready to attend a top private university in 13 years.
Public universities will be cheaper but still expensive: about $75,000 for the student and four times that amount for the taxpayer.
As expensive as it sounds, it doesn't come close to covering the true costs of higher educaiton.
At many private universities, tuition and fees cover less than one-half the actual cost of education.
Thus the real cost to educate today's kindergartner will exceed $600,000.


Deposed Haitian Leader and Foes Completing Accord for His Return
Haiti's exiled President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, met here for more than eight hours today with his Prime Minister-designate, Rene Theodore, to put what aides described as finishing touches on a political plan to restore an elected government to the Caribbean nation.
The two leaders, once political rivals and still virtual strangers thrown together in a compromise coalition aimed at garnering the widest public support, need to discuss a wide range of policies to find common ground, aides said.
A crucial disagreement may be arising, however, over the future of the Haitian Army chief, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras.


New York Seeks to Shed Illegal Alien Prisoners
The State Correction Commissioner, Thomas A. Coughlin 3d, charged today that New York's crowded prisons were being used to warehouse 753 illegal aliens who belong in Federal custody -- enough to fill a medium-security prison.
Mr.
Coughlin and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo threatened to sue the Federal Government if it did not assume responsibility for the convicts.
They asserted that a 1990 Federal law requires the Federal Government to take into custody any illegal alien who has been convicted of an aggravated felony and who has served enough time in state prison to be eligible for parole or work release.


Patterns
Karan's Young Customers
Donna Karan, flush with the success of her lower-priced DKNY collection and her new designer men's wear line, introduced her first line of children's clothing in her showroom on Friday.


CHRONICLE
It may seem an unlikely venue for a man whose name conjures up images of the deepest regions of the sea, but JEAN-MICHEL COUSTEAU, the French marine explorer and son of Jacques-Yves Cousteau, will attend a benefit this evening at the Hermes boutique, 11 East 57th Street.
Hermes has declared 1992 the Year of the Sea and is donating part of the proceeds of sales of its specially designed accessories to the Cousteau Society and to conservation groups in 10 cities.
Tomorrow, Mr.
Cousteau will attend a similar event at the residence of the French Ambassador in Washington before going off to Honolulu, Beverly Hills and Palm Beach.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.75
6.17
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.96
3.92
6.01
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.08
4.03
6.01
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.11
7.07
7.76
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.96
7.94
8.04
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
9.00
9.23
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.81
6.80
7.33
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Off Limits, Even for a Senator
Senator Bob Kerrey's day in South Dakota had an inauspicious start when he made an early morning visit to Mount Rushmore and received a scolding from a park ranger.
Mr.
Kerrey, who rose before dawn and hurried his entourage into the morning chill to reach the famous monument before sunrise, took one long, soulful look at the granite faces set against a pink sky and then decided he wanted to hike closer.
"I don't ask you for much," he said to William Shore when the adviser balked at delaying the schedule.


Beth Israel Workers Approve New Contract
Unionized employees at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan resoundingly approved an innovative labor contract yesterday that guarantees their jobs for the next 40 months, a union official said.
The agreement, reached on Feb. 19, has been described by both the hospital and Local 1199 of the Drug, Hospital and Health Care Employees Union as a labor-management partnership that will improve recruitment, training and patient care.
Along with the promise of no layoffs, it includes free health care services for employees through the hospital, the formation of a labor-management committee for worker training and a commitment to match wage increases at other hospitals in the New York area.


Rightist Party Says It Plans to Contest Vote on Apartheid
The right-wing Conservative Party today belatedly picked up the political gauntlet thrown down by President F. W. de Klerk and announced that it would campaign against approval of the referendum that Mr. de Klerk called five days ago to determine white support for his policies of change.
"Such a Government deserves to be rejected and I therefore call on all white voters to reject Mr. de Klerk's reforms with great enthusiasm in his own referendum," said Andries Treurnicht, leader of the party, which defends apartheid.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
4.00
6.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.96
3.96
6.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.09
4.08
6.01
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.08
7.11
7.83
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.94
7.96
8.12
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.97
9.00
9.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.80
6.81
7.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Excerpts From High Court Ruling on Rights of Inmates
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court decision today in Hudson v.
McMillian, holding that excessive force against prisoners may violate the Constitution even in the absence of serious injury.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote the majority opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and by Justices Byron R. White, Anthony M. Kennedy and David H. Souter.
Justices John Paul Stevens and Harry A. Blackmun wrote separate concurring opinions.
Justice Clarence Thomas filed a dissenting opinion, which Justice Antonin Scalia joined.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR FOR THE COURT
This case requires us to decide whether the use of excessive physical force against a prisoner may constitute cruel and unusual punishment when the inmate does not suffer serious injury.
We answer that question in the affirmative.


Woman in Abortion Dispute Ends Her Pregnancy
A North Dakota woman who was at the center of a bitter abortion battle quietly terminated her pregnancy Saturday, and opponents of abortion say state employees illegally assisted her.
The woman, Martina Greywind of Fargo, is a desperately poor street person who is addicted to paint fumes.
Her six children were previously taken away from her by the state.


Helping Children to Heal Themselves
WHEN 10-year-old Jeremy Maloney learned last year that he had diabetes, his doctor gave him two choices: take the traditional route and spend a week in a hospital, where he would receive intravenous treatment to regulate his blood sugar level, or stay home and take personal responsibility for tracking and controlling his blood-sugar imbalance.
Jeremy chose the latter course.
His doctor, Steven B. Leichter, director of the Diabetes Institutes in Norfolk, Va., taught him how to manage his disease, and within a month he was giving himself insulin injections and was fully in charge of monitoring his diet.


Why Not Call Regency Gang Armed and Dangerous Criminals?
To the Editor:
As I read your Feb. 6 report of "dapper" thieves who startled a "posh hotel," meaning New York City's Regency, I was struck by your prose in describing a gunpoint robbery.
For the men who committed the crime you use such words as "band," "well-mannered," "polite," "courteous" and "well-dressed."


Getting Physical Is No Way to Rattle Rangers
There aren't too many teams who try to match the Rangers in the physical aspect of play this season, especially in Madison Square Garden.
The Chicago Blackhawks made such an attempt last night, and kept things entertaining and competitive for two-thirds of the game.
But the Chicago players seemed to lose their steam after the home team matched them bump for bump and goal for goal in the first two periods.
Perhaps it was because the Blackhawks were playing their third game in three cities in four nights and because they usually struggle for goals on the road.


Vehicle's Design Doomed Van Plant
Viewed in hindsight, the General Motors Corporation's assembly plant in North Tarrytown, N.Y., was probably doomed the moment the company decided in 1987 to manufacture its plastic-bodied mini-vans there.
Although mini-vans were an America original in the 1980's, G.M.'s adaptation, with its wide stance and sloping, futuristic nose, was far less popular than G.M. hoped.
The auto maker expected to sell 150,000 to 200,000 mini-vans annually, which would have kept the North Tarrytown plant humming at capacity and might have assured that subsequent mini-van models would be built there.


Theater in Review
Mary Stuart  Jean Cocteau Repertory  Bouwerie Lane Theater 330 Bowery (at Second Avenue)  Through April 3 By Friedrich Schiller; translated by Robert David MacDonald; directed by Casey Kizziah; set design, George Xenos; costumes, Gregory Gale; lighting, Brian Aldous; production manager, Patrick Heydenburg.
Presented by the Jean Cocteau Repertory, Robert Hupp, artistic director; David Fishelson, executive director.
WITH: Harris Berlinsky, Robert Ierardi, Joseph Menino, Grant Neale, Craig Smith, Elise Stone, Angela Vitale and Mark Waterman.


Migrants of Drug World: From Brooklyn to Buffalo
They leave Brooklyn in the dead of night with little more than bus fare, a change of clothes and a reputation on the streets.
Their destination is Buffalo.
Their job is to sell drugs.
Bands of young New York City drug dealers, skilled in the use of guns and terrorist tactics to take over neighborhoods, are being recruited to hustle the streets of Buffalo and surrounding cities and towns, according to local and Federal law-enforcement officials.
Lured by higher-level dealers' promises of a safer and more lucrative trade, these teen-agers have become the migrant workers of the drug world.


Fashion World Should Look at Real Women; The Surgeon's Version
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 29 report on the reassurances surgeons are giving their patients about silicone gel breast implants exposes the disturbing presuppositions of the cosmetic plastic surgery industry.
According to the American Society of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons, small breasts are not only "deformities," but "a disease which in most patients results in feelings of inadequacy."


Leafs Try a Long Shot And Catch the Devils
The Devils have difficulty winning when Chris Terreri has an average night in goal.
Tonight, Terreri was below average, allowing a shot from nearly 100 feet away to end up in his net, and New Jersey had to settle for a 5-5 tie.
The Devils seemed fairly content despite squandering two-goal leads twice in the third period.


Free-Market Economist To Head Cleveland Fed
A well-connected Milton Friedman disciple from California will become the new president of the Federal Reserve Bank in Cleveland on March 8.
The choice of Jerry L. Jordan, the chief economist at First Interstate Bancorp in Los Angeles, to replace H. Lee Hoskins, who resigned in November to become the chief executive of Huntington Bancshares Inc. in Columbus, means that one high-profile advocate of hard money and a free-market approach to bank regulation will be replaced by another.


HIGH COURT DEFINES NEW LIMIT ON FORCE BY A PRISON GUARD
In an important decision on prisoners' rights, the Supreme Court ruled today that a beating or other use of excessive force by a prison guard may violate the Constitution even if it does not result in a serious injury to the prisoner.
The vote was 7 to 2, with a majority opinion by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor and a dissenting opinion by Justice Clarence Thomas, who said that the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment "is not, and should not be turned into, a national code of prison regulation." Justice Antonin Scalia signed Justice Thomas's dissent.


Metropolitan Diary
THE scene: the bread line at Zabar's where Marion Thunberg encounters an excited elderly woman who says: "I'm so thrilled. I just saw Tony Randall in meat!"
. . .
Dear Diary:


Gloomy Outlook Lifts Treasuries
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher and interest rates fell yesterday, propelled by a report showing that consumer confidence fell to near-record lows in February.
The results of the Conference Board's monthly survey of consumer attitudes took market participants by surprise, and prices rose sharply after the figures were released.


EMPLOYEE LAYOFFS IN NEW YORK AREA DISRUPT ECONOMIES
With companies from General Motors to United Technologies announcing plans to shrink their work forces, the New York City region faces the prospect of at least 40,000 employees losing their jobs during the next few years, primarily in manufacturing, transportation and government.
And those are just the layoffs that have been publicly announced.
Coming on the heels of the more than 500,000 jobs lost in the region since employment peaked in February 1989, this latest round of announcements is certainly not good news.
Even before this, the total exceeded the 350,000 jobs lost in the region from late 1973 through 1976, when the area was suffering its worst recession since the 1930's.
Heightened Concern
But there is a new and, in many ways, more disruptive element to the latest round of layoff announcements.
Companies are revealing that thousands of people will be laid off but are providing scant details as to when, where or who will be affected.
That is creating heightened uncertainty, and causing even those whose jobs are not threatened to cut back their spending.


Vincent Agrees to Talk With McCarthy Again
Daniel McCarthy remains alive in his bid to be the Yankees managing partner, but he still has fences to mend and hurdles to overcome.
After thinking it over, Commissioner Fay Vincent summoned McCarthy today for a meeting at 3 P.M.
Thursday.
"I just decided I would see him," Vincent said by telephone from New York.
"We told him to be here on Thursday and he's coming."


C.I.A. Chief Says North Koreans Are Hiding Nuclear Arms Projects
Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, said today that North Korea is believed to be hiding parts of its nuclear weapons program despite pledges to join with South Korea in making the peninsula nuclear-free and to open up its installations to international inspection.
In testimony before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Mr.
Gates also predicted that the Government in Pyongyang could possess a nuclear weapon from within a few months to a few years.  'A Deception Plan'
"We have some information that I can't go into here in this setting that suggests that they have a deception plan for hiding their nuclear capabilities," Mr.
Gates said, without elaborating.
At another point in his testimony, he said, "There are, in a certain understatement, grounds for questioning the North's sincerity, given that it has not yet even admitted the existence of, much less declared the plutonium production reactors and a reprocessing facility at the Yongbyon nuclear research center."


Brooklyn Office Project Gets Long-Term Tenant
The Dinkins administration signed a 20-year-lease yesterday to move the Brooklyn District Attorney's office into a long-stalled commercial office and hotel complex in downtown Brooklyn, providing the linchpin that could lead the way to construction of the first hotel in the borough in half a century.
Mayor David N. Dinkins, in a ceremony in Brooklyn's Borough Hall, said the district attorney's office would become the "anchor tenant" in the 31-story commercial office tower, the Renaissance Plaza, that has been planned since 1984, but had foundered as several prospective tenants pulled out.
The development is to include a Hilton Hotel.


BRIEFS
*
Carter-Wallace Inc., New York, a pharmaceuticals and toiletries company, approved a 3-for-1 split of its common and class B common stock, to holders of record on April 27.  *
IVAX Corp., Miami, a holding company and specialty chemicals concern, acquired Willen Drug Co.
Terms were not disclosed.


Dow Falls 24.59; Economic Concerns Cited
Stock prices took a moderate spill yesterday, pulled down by lingering concerns about interest rates and gloomy data on consumer confidence.
The Dow Jones industrial average was off 24.59 points, to 3,257.83.
Trading was choppy and made more pronounced by program traders, said Birinyi Associates, which tracked 10 programs on the day.


Review/Television; A Look at the Haters and the Hated
"48 Hours on Hate Street," at 8 tonight on CBS, is a scrapbook of recent clashes around the country over race, homosexuality and charges of anti-Semitism.
Although the patched-together hour does not provide much support for Dan Rather's opening statement that extremists are moving into the mainstream, it does point up what seems to be a resurgence of group tensions.
In Denver, Phil Jones interviews Shawn Slater, a 25-year-old graduate of the Culinary Institute of America who is a rising star in the supposedly cleaned-up Knights of the Ku Klux Klan.
"I don't hate anybody," he says, but the benign image is somewhat smudged by a stomach tattoo, which he has difficulty explaining, that features Hitler, Mussolini, Charles Manson and a swastika.


Celebrating Rossini's Birthday And His Truly Operatic Tastes
COMMEMORATING the 200th anniversary of the birth of the composer Gioacchino Rossini, who was born on Feb. 29, is as much a job for chefs as it is for musicians.
He was a notorious gastronome and bon vivant, remembered not only for "The Barber of Seville," "William Tell," "Cinderella" and other operas but also for the way he liked his filet mignon.
Tournedos Rossini, perhaps the most famous of the dishes identified with the composer, consists of a filet mignon sauteed in butter, then parked on a crouton, also sauteed in butter.
This assembly is topped with foie gras and truffles, then annointed with a rich Madeira sauce.


Hibernians In Accord On Parade
Pressure increased on the organizers of the St.
Patrick's Day Parade yesterday to allow a gay and lesbian group to march in it, even as warring factions of the organization, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, came to an agreement on who would be the parade's official sponsor.
At a news conference he called at City Hall, Councilman Tom Duane, who is Irish and gay, urged the city's politicians not to march in the parade unless it includes the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization "in a manner they deem acceptable."


Clemens Is Absentee
While heartened by the early arrivals of Wade Boggs and Mike Greenwell, the Boston Red Sox spring training camp at Winter Haven, Fla., was taking on an edge yesterday, but pitcher Roger Clemens remained absent and apparently preparing to honor a charity date in Houston.
On the second day of workouts for pitchers and catchers, Clemens, who won his third Cy Young Award last season, had still not called to say why he was not in camp or when he would arrive.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Greetings Corp., Cleveland, named Morry Weiss chairman.
He retains the title of chief executive.
He will be succeeded as president and chief operating officer by Edward Fruchtenbaum. *
Avon Products Inc., New York, named Robert F. McCracken senior vice president of corporate strategy and development.
He succeeds Robert W. Pratt Jr., who is retiring.


On Cooking Literacy
To The Living Section:
In "The Lost Generation, Cooking Illiterates"  [ Jan. 15 ] , one of the terms, used several times, was "carmelized." I don't know that one.
I
do
know "caramelized" meaning to create a thin crust of burned sugar, like creme caramel and caramel candy, or even caramel butterscotch pudding.
Or have I missed another word change?
Are we going to see creme carmel on French menus?
ABBIE F. SALNY  Wayne, N.J.


Friendships for Health
To The Living Section:
Jane E. Brody's Personal Health column, "Maintaining Friendships for the Sake of Your Health"  [ Feb. 5 ]  illustrates the dangers of society's tendency to medicalize virtually everything, even intimate relationships.
Her view that friendships should be maintained for their health benefits and terminated when they lose these benefits makes me think she has forgotten the difference between friendship and aerobic exercise .
FELICIA ACKERMAN  Professor of Philosophy Brown University Providence, R.I.


It's Finally Agreed: Germany to Regain A Stolen Trove
After a year and a half of wrangling, representatives of the German Government and the heirs of Joe T. Meador, an American Army officer who stole a nearly priceless collection of medieval treasures from a mineshaft outside of Quedlinburg in the final days of World War II, completed an agreement yesterday to return the artworks to Germany.
First, however, the glittering, thousand-year-old treasures -- which Klaus Maurice, the chief German negotiator, called "one of the most important collections of religious art of the early Middle Ages" -- will be displayed at the Dallas Museum of Art for seven or eight weeks beginning March 7.
Officials of the museum had agreed to store the artworks during the legal battle in exchange for the right to exhibit them when a settlement was reached.


Knocking Around
He's no Bo, but Los Angeles Rams running back CLEVELAND GARY does know baseball, too.
The 25-year-old outfielder, who has been a two-sport pro for three years, signed a minor league contract Monday with the California Angels and has been assigned to their Class A level.
Gary, a converted pitcher, was released earlier this month by the Montreal Expos organization.(AP)


U.S. Weighs Bigger Cut In Farm Trade Barriers
The Bush Administration may push for bigger cuts in agricultural trade barriers than are called for in the current plan to reform world trade, a United States trade official said today.
United States trade officials, appearing before the House Agriculture Committee, endorsed a farm trade reform proposal from Arthur Dunkel, Director General of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the Geneva-based trade organization.


Mercedes Is Scali's Redemption
In a surprising climax to its agency review, Mercedes-Benz of North America Inc. yesterday dismissed McCaffrey &amp; McCall, its shop since 1979, and hired Scali, McCabe, Sloves, which lost the Volvo account 15 months ago in auto advertising's most notorious and costly scandal.
"Vindication," Marvin Sloves, Scali's chairman and chief executive in New York, exuded in a telephone interview.
"All I said was that we wanted to get back into the automobile business, and we have."


Flint Journal; A City Where Hope Runs on Empty
In its glory days, not so very long ago, when jobs seemed almost as plentiful as autumn leaves, this town proudly called itself "Vehicle City," because of all the cars and trucks its workers produced for the General Motors Corporation.
But the American Dream has been fading into bitter memory here for years now as job after job has been lost to layoffs and plant closings.
Vehicle City is running out of gas.


CHRONICLE
The brigade of doting bachelor fathers grows in Hollywood: JACK NICHOLSON and REBECCA BROUSSARD have had a second child, a spokesman for the couple has announced, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Miss Broussard gave birth on Thursday to an 8-pound, 6-ounce boy, who has not yet been named.
The couple also have a daughter, Lorraine Broussard-Nicholson, 20 months old.
Mr.
Nicholson has a daughter, Jennifer, 28 years old, from his marriage to Sandra Knight.


Johnson &amp; Johnson Injunction Lifted
Johnson &amp; Johnson won a round yesterday in a battle with the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company over the packaging of a combination pain-killer and sleeping pill.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan lifted a temporary injunction that had blocked the sale of Johnson &amp; Johnson's Tylenol PM analgesic.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the completion of an aquarium in Camden, N.J., misstated the duration of the project.
The aquarium was conceived in 1986, and construction began in December 1988.


Osborne Penalizes 2
Two Nebraska football players have been kicked off the team following their arrests in connection with a brawl with members of the Cornhuskers' baseball team last Friday at a party.
"I know the facts, and we'll stand by our decision," TOM OSBORNE, the Nebraska football coach, said last night.
"They won't play any more football at Nebraska."


Abortion Doctor Loses License
New York State has revoked the medical license of a doctor who is accused of severing the arm of a fetus in a botched abortion in November.
The maiming of the baby girl, who was born alive the day after the incomplete abortion, is one of several charges against the doctor, Abu Hayat.
He has also been accused of perforating the uterus of a woman who died shortly afterward at a hospital and with stopping an abortion midway through because the patient could not give him an extra $500.


Teacher, Doctor, Counselor in One; New Public School Also Provides Community Service
Once Intermediate School 218 opens in Washington Heights on Monday, it will hardly ever close.
Fifteen hours a day, six days a week, 52 weeks a year, its doors will be open not only to its 1,100 students, but also to their mothers and fathers and other children in the neighborhood, offering dental treatment, drug counseling and dozens of other social services along with the three R's.


Kerrey Is South Dakota Victor; Keeps Presidential Hopes Alive
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska kept his Presidential campaign alive today with a substantial victory in the South Dakota Democratic primary, an outcome that imperils the candidacy of Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa.
President Bush was not opposed on the Republican slate after Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator, lost a court bid to have his name added to the ballot.
But in what may have been a message of dissatisfaction with the incumbent, about a third the Republican primary voters chose a slate of uncommitted delegates.


Dead Whale That Washed Ashore on Long Island Is Examined


History Defeats Islanders
The Islanders, in need of a victory in their quest to catch Pittsburgh for the fourth and final playoff spot in the Patrick Divison, did not have history on their side when the game began against Philadelphia tonight.
Nor when it ended.
New York, which has not won a regular-season contest at the Spectrum since Nov. 21, 1987, and has managed just 3 ties in the last 15 games on Philadelphia's home ice, kept that futile streak intact by losing to the Flyers, 4-1, before 16,981 spectators.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  SUSPICIONS ABOUT KOREAN ARMS
Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, said his agency believes that North Korea is hiding parts of its nuclear arms program despite pledges to join with South Korea in making the peninsula nuclear-free.
A1  SENATE PUTS PRESSURE ON CHINA
Responding to China's human rights record, trade surplus and arms exports to the Middle East, the Senate voted to impose conditions on the renewal in June of the country's access to the U.S. market.
A1  MAO, STALIN AND KOREA
The publication of a cable from Mao to Stalin in 1950 provides the first documentary evidence of Chinese intentions in entering the Korean War against U.S. forces.
A8  OUSTED HAITIAN LEADER SIGNS PACT
Haiti's ousted President signed an agreement with a former rival pledging to form a "government of national unity" and begin a timetable for his return home.
A3  INSIGHTS INTO TOKYO POLITICS
A former Japanese Prime Minister and an ex-Cabinet minister admitted in testimony that they had received large sums of cash as unreported contributions.
They denied they had done anything improper.
A3  SENATORS ASSAIL U.S.
ON ISRAEL
A number of senators assailed the Bush Administration for demanding that Israel halt settlement building as a condition for $10 billion in loan guarantees.
But the policy does not seem to be endangered.
A6  U.S.
EMPLOYMENT AND SAUDI JETS
Eager to keep American defense workers employed in an election year, the Administration is considering going ahead with a sale of 72 advanced F-15 fighter planes to Saudi Arabia.
A6  BUSH AND THE BLEAK DRUG BATTLE
Two years after traveling to South America to devise a plan to combat drug traffickers, President Bush is to meet with Latin American leaders on expanding the effort.
Critics say it has borne little fruit.
A7  South African Conservatives to oppose de Klerk in referendum.
A4  National A10-19  UPHOLDING PRISONERS' RIGHTS
The Supreme Court ruled that a beating by a prison guard may violate the Constitution even if it does not cause serious injury to the prisoner.A1  WITHER THE NUCLEAR STOCKPILE?
Illustrating the size of the problem of how to dismantle the nation's nuclear arsenal, the Energy Department and its critics argued over a proposal to store plutonium in the Texas Panhandle.
A1  KERREY WINS IN SOUTH DAKOTA
Senator Kerrey of Nebraska kept his Presidential hopes alive with a substantial victory, while a third of Republican voters bypassed President Bush in favor of uncommitted delegates.
A1  CLINTON TURNS ATTENTION HOME
In a move that could benefit his Presidential aspirations, Governor Clinton left the campaign trail to return to to Arkansas to shepherd through the legislature a measure on the protection of children.
A18
Victory transformed the Tsongas campaign staff.  A18  G.O.P. AND THE SOUTH
Seeking the votes of Georgia Republicans, President Bush and Pat Buchanan hit every button in trying to prove their adherence to the South's conservative traditions.
A19
President Bush confronted a new accusation on his values.
A19  LAWMAKERS AND BAD CHECKS
In a move certain to disconcert some lawmakers, a House ethics subcommittee prepared to release the names of Representatives who overdrew large sums from their House bank checking accounts.
A10  ANOTHER BLOW TO FLINT
G.M's decision to close a plant in Flint, Mich., was just the latest in a series of blows to a place once proudly known as "Vehicle City." A10
Local leader in Los Angeles looked for a "new vision" for the city.
A10  LOST BATTLE ON ABORTION
Rebuffing an anti-abortion group that offered to pay her to carry her fetus to term, a pregnant street person addicted to paint sniffing had an abortion.
A10  NEW ROUND IN ESTATE FIGHT
Lawyers for Stanford University and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art blocked trustees of two disputed estates from immediately disbursing multimillion-dollar bequests to the Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston.
A14  FEARS OF RACIAL HARASSMENT
The killing of a Japanese businessman in California heightened fears among Japanese-Americans of a spread of racial harassment.
A12  Education Page B6  Tribal colleges are giving American Indians new opportunities to learn.
Success in fundraising by women's colleges challenges myths.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 LAYOFFS: WHAT LIES AHEAD
The uncertainty caused by the prospect of a loss of at least 40,000 employees losing their jobs during the next few years is causing economic turmoil in the New York region, with people cutting back just in case.
A1  THE DRUG CARAVAN
Bands of young New York City drug dealers, skilled in the use of guns and terrorist tactics to take over neighborhoods, are being recruited to hustle the streets of Buffalo and surrounding cities and towns, according to local and Federal law-enforcement officials.
A1  Neediest Cases B2  Business Digest, D1 The Living Section C1-10  HEARTS, MINDS AND STOMACHS
The advocates of good health and the advocates of food-for-pleasure are at war, and the stakes are the nation's annual $362.7 billion market for groceries and the role of national tastemaker.
For the consumers caught between the two, a result is confusion.
A1
Wine Talk C1  How a heart attack changed a company.
C1  Health Page C13  Personal Health: Unexpected side effects from common drugs.
Arts/Entertainment C14-20  Stolen art trove is heading back to Germany.
C15  The record industry celebrates grammy night.
C15  Music: Quartet of soloists.
C15  Sports B7-14  Basketball: Nets defeat the Celtics, 109-95.
B7  Hockey: Rangers win.
B7  Horse Racing: Winning the Derby and losing the war.
B7  Obituaries D21  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  Pressing principle in Israel.
The President and the sewer.
Mr.
Bush's artless surrender.
Letters A20  Anna Quindlen: More than biology.
A21
Garry Trudeau: Cyberspin.
A21  Walter F. Mondale: Primaries are no test of character.
A21  Rakiya Omaar and Alex de Waal: Who prolongs Somalia's agony?
A21


How a Heart Attack Changed a Company
EXECUTIVES of big food companies rarely seem excited about their products.
They may talk about the virtues of their reformulated puddings or their fruit-flavored cereals, but they seldom give the impression that they actually eat the stuff.
Charles M. Harper, the chairman of Conagra Inc., the nation's second largest food company, is a different story.
Before a visitor has a chance to say how she takes her coffee, he urges her to try one of his favorite products, a low-calorie, low-fat cocoa.
"It's only 20 calories," Mr.
Harper said.
"You might not care about that, but I do." Encouraged, he offers a taste of Conagra's new low-fat breakfast sandwich, which he eats every weekday morning.


Judge in Chip Case Discusses Long Ordeal
J.
Barton Phelps, a retired judge, took on what he thought would be a six-week arbitration job in 1987.
It turned into a five-year ordeal in which he was asked to decide whether Advanced Micro Devices Inc. should gain the rights to the Intel Corporation's 386 microprocessor, one of the treasures of the chip industry.
Now the ordeal is at end, at least for Judge Phelps.
He issued a surprising opinion on Monday that seemed to leave both companies partly satisfied and partly unhappy.
He did not give Advanced Micro the rights to Intel's processor, but rather gave it the rights to use Intel's intellectual property in Advanced Micro's 386 clone.


Senate Backs Curbs On Beijing's Access To Markets in U.S.
Responding to China's human rights record, soaring trade surplus and continued arms exports to the Middle East, the Senate voted today to impose conditions on the renewal of China's favorable trade status with the United States in June.
The vote sends the legislation to President Bush after nearly three years of political maneuvering.
The Administration has repeatedly threatened to veto the legislation, and the 59-to-39 vote today fell 8 votes short of the two-thirds majority that would be needed to override a veto if all senators voted.
But the margin was wider than in last summer's vote on the same issue, when the Democrats also prevailed, 55 to 44.


Fashion World Should Look at Real Women; What Is Wrong
To the Editor:
A truly informative discussion of women's self-esteem issues (front page, Feb. 6) would follow up on what it is that black girls get that white girls don't get: a clear, unequivocal message from their parents that nothing is wrong with them, only with the way the world treats them.


Traffic in Baby Parts Has No Factual Basis
To the Editor:
I was disheartened that Roger Morris treats as fact the false claim that "third world babies are grown on farms to provide organ transplants for first world customers" in "Toward a Policy That's No Longer Foreign" (Op-Ed, Feb. 4).
I have closely tracked this groundless rumor, which has appeared hundreds of times in the world press since January 1987.
This is the first time it has been repeated uncritically in a major United States publication.


Review/Concert; A Quartet of Soloists With Chamber Music
Chamber music, as it was practiced at Carnegie Hall on Monday night, is the product of long and difficult translation.
At least two -- and perhaps all three -- of the piano quartets on the program were written in another language and for another time, intended not for audiences of 2,800, not for brilliant instruments, nor even for virtuosos accustomed to the public oratory of current concert life.
How does one arrive at an appropriate modern metaphor for Beethoven's E-flat Quartet, composed in 1796 for a featherweight keyboard instrument as easily transportable as one's dining room table and for a violin, viola and cello softened and dulled by gut strings?
When Schumann's E-flat Quartet was written in 1842, instruments were already bigger and tougher, yet still spoke a comparatively modest dialect.


As for That Myth About How Much Alumnae Give
A recent series of striking successes by women's colleges in raising money from their alumnae challenges the widely held belief that that women give less generously to colleges than men do.
Wellesley College, for example, recently completed a five-year fund-raising campaign that raised $167 million, setting a record a fund-raising drive by a liberal arts college.
Women's Colleges at the Top
In fact, three of the four biggest fund-raising drives by private liberal arts colleges have been by women's colleges, school officials and other specialists say.
The other largest campaigns, all concluding within the past two years, were by Smith College, which raised $163.2 million, Pomona College, a coeducational school which raised $157 million, and Mount Holyoke, which reached $139.4 million.
Wellesley's campaign concluded earlier this month.


Mislabeling and Health Risks Tied to Skin Lightener Creams
Skin lightener creams, which for decades have been primarily advertised to African-Americans, are often mislabeled and used improperly, posing risks of skin problems of which most users are unaware, some experts caution.
A new study of skin bleaches by the New York City Consumer Affairs Department asserts that misleading labels and advertising encourage misuse of the products and that misuse can cause disfiguring skin conditions.


After Blaze Lasbeled as Arson, Firefighters Mourn the Loss of a 30-Year Veteran


CHRONICLE
The only sad element at the Saturday show and party for the 25th anniversary of the Ridiculous Theatrical Company is the fact that Charles Ludlam, the founder of the innovative troupe, will not be on hand to witness the merriment.
Mr.
Ludlam died of AIDS in 1987.
The company is known for its wildly farcical, original and often campy productions that have pushed the art of parody to extremes.


San Marino Journal; After 1,600 Years, Is It Time to Join the World?
It has taken some time for the winds of change to sweep from the Caucasus and the Carpathians to this rocky redoubt that forms a graceful mole on Italy's thigh.
But now San Marino, which prides itself on being the world's oldest and the world's smallest republic -- and once prided itself, too, on its aloofness -- is on its way to joining the United Nations, just like some of the newly independent former Soviet republics.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Tsongas Picks Up Speed But Loses Some Control
Before his victory in New Hampshire, Paul E. Tsongas got by with a campaign staff that consisted mostly of old friends and a band of young volunteers who called themselves the "Tsongi."
Now, he has been discovered by political professionals as a potential meal ticket, and with scores of paid employees and volunteers joining the staff, Mr.
Tsongas is being buffeted by the loss of control that goes with the move to prime time.


Nets Rise Well Above Themselves In Victory
Sure, Larry Bird was still on the injured list, as he was when the Nets beat the Celtics alomost six weeks ago in Boston.
But Robert Parish was back, scoring 10 points and grabbing 6 rebounds, and Kevin McHale was back, sore calf and all, to score 14 points and snatch 10 rebounds.
And this time the Nets manhandled the Celtics even more easily, 109-95, tonight before a crowd of 16,388 spectators at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Tyson Lawyers Out
The lawyers who represented MIKE TYSON during his rape trial have been replaced because of dissatisfaction with "the way that they painted my client," DON KING, the promoter, said last night in an interview on the Black Entertainment Television program "Our Voices."
"We've got ALAN DERSHOWITZ and we're going to try to get this thing resolved," said King.
"A lot of things that could have been done wasn't done."


Winning Derby but Losing War
In the distance beyond the barns, you can hear the echoes of the warning given to generations of racing people by Horatio Luro, the Grand Senor of the thoroughbreds: "You can't squeeze the lemon dry."
Horses on two continents are straining and training these days to get to the Kentucky Derby on May 2, and to win it and plunge forward to the Preakness and the Belmont Stakes, all within five weeks' time.
And they're doing it in spite of the knowledge that last year's Derby winner, Strike the Gold, has lost 10 straight races since winning the prize, and still nobody knows what happened to him.


Ousted Haitian Leader Signs Pact With Old Rival
Nearly five months after he was ousted in a coup, the exiled Haitian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, signed an agreement today with a former political rival who is now his Prime Minister, pledging to form a "government of national unity" and to begin a timetable for the President's return to Haiti.
With a formal accord in place, diplomats say Father Aristide, who was deposed by the military under Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, may also be more willing to compromise on the army chief's future.


Neighbors Testify Against Plans for Roosevelt Raceway
If there's one thing Long Island doesn't need, it's another shopping center and movie-theater complex, neighbors of Roosevelt Raceway said at a public hearing today.
The raceway is the largest piece of undeveloped commercial property in Nassau County.
"We already have 23 movie theaters in a three-mile radius," said Beverlee Szimanski, chairwoman of the Association of Stewart Avenue in South Westbury.
"What do we need another one for?"


Corrections
An article in Science Times yesterday about new refrigeration technologies rendered the name of a researcher at the Naval Postgraduate School incorrectly.
He is Jay Adeff.


People
*
Lynn Vernon, a senior vice president at Bozell Detroit, Southfield, Mich., has been named director of client services for Chrysler U. S. A., a new position. *
George A. Rosenberg, president and chief operating officer at Cohn &amp; Wolfe, New York, has been named to the additional, new post of chief executive.


Killing Alarms Japanese-Americans
The stabbing death this week of a Japanese businessman who had reportedly been the target of anti-Japanese remarks and a death threat heightened fears today among Japanese-Americans of a spread of racial harassment.
News of the killing of the man, Yasuo Kato, a 49-year-old real estate consultant in the Ventura County town of Camarillo, spread quickly among Japanese-Americans here, adding to a sense of uneasiness that community leaders said had been caused by a recent spate of ugly incidents.


Corrections
A brief article on Thursday about the slaying of Mary Kerner, an 80-year-old woman, misidentified the Brooklyn neighborhood where the attack took place.
It was Brooklyn Heights.


Yawkey 'Very Serious'
The owner of the Boston Red Sox, JEAN YAWKEY, remained in very serious condition as the result of a recent stroke, officials at Massachusetts General Hospital said yesterday.
Mrs.
Yawkey, 83 years old, was listed in serious condition after suffering the stroke last Thursday, but her condition was changed on Sunday night.


Sides Warm Up for Tax Fight Today
Republicans and Democrats warmed up for the angry floor debates that will begin on Wednesday over tax and growth legislation with several hours of wrangling over both the substance of competing bills and the procedures for considering them.
In a drawn-out rhubarb at the Rules Committee, Republicans charged the Democrats with misrepresenting President Bush's proposals and trying to keep them from coming to a vote.


No Fuzziness, Please
To The Living Section:
Your article "For the 90's, Lavish Amounts of Stinginess"  [ Jan. 15 ]  on frugality highlighted the tension between the mainstream business community and those who call for a major reassessment of global resource use.
I enjoyed it, but the organization I work with, Context Institute, was called a "new age think tank."
Our director, Robert Gilman, who represented us in your article, is a Ph.D. astrophysicist, trained at Princeton.
He is the founding editor of our journal "In Context: A Quarterly of Humane Sustainable Culture," winner of the 1991 Alternative Press Award for "Best Coverage of Emerging Issues," and widely recognized as a leading forum in the investigation of sustainability and sustainable development.
Naturally, we wince more than a little at being lumped with a movement usually characterized as fuzzy-headed at best.


Theater in Review
The Law of Remains  Diplomat Hotel 116 West 43d Street Through March 14 Created and directed by Reza Abdoh; produced by Diane White; sets, Sonia Balassanian; lights, Rand Ryan; sound, Raul Vincent Enriquez; costumes, Liz Widulski production stage manager, Mike Taylor.
Presented by Dar A Luz.
WITH: Sabrina Artel, Brenden Doyle, Anita Durst, Giuliana Francis, Stephan Francis, Ariel Herrera, Priscilla Holbrook, Peter Jacobs, Kwasi Boateng, Sardar Singh Khalsa, Veronica Pawlowska, Raphael Pimental, Tom Pearl, Tony Torn and Kathryn Walsh.
Drummer, Carlos Rodriguez.


Palestinians Stiffen Their Stance in Middle East Peace Talks


To Russia With Fords
The Ford Motor Company has opened its first full-service dealership in Russia, the company said today.
Ford's full range of cars are offered at the up-to-date dealership in St.
Petersburg, a joint venture between Transco N.V. of Belgium, DTI Holdings and LRC Auto-Vaz, which operates service centers for Lada automobiles in that city.


Horszowski Cancels Recital at Carnegie Hall
The pianist Mieczyslaw Horszowski has canceled a recital at Carnegie Hall on March 6 that was to celebrate his 100th birthday.
The Carnegie Hall press office said the pianist was not ill, but added: "Mr. Horszowski finds that the rigors of traveling and concertizing are difficult. He expects to continue to perform on occasion." The concert will not be rescheduled this season.
People who bought their tickets through Carnegie Charge will automatically receive credit on their account.
Tickets bought at the box office may be returned in person or by mail until April 3.
The address is Carnegie Hall Box Office, Attention: Horszowski Refund, 154 West 57th Street, New York, N.Y. 10019.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Libraries and Cooking
To The Living Section:
"The Lost Generation, Cooking Illiterates"  [ Jan. 15 ]  can find bearings and direction inexpensively by visiting a local public library.
The following books come to hand from our cookbook collection: "How to Boil Water" by H. Hana; "How to Cook: An Easy and Imaginative Guide for the Beginner" by Raymond Sokolov; "The Fear of Cooking: The Absolutely Foolproof Cookbook for Beginners (and Anyone Else)" by Bob Scher; "Cooking as Therapy" by Louis Parrish, and "Easy Basics for Good Cooking" by Sunset Magazine.
Most libraries have similar books available.


Tokyo Stocks Stronger
Stock prices rose in Tokyo today.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 339.22 points, or less than 1.61 percent, to 21,364.77.
On Tuesday, the index gained 52.31 points.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Flu Forces Navratilova to Withdraw  Martina Navratilova, who broke Chris Evert's record for tournament titles by winning her 158th earlier this month, withdrew from the Matrix Essentials Evert Cup tournament in Indian Wells, Calif., yesterday because she was ill with the flu.
Navratilova, the defending champion and seeded second, was replaced in a match against Kathy Rinaldi by Victoria Milvidskaia of the Commonwealth of Independent States. (AP)


Finally, Procrastinators Remember the Neediest
In college, they did not begin their papers until the night before they were due.
They do their Christmas shopping on Dec. 24, they file their tax returns on April 15 and they have waited until the Feb. 29 deadline was a whisker away before sending their donation to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"Every year I plan on sending my donation in early, and every year I never seem to get around to it until February," said a letter attached to an anonymous donation for $50.
"Like you say, 'To delay may mean to forget,' and though I often delay, I never forget."


Eating Well You Can't Judge a Plate by Its Color
THERE is no way to tell by looking whether a piece of ceramicware has an unsafe amount of lead.
But here are some precautions you can take to prevent lead from leaching into food.
Watch out for china that has been handed down from previous generations.


Natural-Gas Locomotives With Coal as the Cargo
Even while the Energy Department is experimenting with diesel trains that would use coal as their fuel, a rail company is testing natural-gas diesel trains that would haul coal as their cargo.
Among the Burlington Northern Railroad trains that now carry coal east from the Powder River fields of southern Montana is the first of what may eventually be hundreds of locomotives powered by natural gas.


Quotation of the Day
"It's easier to think about healthier eating habits than to do something about it." -- AMY MOORE, a Denver high school student, lunching on french fries.  [ A1:4. ]


Consumer Confidence Plummets
Consumers' confidence in the economy plunged in February to the lowest level since 1974, when the nation was gripped by a severe recession, a business research group said today in its widely followed survey.
The Conference Board said its index for February dropped four points from January to a reading of 46.3, the lowest level since December 1974.


Taxiing Planes Clip Wings
The wing of an Air France cargo plane struck that of a Trans World Airlines 747 commercial jet as both were taxiing for departure at Kennedy International Airport last night shortly before 10, the Port Authority police said.
No passengers or crew members were hurt and the two aircraft were damaged only slightly, said Lieut.
Kevin Hassett, a Port Authority police spokesman.
The lieutenant said the 300 passengers aboard the jet, which was bound for Paris, had to wait for another plane.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 18 about the history of silicone and silicone gel breast implants referred imprecisely to the Dow Corning Corporation's relationship with Dr.
Frank Gerow and Dr.
Thomas Cronin, developers of a type of implant.
The two researchers received royalties from Dow Corning for more than a decade, ending in 1980, but were never employed by the company.
The error was called to The Times's attention last week in a letter from a lawyer representing Dr.
Cronin.


Winter Games Broadcast Wasn't a Loser, CBS Says
CBS said yesterday that it broke even financially on the 1992 Winter Olympics, a reversal of fortune for the television network, which had previously reported huge losses on its major league baseball and National Football League contracts.
"We actually said we thought we'd break even before the Games," said Howard Stringer, president of the CBS Broadcast Group.
"I know I said it."


Bid for Health Net
Qual-Med Inc. offered to acquire Health Net, a health maintenance company, from HN Management Holdings for $100 million in cash.
Qual-Med said it would increase its bid if Health Net's 1991 pretax earnings exceeded a projected $36.4 million.
Qual-Med, based in Pueblo, provides health care services to 224,000 people in California, Colorado, Idaho, New Mexico, Oregon and Washington.
Health Net is based in Woodland Hills, Calif.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  UNEMPLOYMENT AND UNCERTAINTY
The New York region faces the prospect of at least 40,000 employees losing their jobs during the next few years.
This comes on the heels of the more than 500,000 jobs lost in the region since employment peaked in February 1989.
But there is a new and, in many ways, more disruptive element to the latest round of layoff announcements.
As companies reveal that thousands of people will be laid off but provide scant details as to when, where or who will be affected, they are creating heightened uncertainty, and causing even those whose jobs are not directly threatened to cut their spending.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Indians Turning to Tribal Colleges For Opportunity and Cultural Values
For years Ted and Jenny Eagle moved through a rhythmless dance of dead-end jobs, empty pockets and, in desperate resignation, drunken staggers.
The life of American Indians on the High Plains has proved little more promising for them than it was for their ancestors a century ago, when official policy held native tribes on vast and vacant reservations.
But the Eagles, who live on the Standing Rock Indian Reservation here with their four children in a two-bedroom mobile home on a field of junked cars, recently decided to aim for a better life.
Last fall Mr.
Eagle, who is 44 years old, and Mrs.
Eagle, 36, enrolled in college.


C.D. Rates Down Slightly
Yields on bank money market accounts and short-term certificates of deposit continued to ease slightly in the week ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, which tracks bank rates.
"The easing is entirely in the short-term accounts," Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor, said yesterday.
"The five-year certificate of deposit yields have been cautiously nudging upward for the past five weeks. Investors should not expect a quick rebound in rates like those that followed the bottom of previous down cycles. Any upturn is bound to be slow and sluggish at best."


Mao's 2 Telegrams on Korea
Following are the texts of two telegrams in which Mao Zedong discusses his plans for the Chinese invasion of Korea in 1950.
The first was sent to Stalin on Oct. 2, 1950.
The second was sent to Prime Minister Zhou Enlai, then in Moscow, on Oct. 13, 1950.
The telegrams were translated by Thomas Christensen, an Olin fellow at the Center for International Affairs at Harvard.
FROM MAO TO STALIN


Bridge
It is likely that every teacher, in every activity, has had the experience of being surprised, even outwitted, by a student.
It happened last Thursday in a bridge class in Hobe Sound, Fla., and featured the diagramed deal.
It was designed to illustrate a simple point: that a defender should not cover when an honor sequence is led from the dummy.
When the deal had been played at 10 tables, the teacher explained that South could only succeed if East had unwisely wasted the heart king when that suit was led repeatedly from the dummy.
But that statement was untrue, as was demonstrated at one table.
Sue Grandin of Chestnut Hills,


New Los Angeles Leaders Rebuke the Doomsayers
In the last year, this sunny land of movies and aerospace giants has had an unwelcome visit from the prophets of doom and gloom.
A deep, prolonged and painful recession, compounded by drastic cutbacks in military spending brought about by the end of the cold war, has badly shaken the optimism and sense of unlimited opportunity that has long been the mark of Southern California.
On Monday, nearly 100 local leaders gathered in a hotel ballroom on the glittery Sunset Strip of West Hollywood to try to shake the jitters, peer through the clouds of pessimism and find a "new vision" for Los Angeles.


Books of The Times; Recycling the 1980's For Ecological Scorn
Strong Motion  By Jonathan Franzen  508 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


The President and the Sewer
When President Bush loaded his recent economic proposals with subsidies for real estate investors, did he have in mind the needs of ordinary citizens?
Or was he thinking about the 60 wealthy real estate executives who contributed $6 million to support his 1988 campaign?
Mr.
Bush may only have been seeking a way to promote economic recovery.
But the fact that his motives are open to question underscores the urgency of plugging a major loophole in America's system of financing Presidential campaigns.
In theory, general election campaigns are funded by public money raised through a voluntary checkoff on tax forms.
In practice, there's plenty of room for huge, special-interest private donations.


Food Notes
Fast Food: The Ins and Outs
It has been five years since the Center for Science in the Public Interest issued its Fast Food Guide.
Now a second edition, by Michael Jacobson and Sarah Fritschner, is available.
The revised edition, published by Workman for $7.95, has 333 pages, more than 100 more than the original, and reflects some changes in the fast-food industry since 1986.
For one thing, the menus have expanded and become more varied, so the book has longer lists of dishes with their ingredients and nutritional content.


Hill of Duke Injured
Top-ranked Duke, already playing without its starting point guard, BOBBY HURLEY, may have lost his successor to injury, too.
GRANT HILL, a sophomore, hurt his left ankle in practice yesterday and could be sidelined for the Blue Devils' home game tonight against the University of Virginia.
Hill suffered a "high ankle sprain," according to Coach MIKE KRZYZEWSKI.
The player's status will be re-evaluated today, but Krzyzewski does not expect Hill to play.
That could force Duke to rely heavily on sophomore KENNY BLAKENEY, who has played sparingly this season.


Lead in Ceramics: More Questions, Some Answers
LAST November, California sued 10 of the leading manufacturers of ceramic dinnerware for unacceptable levels of lead in their dishes.
For many people, the immediate, unanswered question was whether the china they use every day was safe or not.
Yesterday, the California Attorney General, Daniel E. Lungren, and the Environmental Defense Fund, a nonprofit group in New York, tried to answer that question by releasing the names of hundreds of patterns of china that, according to manufacturers' tests, meet the state's standards, the strictest in the United States.
The Attorney General refused to release the names of the patterns that do not meet the standards.
"It is more fair to put out information about companies that we know are below the warning level," Edward Weil, a Deputy Attorney General, said yesterday.


Market Place; Dial Adds More By Taking Away
TO judge by stock market action, one might think Greyhound Financial is worth less than nothing.
That judgment is based on the stock move of the Dial Corporation, the parent of Greyhound Finanacial, since it announced last fall that it planned to spin off its financial operations to shareholders.
When that spinoff takes place next week, it appears that Dial shares will trade for more without its finance operations than they used to fetch with them included.


Mao's Cable Explains Drive Into Korea
The publication of a secret cable from Mao to Stalin in 1950 has provided the first documentary evidence of the Chinese leader's intentions in making the risky decision to enter the Korean War and engage American forces in combat.
Answering questions that have haunted scholars for decades, the telegram and other documents that have recently been smuggled to the West lend support to the theory that Mao acted out of fear that an American victory in Korea would threaten China.
The documents have also convinced historians that Stalin agreed to, and then abruptly canceled, a Chinese request for Soviet air cover during the attack.


Jews for Jesus Loses Appeal Over Discrimination Charge
New York State's highest court ruled today that a Jewish group did not violate state anti-discrimination statutes by urging that restaurant owners and ministers refuse to rent space to Jews for Jesus Inc., a missionary organization that recognizes Christ as the Messiah.
The case amounted to an unusual test of the balance between free-speech protections and a provision of New York civil-rights law that makes it illegal to "aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce" various forms of discrimination.


Veteran Firefighter Killed in Arson Blaze
Two weeks ago, his colleagues in the firehouse on Queens Boulevard in Woodside gave a party for Lieut.
Thomas A. Williams to celebrate his 30th anniversary as a New York City firefighter.
Yesterday, they were planning his funeral with his family.
Lieutenant Williams of Rescue Company 4 died of injuries he suffered when he fell or was blown from a large second-story window of a three-story mixed-use building in Maspeth, Queens, during a blaze late Monday night.
Yesterday, marshals declared the fire arson, said Tom Kelly, a Fire Department spokesman.


Hewlett-I.B.M. Pact Near
The Hewlett-Packard Company and the International Business Machines Corporation are expected on Wednesday to announce a strategic alliance to manufacture components for high-speed optical-fiber communications between computers.
The combination of the two computer giants could give a new impetus to the use of optical fibers for communications between computers ranging from personal computers to supercomputers.


Primaries Are No Test of Character
Despite the strong voter turnout in New Hampshire, many people remain deeply dissatisfied with how we select our Presidential nominees.
Leading up to this year's campaign, we heard plenty of promises from the media about greater attention to the substance of candidates' ideas.
Soon enough, though, personal issues took over.
Already, Bill Clinton and his wife have had to justify their marriage, and he has been forced to defend a thoughtful letter written as a college student coming to terms with the draft and the Vietnam War.
Paul Tsongas has stripped to a swimsuit to prove his health.
And Bob Kerrey has had to explain repeatedly why his family business cannot afford to buy private health insurance for its workers.


Problems With Ice Repaired
Some supervisors use a style called "hands-on management." Last night at Madison Square Garden, before the Rangers played the Chicago Blackhawks, Mike Chaykowsky tried "feet-on management."
Chaykowsky, the manager of building operations for the Garden, put his skates on his feet and his feet on the ice to examine the repairs and improvements to his rink surface, which is being investigated by the National Hockey League.


Tax Incentive For Builders Is Extended
For the second time in two years, the New York City Council voted yesterday to extend a tax break for developers that both Council leaders and Mayor David N. Dinkins have said should be revamped.
With the administration's urging and blessing, the Council voted 44 to 6 to extend the industrial and commercial development incentive program, which expired on Dec. 31, through July.
In the meantime, the State Legislature and the Council are to consider new bills that would channel the tax incentives into poorer neighborhoods and encourage more renovation than new construction in Manhattan.


The 1992 Grammys Are 'Unforgettable'
Natalie Cole's recording of "Unforgettable," a tribute to her father, Nat (King) Cole, was the big winner at the 34th annual Grammy Awards ceremony at Radio City Music Hall.
The performance, a daughter-father duet created electronically, won awards for album, record and song of the year as well as for Ms.
Cole's arranger and engineer.
Article, page C15.


Kurdish Origins
To the Editor:
The Kurds continue to be a misunderstood people.
Your Feb. 6 front page reports that the Kurds are "a Turkic ethnic group."


Sports of The Times; Knowing When To Let Go
THE more I watch Earvin Johnson and Jerry Tarkanian attempt to come to grips with their sports mortality, the more I wonder which of them is the more sorrowful figure.
Both are clearly having difficulty letting go: Johnson from his role as a professional basketball star -- the sun around which the Lakers once revolved -- Tarkanian from his role as head basketball coach for 19 years at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas.


Another Look at Dr. Diesel's Idea
A century ago, when the German inventor Rudolf Diesel began experimenting with an internal combustion engine that would ignite by compression rather than spark, his first working model ran on pulverized coal.
But coal dust is highly combustible, and according to one account, Dr.
Diesel decided to switch fuels after an explosion killed his partner.
The diesel engines now in common use run on No. 2 oil.
But coal, much more abundant around the world than oil, may soon be feasible -- and safe -- for use in diesel engines.


Grocery Wars: Good-for-You vs. Indulge!
It is 7:15 on a Thursday night.
Mary Allen Pinter and shopping cart are careering through the aisles of a Stop and Shop in the Back Bay section of Boston.
She shakes her head and shrugs.
She mutters and sighs and occasionally makes soft growling sounds.
But she insists she is not crazy.
"I'm your typical overworked upper-income shopper trying to get a decent meal on the table," said Mrs.
Pinter, a 37-year-old lawyer who had stopped off on the way home from her office.
"I reach for one thing and then remember it's too fatty. I think of something else and there's another reason why it's bad." Nutritionist vs.
Gourmet
The tug-of-war between health and hedonism is not new to the American table.
Throughout the nation's history, eating has sometimes been a sybaritic display of abundance, at other times an abstemious prescription for one's body and soul.
But seldom have the Nutritionist and the Gourmet sparred as ruthlessly as now.
On the surface, the tug-of-war is over the nation's annual $362.7 billion market for groceries.
Beneath it, the Nutritionist and the Gourmet are vying for the social status that comes with control of the nation's menu.


Fashion World Should Look at Real Women
To the Editor:
I was thrilled by your Feb. 6 front-page article on the fashion world's obsession with an unrealistic female image.
I have been sounding off on this theme for so long that my friends and family regard me as a crank.
Now, it turns out, I understated the problem.
The models who strut down the runway aren't real women at all.
Thanks to collagen and silicone, they are artificial composites of selected parts of widely different body types.


Personal Health
A TRAVELING companion who was having trouble sleeping was surprised and relieved to learn that Sudafed (pseudoephedrine), the decongestant she was taking to suppress symptoms of a cold, was a stimulant that often induced wakefulness.
But while a temporary sleep disturbance is of little significance to health, dry mouth, another side effect of this and other medications that is commonly overlooked, can be more serious, especially if a drug is taken for a chronic ailment.
Doctors often caution patients that a prescribed drug may cause gastrointestinal distress, emotional disturbances or potency problems.
And many people now realize that certain drugs can induce sleep and should not be used when operating a vehicle or dangerous equipment.
But few are warned about the effects both prescription and over-the-counter drugs can have on important organs like their mouths, eyes, ears and skin.
Oral Health
Since a steady flow of cleansing saliva is vital to the health of teeth and gums, persistent dry mouth can result in serious tooth decay, periodontal disease and, ultimately, loss of teeth.
Travelers who use a scopolamine patch behind the ear to prevent motion sickness are usually all too aware of the oral dryness this drug causes.
But for many other medications, the effects on saliva are more subtle and often overlooked or dismissed as a minor problem.
Among the many drugs taken indefinitely that can slow salivary flow are diuretics like Lasix, Hydrodiuril and Dyrenium used to treat high blood pressure, other antihypertensive medications like Aldomet, Catapres and Minipress, anti-anxiety agents like Librium, Miltown and Valium, antidepressants like Elavil and Tofranil, antipsychotics like compazine, Haldol, Mellaril and thorazine and drugs used to treat Parkinson's disease like Artane and Larodopa.
Dry mouth can also be caused by medications used for short-term relief, like antihistamines, which are often taken by people with upper respiratory infections as well as allergies.
Among the most popular drugs in this category are Actifed (a combination of pseudoephedrine and antihistamine, both of which stem salivary flow), Benadryl, Chlor-Trimeton, Dimetane and Phenergan.
Other drugs taken indefinitely can cause gums to enlarge, become tender or bleed.
They include aspirin, its derivatives and estrogen.
Vision Problems
Dr.
Jimmy Bartlett, an optometrist affiliated with the University of Alabama, has reported, "It is not at all unusual for a patient to come into our clinic with a vision complaint, only to find out the real problem is a particular medication he or she is taking." He explained that most people do not realize that common medications, like steroids and diuretics, can cause eye problems.
For example, the same medications that cause dry mouth can also dry up tear flow in the eyes, causing severe irritation for wearers of contact lenses.
Dr.
Bartlett listed these drugs as among the more commonly used ones that can cause ocular problems:
*Corticosteroids, taken for a year or longer, can trigger the start of a cataract, or clouding of the lens that reduces sharpness of vision.
The cataract stops developing, but does not disappear, when the drug is stopped.
*Digitalis, the heart stimulant, is among several cardiac drugs that can disrupt color vision, sometimes causing patients to see colors that are not there.
*Chloroquine (Aralen), used to prevent malaria and to treat connective-tissue diseases like arthritis, can cause sensitivity to and scattering of light as well as pigment changes inside the eye that dim vision.
*Sulfa drugs and diuretics may cause nearsightedness and blurred vision.
*Antipsychotics can produce a gritty, stinging and burning feeling in the eyes.
*Oral contraceptives may in some women cause bleeding in the eye or clotting disorders that block blood flow to parts of the eye.
Dr.
Bartlett said that in most such cases the problem can be corrected by cutting doses or switching drugs.
Hearing Problems
Many drugs have toxic effects on the ear's delicate tissues.
For example, continued aspirin use, like the doses commonly prescribed to treat arthritis, can cause ringing in the ears (tinnitus) and deafness.
Tinnitus may also occur during treatment with chloroquine, a drug that can result in nerve damage several weeks after high-dose therapy ends.
Some antibiotics can harm the ears.
Auditory damage can be especially severe from kanamycin and neomycin.
Gentamicin and tobramycin can damage the vestibular canals, causing dizziness and loss of balance.
Skin Problems
From 1 to 3 percent of patients experience skin reactions caused by medications.
Problems range from rashes to oversensitivity to sunlight.
For example, severe sun damage (sunburn, swelling, blisters, excessive pigmentation, rashes) can be set off by many antidepressant and antipsychotic drugs, the antihistamine Benadryl, antibiotics like tetracycline, doxycycline and the sulfa drugs, chloroquine used on a long-term basis, diuretics like the thiazides and Lasix, antidiabetic drugs, oral contraceptives, benzocaine and even some sunscreens.
Allergic reactions, like skin rashes, are also common and often misleading because sensitivity to a drug may develop over time or may not show up until after the patient has stopped taking it.
Skin rashes or hives have been associated with antiobiotics like penicillin, streptomycin, ampicillin, tetracycline, kanamycin and neomycin, and with allopurinol, barbiturates, codeine and some diuretics.
What to Do
Whenever a drug is prescribed, ask the doctor for a list of common side effects, both serious and pesky.
Ask under what circumstances you should report a possible side effect as soon as it is noticed.
Dr.
Bartlett, the optometrist, also suggests that people on long-term medication (either prescribed or over-the-counter) should have frequent eye examinations.
If you are taking a drug sold over the counter, be sure to check accompanying literature or labels for warnings about side effects.
If you experience an unusual reaction while taking any medication, it is best to check with your doctor without delay, but do not discontinue a prescribed medication or adjust the dosage without first seeking medical advice.


A Good Excuse for a Round of Parties
Grammys can be spelled another way: P-A-R-T-I-E-S, with lots of exclamation marks and nothing in lower case.
All the major record companies, as well as the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, which presents the Grammy Awards, and the New York City committee serving as host for the ceremonies at Radio City Music Hall, put luxury on the agenda over the last few days to celebrate the music industry and its royalty.


Fashion World Should Look at Real Women; Boyish?
To the Editor:
Who defines what a woman sees in the mirror?
Well, you do for one in your Feb. 6 front-page article on women's self-image.
It is mystifying why you should describe the model Stacey Stetler's figure before breast-implant surgery as "boyish."


Loss Widens At Ann Taylor
The Ann Taylor Stores Corporation yesterday reported a $5.4 million loss for the fourth quarter, which ended Feb. 1, compared with a loss of $723,000 in the comparable period a year earlier.
Geri Savidge, a spokeswoman for Ann Taylor, said earnings suffered from heavy markdowns to clear inventory and from contract buyouts and severance benefits associated with the departure of about 20 top executives, including the chairman and chief executive, Joseph E. Brooks.


Ethics Panel to Reveal Abusers of House Bank
In a move that panel members say could jeopardize the election chances of a number of lawmakers, a House ethics subcommittee is preparing to release a list of Representatives who overdrew large sums from their checking accounts at the House bank.
Last October the House voted to close the bank and initiate an audit to still a wave of criticism of members who overdrew their accounts without penalty, in effect receiving interest-free loans.
House leaders hoped that by ordering the investigation they could quell efforts by a handful of junior Republican members that Democrats said were intended to tarnish the reputation of an institution long dominated by Democrats.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Marching Through Georgia, Guns Firing
The Republican primary battle between President Bush and Patrick J. Buchanan has rolled into Georgia with an angry tone.
Each camp is trying to cast itself as the authentic heir to the Southern conservative tradition, and each is attacking the other in a rough politics of values.
In a dizzying succession of television interviews, Mr.
Buchanan sat in an Atlanta hotel suite this week and hit almost every flashpoint in Southern politics.
He railed against "blasphemous art" financed by the Federal government, fumed about "racial quotas" and hammered at a President who he said had "cut deals" with Senator Edward M. Kennedy, the Massachusetts Democrat who is one of the enduring targets of the Southern right.


Grammy for High School Jazz: A Serious Swinger
Michael Leonhart speaks of jazz trumpet the way he plays it -- with elegant eloquence.
"It's like a higher level of communication," the 17-year-old from the Upper West Side of Manhattan said.
"There's structure, but so much room for chance, for magic, because it is so spontaneous."


Cole's 'Unforgettable' Sweeps the Grammys
In an outpouring of nostalgia for the days before rock-and-roll, Natalie Cole's "Unforgettable," an album of songs associated with her father, Nat (King) Cole, swept every category in which it was nominated at the 34th annual Grammy Awards.
The album, which reached No. 1 and has sold four million copies in the United States, is a set of romantic songs accompanied by an orchestra, in pre-rock style.
"I thank my dad for leaving me such a wonderful, wonderful heritage," Ms.
Cole said last night at Radio City Music Hall as she accepted the award for record of the year for her single of "Unforgettable," an electronic duet with her late father's voice.
In previous years, she had won three Grammy Awards.


Nets Rise Well Above Themselves In Victory
Sure, Larry Bird was still on the injured list, as he was when the Nets beat the Celtics alomost six weeks ago in Boston.
But Robert Parish was back, scoring 10 points and grabbing 6 rebounds, and Kevin McHale was back, sore calf and all, to score 14 points and snatch 10 rebounds.
And this time the Nets manhandled the Celtics even more easily, 109-95, tonight before a crowd of 16,388 spectators at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Tomba Will Pursue Top World Cup Title
ALBERTO TOMBA, who has not competed in the super giant slalom since 1989, will break ritual and ski in a super G in Morioka, Japan, on Sunday as part of his campaign to win the overall World Cup title.
His agent, PAOLO COMELLINI, said yesterday that the Olympic giant slalom gold medalist had made the decision after two days of discussions with his parents, who have opposed his participation in speed races since he broke his collarbone in a super G in Val D'Isere in 1989.


Tenants Assail Conditions, but Fail to Get New Housing Chief's Ear
On her second day as chairwoman of New York City's Housing Authority, Sally Hernandez-Pinero came under fire yesterday when she refused to meet with about 100 people who went to her office to demand faster repairs and maintenance and better security in the city's public housing projects.
It was a dose of reality for Ms. Hernandez-Pinero.


White House, Anxious Over Jobs, Weighs Sale of 72 F-15's to Saudis
Anxious about keeping American defense workers employed in an election year, the Bush Administration is considering going ahead with a sale of 72 advanced F-15 fighter planes to Saudi Arabia.
The Saudi request is not new, but the Administration had shelved it in past years rather than risk a fight with members of Congress who view sales of advanced weaponry to Arab countries as a threat to the security of Israel.
The Administration contends that Saudi Arabia needs the planes chiefly to bolster its defenses in light of a threat posed by Iraq.


Accused Students Worked for Cornell
Two Cornell University sophomores charged on Monday with creating a computer virus that has spread worldwide were both part-time employees of Cornell computer centers, college officials said today.
The students, David S. Blumenthal of Worthington, Ohio, and Mark Andrew Pilgrim of Valley Forge, Pa., were released on $2,000 cash bail each today after an appearance in Ithaca City Court.
They had pleaded not guilty on Monday night to charges of second-degree computer tampering, a misdemeanor.


Pressing for Principle in Israel
President Bush, target of repeated primary campaign criticism for convenient flips and flops, deserves respect for sticking to principle on loan guarantees to Israel.
"I'm not going to shift the foreign policy of this country because of political expediency," he said yesterday, and the terms that Secretary of State Baker has now spelled out demonstrate his conviction:
The Administration won't support $10 billion in guarantees for loans to aid absorption of Jews from the former Soviet Union unless Israel agrees to freeze its vigorous construction of new Jewish settlements on the West Bank and in Gaza.


Riley Returns to 'Showtime' and Oscars
Pat Riley looks intently toward the future and rarely looks back.
That is part of what keeps him driven, what keeps him hungry for more success no matter how much he achieves.
But Wednesday night at the Forum, Riley will have to look back.
He will return to the Forum for the first time as the Knicks' coach to face the Los Angeles Lakers, the team he coached to four National Basketball Association championships in nine seasons.
The Lakers are Riley's lifeline to professional basketball.
He played for them, he coached them, and he will always be linked to them historically, no matter what he accomplishes in New York.


In Japan, Ito Is Proclaimed the Golden Girl
Midori Ito returned home from the Olympics today and was accorded a heroine's welcome that made it seem as if she had won the gold medal instead of the silver.
But there was also some soul-searching in Japan over whether the enormous pressure of the news coverage had caused the 22-year-old figure skater, renowned for her spectacular jumping, to crumble and fall in the women's original figure-skating program last week.


Senators Press Baker on Israel Loan Guarantees
A number of pro-Israeli Senators assailed the Bush Administration today for demanding that the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir halt settlement building as a condition for $10 billion in loan guarantees, but the policy did not seem to be endangered by Congressional opposition.
President Bush vowed not to soften his terms.
"We spelled out our policy," Mr.
Bush said on Air Force One today, on the way to a campaign trip through California.
"There it is. It's a proper policy. It's been the policy of the U.S. Government for a long, long time."


House Votes to Toughen '900' Phone Rules
The House approved a bill today that would force companies that sell products and services over "900" telephone numbers to disclose their prices more completely and give consumers greater opportunity to dispute their bills.
The measure is similar to one passed by the Senate in October and reflects a carefully crafted compromise that was generally supported by organizations representing "900" companies and the long-distance industry.


A Top Salomon Executive Gets New Bear, Stearns Post
Salomon Brothers Inc., still struggling to recover from the Treasury market scandal that rocked the firm last year, lost another senior executive yesterday.
Denis A. Bovin, one of the best-known and respected young investment bankers on Wall Street, left the firm to take the new job of vice chairman of investment banking with Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
In his new job, Mr.
Bovin, 44, who has a strong reputation for developing solid client relationships, will expand on his responsibilities, taking a greater role in developing worldwide strategies and directions for the division.
As vice chairman, he will serve as one of four members of the firm's investment-banking policy group, which determines the direction of the firm's corporate finance and mergers and acquisitions operations.


The Pop Life
Something New
"Little Village" (Reprise), a new album by the band Little Village -- the guitarists John Hiatt and Ry Cooder, the bassist Nick Lowe and the drummer Jim Keltner -- could have been made anytime during the last 20 years or so.
That's odd for a pop record: pop music usually keeps up with the times or dies.
But the band members' weird reimagining of American roots music, from blues and rhythm-and-blues to country and rock, exists out of time, partly because it never existed before and also because their sort of odd blend is as popular now as it has ever been.
Baby boomers still listen to, and make, music.
"I had a little bit of a hard time in 1976 with a Tex-Mex band I was playing with," said Mr.
Cooder.
"When we got to the Eastern Seaboard, the people who had come out on dates couldn't relate: they were not happy about being there. The band was overweight Tex-Mex guys in leisure suits, and that had people squirming. But over the years, things have changed. I think overweight guys in leisure suits have a chance now, so I guess we do, too."


Prey Replacing Auger at Y
Because of illness, the soprano Arleen Auger has canceled her recital on Saturday at 8 P.M. at the 92d Street Y. In her place, the baritone Hermann Prey, accompanied by the pianist Leonard Hokanson, will perform an all-Schumann recital.
Tickets for Ms.
Auger's recital will be honored at the door.
For refund information, call the Y box office at (212) 415-5440.


Mr. Bush's Artless Surrender
To borrow from a bard who probably wrote too bawdily to qualify for a Federal arts grant, nothing in John Frohnmayer's chairmanship of the National Endowment for the Arts became him like leaving it.
His job performance was checkered, but he announced his resignation with a song and a defense of the arts against "the lunacy that sees artists as enemies and ideas as demons."
This class act put President Bush to shame for the graceless, naked capitulation to his right-wing challenger, Patrick Buchanan, who had threatened to make Federal support for offensive artworks a campaign issue.
The White House cover that Mr.
Frohnmayer had agreed to leave months before Mr.
Buchanan called for his head only underscored that Mr.
Bush has yielded to Endowment critics repeatedly, by refusing to exercise leadership on the arts and by withholding support from his administrator.


A Chicken Soup Goes to the Heart and Gizzard of the Matter
GROWING up at a time when money and food were scarce in a part of France -- Bourg-en-Bresse -- famous for its chickens, I am conditioned to using all parts of the chicken.
A flavorful and filling chicken soup made with hearts and gizzards is an example.
The combination may seem unusual as the base for a soup, but these variety meats are a great find for the thrifty cook.


G.O.P. Lukewarm on Cuomo's Revised Bias Bill Plan
Leaders of the Republican-controlled Senate today rebuffed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's effort to win their support for his proposed bias-related crime bill, even though he tried to make it more palatable by suggesting that the law be allowed to expire at a certain point.
The bill, which would create a new category of crime and impose specific penalties for criminal offenses motivated by bias, has been consistently rejected by the Senate on the ground, at least publicly, that it is often impossible to determine a criminals' motivation.


Dr. John S. Bonnell, 99, Is Dead; New York Presbyterian Preacher
The Rev.
Dr.
John Sutherland Bonnell, who gained a national reputation as a preacher in his 26 years as pastor of the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York City, died at his home in Roseburg, Ore., on Sunday.
He was 99 years old.
He died of natural causes, said his son-in-law, the Rev.
James G. Emerson Jr. of San Francisco.


Josiah W. Bennett, 75, Specialist In Asian Affairs for the State Dept.
Josiah W. Bennett, a retired Foreign Service officer who served as political adviser to the last two American ambassadors to South Vietnam, died Saturday at Hillhaven Extended Care, a nursing home in Santa Cruz, Calif.
He was 75 years old.
He had had Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


Biotechnology Industry Rejoices With Caution
While applauding President Bush's proposal to ease the regulatory burden on genetically engineered products, biotechnology industry executives and analysts said today that Federal regulatory bodies had substantial autonomy and could still erect roadblocks.
If carried out as written, the new policy would primarily benefit the makers of agricultural and food products by specifying that the biotechnology versions should receive no greater scrutiny than those produced by conventional means.
Unlike agricultural products, which are released into the environment, biotech drugs have not faced notably greater barriers to the market than conventional drugs.


2 Japanese Admit They Got Cash but Not as 'Bribes'
The Japanese were offered some unusual insights into their country's political ethics today when a former Prime Minister and a former Cabinet minister admitted in parliamentary testimony that they had received large sums of cash as unreported contributions, then denied they had done anything improper because the money was returned when the donor was engulfed by a scandal.
The nationally televised testimony by former Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki and by Jun Shiozaki, a former Minister of the Management and Coordination Agency, did not provide any startling new details.
The affair has already resulted in the indictment on bribery charges of Fumio Abe, a former cabinet minister who is close to Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.
The Justice Minister indicated today that no further charges would be filed.


Optimistic Mets Have Hopes of Saving Their Relievers
The Mets in 1991 would look to their bullpen and the relievers would stare at each other.
The uncertainties in the dugout would often lead to the following exchange of uncertainties in the bullpen.
"Who me?"


Phone Company Changes Its Name
United Telecommunications Inc. changed its name to the Sprint Corporation effective today.
The company has long been best known for its U S Sprint subsidiary, the third-largest long-distance carrier in the country after A.T.&amp; T. and MCI.


Bailout Agency Criticized On Its Auditing Procedures
The savings and loan bailout program remains unable to keep track not only of the billions of dollars in loans, real estate and other assets seized from failed institutions but also of the cash it gets when the assets are sold, Government auditors have found.
The finding, in a report to be made public on Wednesday, directly counters the repeated assertions of the Resolution Trust Corporation, which runs the bailout program.
That agency has reported significant progress in cleaning up its books, monitoring the assets it seizes and supervising the thousands of contractors that it has hired.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Consumers' confidence in the economy plunged in February to the lowest level since 1974.
The sharp drop surprised economists, who expected continued weakness, but not a dive.  [ Page D1. ]
The New York City region faces the prospect of at least 40,000 employees losing their jobs during the next few years.
And those are just the layoffs that have been publicly announced.  [ A1. ]


An Unassuming Kelly Is Special to Yankees
Life changes.
Last winter, Pat Kelly was a talented but unknown minor league infielder who supplemented his salary by installing insulation in roofs.
The winter before that, he poured concrete.
And before that, he worked as a bartender.
No more.
One year after coming to New York and suddenly becoming the second baseman of the Yankees' future, the 24-year-old Kelly could be a new star glittering in the Bronx sky.


7 Nations to Broaden Battle Against Drugs
Two years after President Bush traveled to South America to devise a plan to combat cocaine traffickers on their own turf, he is to meet Latin American leaders here to try to strengthen and broaden the effort, which critics say has borne little fruit.
The visit here, on Wednesday and Thursday, will feature five hours of talks with the presidents of Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, Mexico and Ecuador and a delegation from Venezuela, between Mr.
Bush's campaign appearances in California and Texas.


Domestic Vehicle Sales Rose 4% in Mid-February
Sales of cars and light trucks built in North America rose 4 percent in mid-February, the auto makers reported today.
Analysts said the figures provided additional evidence that the sluggish auto industry was slowly gaining strength.
"We're seeing a semblance of recovery," said Jack V. Kirnan, a Kidder, Peabody analyst in New York.
He said the foundation was in place for consistent improvement in sales, noting that more shoppers were visiting showrooms and more deals were being completed.


A List of the Winners
Here are the winners at the 34th annual Grammy Awards ceremony last night at Radio City Music Hall:
Record of the Year: "Unforgettable"
Album of the Year: "Unforgettable"
Song of the Year: "Unforgettable," Irving Gordon, songwriter


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Goes West; Criticism of Message Follows
President Bush carried his re-election campaign west today, only to run into the same assertion voiced by some supporters elsewhere: that he lacked substance and conviction.
It was all the more stinging because it appeared to come from a most unlikely source, former President Ronald Reagan.
And Mr.
Bush's political advisers rushed to rebut it.


When the Bill Collector Is the School Principal
SOME perceptions Patricia Brown has found nastily inescapable in recent months: The Lord sure didn't make it easy to be poor; when it rains it pours, and the road to paradise is not likely to be paved with unpaid bills.
"You have to keep smiling even though the tears are flowing," she said.


His '61 Bordeaux Is Not Too Rare To Taste
A group of people demolished 110 bottles of Lou Skinner's rarest, and all but irreplaceable, wines this weekend, and made him a contented man.
Dr.
Louis Skinner, a retired dermatologist who lives nearby in Coral Gables, is one of a small band of grand-scale wine collectors, most of them American, who are never happier than when they see something that may have taken a lifetime to create destroyed before their eyes.
In this case, it was nine dozen or so bottles of Bordeaux wines of the 1961 vintage.
To people who care about such things, 1961 has long been considered one of, if not
the,
finest Bordeaux vintage of the 20th century.


Economic Scene; Taxing Carbon: Taxing Politics
THE Western European governments at the United Nations meetings on the environment this month are not just talking about the greenhouse effect, they are on the verge of doing something about it.
The catch, argue Alan Manne of Stanford University and Richard Richels of the Energy Power Research Insitute, the research arm of the electric power industry, is that part of what they are planning to do is likely to be self-defeating.
That is not to say the plan, which could be put into effect as early as 1993, is necessarily foolish: There may be no better alternative for attracting a winning coalition of countries and interest groups within the European Community.
But it does make plain there is more to coping with global greenhouse emissions than identifying least-cost abatement strategy and getting on with the job.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Arkansas; On Campaign Respite, Clinton Works at Home
Gov.
Bill Clinton is off the campaign trail today to shepherd new legislation on the protection of children through a special session of his state's Legislature in a move that supporters said held some small risk but far more potential for political benefit.
The Democratic Governor described this time away from the campaign for his party's Presidential nomination as a welcome respite from a world where one lives by the television "sound bite" and words often seem elevated above action.


Book Notes
Lost in the Stars
If everything goes as scheduled, Margaret Wander Bonanno will probably have her name on a best-selling book next month, when Pocket Books releases "Probe," the latest novel in its "Star Trek" series.
And Ms.
Bonanno is furious.
Ms.
Bonanno already has two best-selling "Star Trek" books to her credit: "Dwellers in the Crucible" (1985) and "Strangers From Sky" (1987).
What appears between the covers of those books, she says, are her words.
What appears in the latest book, she says, are not.
Of the 345-page advance copy that Pocket Books gave to her, she says only 25 pages resemble anything she submitted to them.
After reading the galleys, Ms.
Bonanno said she called Pocket Books and asked that her name be removed from the cover.
Pocket Books refused, Ms.
Bonanno said, saying the contract she signed gives them the copyright over the material and the right to use her name on the novel.
The "Star Trek" and "Star Trek: The Next Generation" series have been wildly successful since they were created in 1979.
In 1991 alone, there were 14 books from the series on the New York Times best-seller list, and the publisher says that last year it sold more than 4 million copies of the 94 titles, all of which remain in print.
The books are published by Pocket Books through a license arrangement with Paramount Communications, which owns the "Star Trek" concept as well as Simon &amp; Schuster, Pocket Books' parent company.
Irwyn Applebaum, the president and publisher of Pocket Books, said that Paramount was very protective of the "Star Trek" name and vigorously reviewed any book or product it licenses.
He would not comment specifically on Ms.
Bonanno's complaints, saying it was his policy "not to discuss the editorial process that any book goes through."
He would say only that Ms.
Bonanno is "the writer of record" for "Probe" and that she "entered willingly and knowingly into her contract with us."
Science-fiction writers vie for the opportunity to write for the "Star Trek" series since it practically assures them a best-seller.
But Richard Curtis, a literary agent who handles grievances for the Science Fiction Writers of America, said there had been a number of complaints over the years by authors in that group about the way they and their material were treated.
Mr.
Curtis said he had been acting as an informal liaison between writers from the organization (of which Ms. Bonanno is not a member) and Pocket Books to iron out some of the difficulties.
He is hopeful, he said, that "the problems are being resolved and conditions for the authors will improve."
Ms.
Bonanno agreed that Pocket Books was technically within its contractual rights to keep her name on the book and to rewrite her material.
But she says the system is one of "slave labor," in which writers are threatened with withholding of payments unless they agree to terms that rob them of virtually any say about the content of the book and the use of their own names.
"It's false advertising," Ms.
Bonanno said.
"They are telling their readership that this is a book by a certain author they have come to know, and the book is not mine. It was written by someone with a great scientific background who lectures the reader for 300 pages. I do great characterizations, and there are no interesting characters in this book. I just don't want my name associated with it." Ryan vs.
Seaver
Nolan Ryan and Tom Seaver will face each other this spring for the first time, but the contest will be in bookstores, not on a baseball diamond.
Mr.
Ryan and Mr.
Seaver were teammates on the Mets and later opponents, but somehow in the odd luck of rotations, they never took the mound against each other.
Now both men have new books coming out during spring training.
"Miracle Man: Nolan Ryan, the Autobiography," written with Jerry Jenkins, is being released by Word Publishing, and "Great Moments in Baseball: From the World Series of 1903 to the Modern Records of Nolan Ryan," by Mr.
Seaver with Marty Appel, is being published by Birch Lane Press.
In true sporting fashion, Steven Schragis, publisher of Carol Publishing Group, which owns Birch Lane, called Byron Williamson, executive vice president of Word Publishing, and offered to place a bet.
Seaver vs.
Ryan.
Birch Lane vs.
Word.
Loser to gives $1,000 to a mutually chosen charity.
Mr.
Williamson declined the wager.
"It's really not a horse race," he said.
"They'll be selling well if they can sell a fourth of what we do. I can figure out why he'd want to have a bet going: it's great publicity for him. We figure we'll do very well without it. I can't figure out what's in it for us."
Perhaps some fun, Mr. Williamson!


Gold Mining Royalty Would Cut Output; A Dirty Business
To the Editor:
In "Digging for Ore Still Pays; Should Miners Pay, Too?" (front page, Feb. 12) your article on gold mining and the Mining Law of 1872, you speak of the "leaching process, a new method of using chemicals to soak the gold from the ore."


Public &amp; Private; More Than Biology
We're pretty familiar with the seed and the egg in our house.
They've become like cartoon characters, like Road Runner and Coyote, chasing each other around the byways of biology.
The seeds have tails (but not top hats) and swim.
The eggs are round and go on a fantastic voyage once a month.
All this and more has been elicited over years of incremental kid information gathering, culminating one day in the Lincoln Tunnel, natch, in the question of how the seed and the egg wind up in the same place at the same time.
Like Proust's madeleine, the look of horror and incredulity on my son's face took me back to the moment when I first heard the news.


CHRONICLE
There was a touch of nervousness in SHELLEY BERMAN'S voice, a hint of uncertainty that he had earned the right to call himself a playwright.
"It is presumptuous to be a comedian and then to write a serious play," he said yesterday.
"There is always the fear that someone will say you are rocking on your hind legs."


60-Minute Gourmet
CURRIES, the bedrock of so many Indian dishes, have as many variations as there are cooks who make it.
Indian cooks treat homemade curries, which are a blend of spices, with the reverence Italians have for olive oil and the French for bread.
Most American home cooks shy away from curry for fear that t is too complicated to make.
Blends are available in the supermarket, but they rarely have the finesse of one you develop yourself.
Moreover, once you have made one, it lasts indefinitely in a sealed jar.
With your curry powder ready and dinner ingredients at hand, an exotic meal can be assembled in less than 60 minutes.


Jersey City's Kind of Election: 8 Candidates for 8 Voters
There are as many candidates as there are voters in an unusual election here, the vote to fill the vacant mayor's office in this city where politics is the chief preoccupation.
The eight City Council members who must choose an interim mayor are supporting eight different candidates, and the prospect that one of them will round up the five votes needed for victory seems dim at best.


Nuclear Disarmament Raises Fear on Storage of 'Triggers'
The Department of Energy said today that the dismantling of much of the nation's nuclear arsenal would require it to store tons of plutonium at a Texas weapons plant where warheads were once assembled.
But critics of the Energy Department's proposal, including a prominent nuclear scientist and the Natural Resources Defense Council, a national environmental and disarmament group, contended that the plan could contaminate soil, air and water as well as make the plant a target for a terrorist attack.


McDonnell's Taiwan Deal Faces Delay
Amid growing suspicions that Taiwan's effort to take a major stake in America's second-largest commercial aircraft maker may be unraveling, a senior executive of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that it "might well turn out" that other Asian nations would infuse cash into the company and take a role in manufacturing its planes.
The executive, Robert H. Hood Jr., the president of the corporation's Douglas Aircraft Company subsidiary, said today that he was still optimistic that the Taiwan Aerospace Corporation, which was created by the Taiwan Government, would raise $2 billion required for a 40 percent stake in the commercial aircraft maker.
A Deadline Comes and Goes


INSIDE
New Rules on '900' Numbers
The House approved a bill to force companies that sell products and services over "900" numbers to disclose prices more fully.
Page D1.
Senators Assail Israel Policy
The Administration was criticized at a Senate hearing for demanding a halt in settlement building in exchange for loan guarantees.
Page A6.
Consumer Confidence at Low
Consumer confidence in the economy plunged to the lowest level since 1974, a business research group said in its widely followed survey.
Page D1.


Gold Mining Royalty Would Cut Output
To the Editor:
As a former executive of a gold-mining company, I would like to correct one misconception in "Digging for Ore Still Pays; Should Mines Pay Too?" (front page, Feb. 12), a report on proposed changes to the 1872 Mining Act, which include imposing a 5 percent royalty on minerals.


Soweto Paradox: Backing White Vote
Pumlani Mhlungu wiped a rag across his gleaming white minibus taxi as he talked about what was troubling his passengers.
They had been debating the referendum that President F. W. de Klerk called for March 17 to let whites decide whether they want his policies of political change to continue.
Mr.
Mhlungu and his passengers cannot vote because they are black.


Just Like 50's (and Noguchi) at Gift Fair
THE ghost of Isamu Noguchi's organic coffee table, designed in 1944 and widely imitated in the 1950's, hovered over Accent on Design, the juried part of the New York International Gift Fair, which closes today at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan.
The newest ideas at the fair, which attracted 2,200 exhibitors from 16 countries, were found in the tiniest objects: doormats and coasters, compact disk holders and cabinet knobs.


Red Sox and Patriots: Who'll Be in Charge?
The death of Jean Yawkey yesterday brings to an end one of the longest dynasties in the history of major league baseball and raises questions about the future of the highly profitable Boston Red Sox franchise, whose value, including the Fenway Park real estate, has been put as high as $200 million.
The questions about the fate of the Red Sox arose yesterday just as a new effort was under way to clarify the future of another Boston franchise, the New England Patriots.


Quintana Probably Out Until Midseason
First baseman Carlos Quintana, who broke his left arm in a car accident in Venezuela, is expected to be out at least until the All-Star Game break in mid-July, the team's physician said yesterday in Winter Haven, Fla.
Dr.
Arthur Pappas, who spoke with doctors at the Caracas hospital where Quintana underwent surgery Monday, said the break in Quintana's arm occurred at the midshaft of the humerus, the large bone running from the shoulder to the elbow.
The first baseman also broke a bone in his right foot behind the big toe.
Initial reports said Quintana's wife, Solys, broke both legs.
But Pappas said she suffered fractures in both feet.
Pappas said he would know more after Quintana is brought to the United States "sometime soon" and can be examined here.
Quintana, who hit .295 with 11 homers and 71 runs batted in last season, was expected to be the team's starting first baseman this year.
He will probably be replaced by Mo Vaughn, who battled Quintana for playing time last year after being recalled from Pawtucket. (AP) Seattle Mariners
Kevin Mitchell says his latest brush with the law was just a matter of talking to the wrong woman at the wrong time.
The San Diego police did not charge Mitchell after a nightclub brawl on Friday night.
"I had just stopped in with Dave Grayson, a friend who plays linebacker for the Chargers," Mitchell said in Tempe, Ariz.
"A friend of mine asked me to stop and say goodbye before I left for training camp. I was talking with the woman taking money at the door when her boyfriend jumped in my face and cussed me."
Mitchell said the man's twin brother got involved and pushed Mitchell down.
Some of Mitchell's friends then came to his aid, he said. (AP) Minnesota Twins
Reliever Steve Bedrosian, a National League Cy Young Award winner who was released by the Minnesota Twins last winter, announced his retirement.
"It was a tough decision but it was a family decision, and we just felt it was time to do this," the 34-year-old pitcher said Tuesday at his Duluth, Ga., home.
Bedrosian was 5-3 with six saves and a 4.42 earned run average last year with the Twins.
San Diego Padres
After three workouts and one 10-minute throwing session off the mound, Ed Whitson said yesterday that his surgically repaired right elbow is healthy again.
Whitson underwent arthroscopic surgery to remove a bone spur from the elbow last July 15 and missed the remainder of the season.
Manager Greg Riddoch said he expected Whitson to be part of his five-man starting rotation when the regular season begins on April 6.
Whitson said he would be ready to make his first start when the exhibition season begins on March 6.
"I don't plan on missing it, that's for sure," Whitson said.
"I knew it was feeling up to par when I left Ohio. After I threw this morning out there in the air and bright sunshine, I was sure it was feeling good." Philadelphia Phillies
Center fielder Lenny Dykstra hopes to hit a lot of homers and steal at least 50 bases from a high spot in the lineup.
"In the past, I only stole when I had a good chance," he said before the team's first full squad workout of spring training yesterday.
"I'm going to take more chances this year."
Dykstra, who missed part of last season after a car accident, said he expected to be one of the first three batters in the lineup and to hit at least .300.
"I'm talking of hitting homers in the teens," he said.
Only outfielder Braulio Castillo was not in uniform for the workout, being detained in the Dominican Republic by visa problems.
Pitcher Andy Ashby and outfielder Cary Williams agreed to terms, reducing the unsigned players to 13, the team announced. (AP)


The U.N. Today
General Assembly COMMITTEE ON THE PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE -- 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL NEGOTIATING COMMITTEE ON CLIMATE CHANGE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Sheldon H. Gorlick, A Tax Authority, 63
Sheldon H. Gorlick, a lawyer, an editor and an authority on taxes and professional incorporation, died on Monday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 63 years old and lived in Ridgewood.
He died of complications resulting from leukemia, his wife, Herthe, said.


Corrections
An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day yesterday misstated the record date for a 3-for-1 stock split at Merck &amp; Company.
It is May 6.


Guru on Government Steps Into Political Feud
A reigning guru of government reorganization came within a stone's throw of New York's City Hall to noodle with some local practitioners yesterday, and stepped smack into the simmering political feud between his host, City Council President Andrew J. Stein, and Mayor David N. Dinkins.
David Osborne, co-author of "Reinventing Government" (Addison Wesley, 1992), spoke at a panel discussion that also seemed aimed at reinventing Mr.
Stein, not previously noted for gravitas in such matters, as he prepares to challenge Mr.
Dinkins for the mayoralty.


Bridge
The Long Island Regional Championships, usually staged in April, have always been a harbinger of spring for players in the New York metropolitan area.
But spring has come early this year and the tournament begins today at the Sheraton Smithtown Hotel, 110 Vanderbilt Motor Parkway, Smithtown, L.I.
The regional schedule is: today, Stratified Open Pairs, Stratified Women's Pairs and Senior Swiss Teams, 1 and 7:30 P.M.; Flighted Knockout Teams, 7:30 P.M. and continues; tomorrow, Flighted Open Pairs and Senior Pairs, 1 and 7:30 P.M.; Saturday, Imp Pairs and Stratified Open Pairs, 1 and 7:30 P.M.; Sunday, Flighted Swiss Teams (two sessions), 11 A.M.


Corrections
A chart on the Business Technology page in Business Day yesterday, titled "New Life for Old King Coal," omitted one of two energy sources that produce less nitrogen oxide than coal.
The two are oil and gas.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Maryland; Washington's Suburbs Offer Tsongas a Chance to Win Again
The dozens of upscale subdivisions, shopping centers, government complexes and office parks that carpet once-bucolic Montgomery County, northwest of Washington, are the main reason former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts stands a good chance of winning this state's Democratic Presidential primary next Tuesday.
Mr.
Tsongas, who needs a victory in Maryland to demonstrate that his electoral appeal extends beyond New England, appeals most strongly to well-educated, well-to-do voters, according to polls of participants in earlier primaries.
And this is the best-paid, best-schooled county in the nation.


Unilever Assignment Goes to Thompson
Unilever United States Inc., New York, yesterday named J. Walter Thompson New York as an agency of record for part of its estimated $100 million of network television buying assignments, after a review that included four other Unilever agencies in New York: BBDO Worldwide, Lintas U.S.A., McCann-Erickson Worldwide and Ogilvy &amp; Mather.


Do We Spend or Save To Get Out of This?
To the Editor:
"Layoffs Called No Big Threat to a Recovery" (front page, Feb. 9) suggests that the recession's real danger is not that 2.9 million jobs have been lost, causing enormous suffering in many parts of the country, but that the job losses are frightening working Americans.
Economists you quote bemoan that Americans seem reluctant to emulate the Federal Government by reaching for their credit cards and going on a spending spree with money they do not have.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.93
3.87
6.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.92
3.96
6.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.00
4.09
6.01
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.98
7.08
7.83
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.84
7.94
8.13
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.87
8.97
9.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.78
6.80
7.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Eight Designers, Inspired by a Bottle
AFTER Absolut Warhol and Absolut Glasnost, it was probably inevitable that the world would behold "Absolut Designers."
The current Metropolitan Home magazine has a 12-page spread celebrating the eight well-known designers who designed objects inspired by the Absolut bottle.
In what could have been "The Clash of the Titans II," they even posed together.


GlenFed Uncertain on Profit
GlenFed Inc. said today that it might fail to post a third-quarter profit and likely would not be able to meet Federal standards for financial soundness.
GlenFed, which lost $232 million last year, blamed the same factors battering many other California savings and loans for its problems: the recession and the lingering slump in the real estate market.


Shelters Right Out of the 19th Century
MARVIN Davis, an advertising man, thinks advertising is "horrendous." For relief, he became a gazebo man, too.
Thus was born Romancing the Woods, a company to design and build shelters, gazebos and pavilions in the "authentic 19th-century tradition" of the Adirondack great camps.
His pieces are custom built and start at $750.
A gazebo like the one he built for himself, above, costs $4,000; call (914) 246-6976.


Detroit Leaning on Japan, in Both Senses
When Lee A. Iacocca, the outspoken chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, demands that America take a stand against Japanese car imports surely he must not be talking about car No. 11AMRXML2D19W-C06, which rolled off the line here the other day.
The car was produced by teams of Japanese workers all wearing neat uniforms with "Mitsubishi Motors" emblazoned on the back.
But the sporty. bright red model is a Dodge Stealth, made by Mitsubishi, and sold in America starting at about $17,000.
And the only thing that makes it seem American is the word "Dodge" etched in the front bumper.
Mr.
Iacocca made no mention of Mitsubishi's Nagoya plant when he visited Japan with President Bush in January, and these days people at the plant say as little as possible about Mr.
Iacocca.
Confused Feelings
"We feel a little funny about him," Kozo Naruse, the deputy general manager, conceded the other day, shaking his head.
"Here he is talking about keeping Japanese cars out of America, and every day we come to work and make very good Chryslers."


J. F. Geisse, 71, Who Founded Discount Stores
John F. Geisse, an early leader in discount merchandising who founded three major store chains, died on Friday at his home in Indianapolis.
He was 71 years old.
Mr. Geisse died of a heart attack, his family said.


U.S. and Colombia Reduce Army's Role in Drug Battle
In a shift in strategy in the drug war, the United States and Colombia have agreed that Colombia's army will no longer play a major role in pursuing traffickers, officials of both countries said today.
On the opening day of a seven-nation, anti-drug summit meeting, it was not clear whether it was the United States or Colombia that first requested the policy change, which redirects $75 million in United States assistance from Colombia's army to its police.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Northwest; Caucuses in Idaho and Washington Offer New Challenges for the Democratic Field
With a chance to show that their campaigns are more than contests of regional loyalties, Democratic Presidential candidates are planning to arrive in the Pacific Northwest this weekend in advance of next Tuesday's caucuses in Washington and Idaho.
Washington, the second-most-populous state in the West, has 80 Democratic delegates up for grabs, and it presents a bit of a puzzle to candidates who have tailored their message toward economically depressed areas.
It was one of only two states in the West -- Oregon was the other -- to vote Democratic in the last Presidential race.


CHRONICLE
In Geneva, the talk of a United Nations conference on the plight of poor rural women was as much about who was not there as who was.
BARBARA BUSH sent a brief message of good wishes that was not read, and some of the more affluent of the 107 countries represented -- Britain, France, Germany Italy, Canada and Japan -- sent only staff members from their offices at the United Nations offices in Geneva.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
WITH a little knowledgeable tinkering, even beginners can easily remedy annoying toilet problems like running, leaking and extended flushing (in tankless toilets).
For toilets with tanks, the first step in diagnosing virtually all problems is to remove the tank cover, flush the toilet and observe the results.
If the handle is loose, use a wrench or pliers to tighten the nut holding it against the inside of the tank.


Market Place; ITT Brings Back Breakup Fever
CONGLOMERATE breakup fever hit Wall Street again yesterday, as ITT, one of the biggest conglomerates, shot up 9 percent on the basis of ambiguous comments on possible restructuring by its chairman, Rand V. Araskog.
ITT, once known as the International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation, ballooned in the 1960's and 1970's under the guidance of Harold S. Geneen, one of the most famous conglomerateurs.
Its most important operations now include Hartford insurance, Sheraton hotels, Rayonier forest products and a variety of manufacturing operations.


Hewlett to Join Two-Way TV Effort
Furthering the link between computers and consumer electronics, the Hewlett-Packard Company said today that it would collaborate with TV Answer Inc. to develop the first national "interactive" television system.
The product would let viewers use their television sets to shop, bank, pay bills, and order food and other services.
Using technology from TV Answer, a developer of wireless data services based in Reston, Va., Hewlett-Packard will manufacture and market devices to control a two-way television system in the home.


Where Cameras Regain Their Snap
WHAT is the worst thing that can happen to a camera?
Rick Rankin, president of Professional Camera Repair Service, opened a small red box and held up Exhibit A: a horribly melted and corroded Nikon that still contained a rancid roll of film, the victim of a fire that broke out in a photographer's studio.
"Fire and water damage," Mr. Rankin said, shaking his head.


Soviet Central Asia's Politics Aren't Simple
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 14 report on Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's visit to Tajikistan contains misleading information on the political situation in that Central Asian republic.
While this may not be the most important story in the world, it might become so, especially if we in the West do not check our tendency to view the politics of Central Asia as Communism versus Islamic fundamentalism.


Critic's Notebook; Court TV: Docudrama's New Rival?
For some, Elisabeth Anne Broderick was a sympathetic figure in the ultimate revenge fantasy of a jilted wife.
For others, including a California jury late last year, she was, quite simply, a murderer, one who had brutally disposed of her former husband and his new 28-year-old wife.
Her widely covered story (she was interviewed in prison on ABC's "20/ 20," for instance) clearly struck a public nerve.
It's hardly surprising that Betty Broderick is back on television this weekend.
What is unusual is that her story is being told in two very different formats, a network television movie and a Court TV documentary, the conjunction of which could signal substantial changes in the future of docudramas.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Voters; Warnings for Winners In South Dakota Results
There was bad news all around after Tuesday's South Dakota Presidential primary, even for the winners.
While Democrats here handed Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska his first victory, with 40 percent of the vote, the main reason people said they voted for him was because he "knows my state."


ACTION ON LEADER OF F.D.A IS URGED
The president of the leading association of plastic surgeons has sent a letter urging more than 5,000 surgeons to ask that Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, be removed from deciding whether silicone-gel breast implants are safe.
The letter, which complains about Dr.
Kessler's 'attitude' about silicone, was sent by Dr.
Norman Cole of the American Society of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons on Feb. 13, before an expert panel convened by the F.D.A. recommended that the implants be used only on an experimental basis.
Patients needing breast reconstruction as a result of surgery or serious deformity would qualify almost automatically for clinical trials, while patients seeking to augment the size of their breasts would have more difficulty qualifying for the implants.
Dr.
Kessler has two months to decide whether to follow the recommendation.


Los Angeles Opera: Age 5 and Growing
For years, the words culture and Los Angeles seemed like a contradiction in terms.
The city was too sunny, too sprawling, too seductive to the body for much attention to be paid to the mind.
Besides, the relentlessly commercial and often lowbrow movie industry was predominant.
But Los Angeles -- whose art, architecture and theater have blossomed in the last decade -- is hardly a cultural backwater now.
And the city took a significant cultural step on Tuesday night when its young opera company offered a world premiere: "Kullervo," a striking work by the Finnish composer Aulis Sallinen.


Pirates Go to Great Lengths for an Overtime Stunner
After Saturday's 15-point loss to Villanova, Seton Hall was looking for a sign, some thread of reassurance that the defeat was a mere aberration, not an omen of changing momentum.
The sign came tonight against Georgetown, but it took two bitter, bruising halves and an overtime to reveal itself.
Bryan Caver took an inbounds pass with five seconds left, dribbled the length of the court, then laid the ball in at the buzzer for his only field goal to give Seton Hall a stunning victory in overtime over Georgetown, 73-71, in a Big East Conference game at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
A crowd of 17,049 saw the game.
The loss ended a four-game winning streak for Georgetown (17-7 over all, 10-5 in the league) and knocked it out of first place in the Big East.
The Hoyas, now half a game behind St.
John's, played almost the entire overtime without center Alonzo Mourning, who fouled out just 12 seconds into the extra period.
Seton Hall (17-7, 9-6) is tied with Syracuse for third place in the Big East.
No sooner had the victory been sealed, then Seton Hall fans began pouring out of their seats, first mobbing Caver then anyone dressed in blue and white in a raucous celebration.
"This was like an N.C.A.A. tournament game," said Jerry Walker, Seton Hall's junior forward.
"It was real important for us to have a tough game after what happened down in Villanova. This was a tough battle."
Caver's dramatic drive through what had been a hounding, impenetrable Georgetown defense, capped a physical, hard-fought game in which neither team gave any quarter.
"The plan was for me to get downcourt and take a good shot," Caver said.
"When I got a few steps past midcourt I looked up and saw that there were three seconds left. Then I looked ahead and I didn't see anyone. I figured they'd try to run at me, but they backed off and I took it in."
"We weren't trying to trap and make a stupid mistake," said Georgetown Coach John Thompson.
"Caver did a good job. It's disappointing to lose after how hard we played."
The Hoyas were actually concentrating on Terry Dehere, the junior guard who touched Georgetown for a season-high 30 points on 11 of 17 shooting.
With Dehere sprinting down the right side on the game-winning play, the Georgetown defense spread and created the winning opening for Caver.
Dehere was the only Seton Hall player in double figures.
Mourning led Georgetown with 17 points.
Robert Churchwell scored 15 points for Georgetown, Irvin Church had 13 and Lonnie Harrell 14.
The Pirates managed only 40.4 percent shooting against the Hoyas, and committed 16 turnovers.
"It wasn't a pretty game but it was a good basketball game," said Seton Hall Coach P. J. Carlesimo.
"A lot of kids stepped up at different times. It's just a good win for us. We're just fortunate Bryan made a great play."
Georgetown took a 58-56 lead with 6 minutes 59 seconds left on a basket by Mourning.
Darrell Mims countered with a basket for Seton Hall and drew Mourning's fourth foul.
Mourning was called for an offensive foul 26 seconds later and Gordon Winchester made two fouls shots to give Seton Hall a 60-58 lead.
Mourning was fouled at the other end and converted one of two foul shots to tie the score at 60 with 5:27 left.
Two series later, Church hit a jumper to make it 62-60 Georgetown with 3:06 left.
The teams exchanged misses then Winchester dunked on a pass from Dehere to tie the score at 62.
Church missed a final shot for Georgetown and Seton Hall failed to connected at the buzzer and the game went into overtime.
Mourning fouled out almost immediately, challenging an open shot by Winchester.
Winchester made the first free throw with 4:48 left in overtime, but missed the second.
The Hoyas tied the game on one of two free throws by Harrell, Dehere gave Seton Hall a 64-63 lead when he made one of two free throws with 3:54 left.
Walker missed two free throws with 2:57 left and Churchwell made two foul shots to put the Hoyas ahead, 65-64, with 2:56 left.
Harrell intercepted a Caver passed and scored to give the Hoyas a 67-64 lead, Walker answered to make it 67-66, Georgetown with 2:12 left.
After Harell made one of two foul shots, Winchester put back a Walker airball to make it 68-68 with 1:07 left.
Arturas Karnishovas drew a foul with 45.8 seconds left but made only one of two free throws to give Seton Hall a 69-68 lead.
After a turnover by the Hoyas, Winchester made one of two foul shots to give Seton Hall a 70-68 lead and after a miss by Joey Brown, Karnishovas made one of two foul shots with 13.3 seconds to make it 71-68.
Churchwell hit a 3-pointer for Georgetown with 5.5 seconds left, and that set the stage for Caver's heroics.


Islanders Sign Lachance
The Islanders, following an Olympic-year tradition, have once again signed a top player off the roster of the United States team.
He is SCOTT LACHANCE, a defenseman who was selected on the first round of last summer's amateur draft.
Lachance will be introduced at a news conference this afternoon, the team said.
His agent, DON MEEHAN, said terms of the contract will be revealed today.
Lachance will practice with the team this week and could take a roster spot immediately.
If he does, it will give the Islanders too many defensemen and increase a possibility of a trade before the March 10 deadline.


Forgettable, That's What the Knicks Were
On a night Pat Riley wanted to remember, the Knicks played a game he would love to forget.
In their most pathetic offensive performance since the inception of the shot clock in 1954, the Knicks fell to the Los Angeles Lakers, 81-68, at the Forum.
It was the lowest point total for New York in the 24-second clock era, one fewer than the 69 points it managed against the Chicago Bulls on Oct. 20, 1973.


Abroad at Home; The Hunt For Red October
It was last October when the country heard the charge that Clarence Thomas had sexually harassed Anita Hill.
The Senate confirmed Justice Thomas, and he is sitting on the Supreme Court.
But the issue is still being pursued, in a way destructive of our political system.
This week a Senate special counsel questioned Nina Totenberg of National Public Radio, who first broadcast a report of Professor Hill's charge.
Two weeks ago the counsel, Peter E. Fleming, questioned the print reporter who broke the story, Timothy Phelps of Newsday.


A Big Campaign For Gillette Shaver
The Gillette Company will spend $14 million to advertise its new Sensor for Women shaver in the product's first year on the market, executives said yesterday.
That figure, they added, was more than twice as large as for any other women's shaving product.


Allstate Is Told To Cut Rates, Not Raise Them
An administrative law judge ruled today that the state's largest automobile insurer, the Allstate Insurance Company, was not entitled to a 19 percent rate increase, and instead should reduce its rates by 2.3 percent.
It was the second major setback for the insurer, which has announced that it intends to pull out of New Jersey but must remain for five years to phase out its business and make good any claims before the state will allow it to leave.


Cason, Injured Sprinter, Withdraws From Race
Scratch the sprint showdown tomorrow night between ANDRE CASON, the world indoor record-holder in the 60-meter dash, and LEROY BURRELL, the former world indoor and outdoor sprint record-holder.
A leg injury forced a disappointed Cason to withdraw yesterday from the Mobil Indoor Championships at Madison Square Garden.
An aching flexor muscle in Cason's left leg, to be exact, has prevented the sprinter from doing any speed work since Feb. 15, the day after he bettered the world mark he had broken two weeks before.
Cason's business manager, WAYNE SOUZA, said the sprinter heeded the advice of his doctor, WILLIAM CARSON, and his coach, JOHN SMITH, and decided not to compete.
Cason, who is unbeaten in six races this season, set a world indoor best of 6.45 seconds Jan. 29 in Ghent, Belgium, and lowered it to 6.41 Feb. 14 in Madrid.


New York on Verge of Declaring Drought Emergency
With reservoir levels sharply below normal, New York City officials said yesterday that they were on the verge of declaring the first phase of a drought emergency that would activate strict restrictions on water use.
Officials of the Environmental Protection Department have been close to declaring an emergency since they issued a drought warning in November.
But they have held off for fear of repeating the 1989 drought emergency, which was lifted after two months, when heavy rains arrived unexpectedly.


GUATEMALANS LAG IN QUEST FOR PEACE
Despite hopes that peace in El Salvador might spur an end to the civil war in neighboring Guatemala, recent negotiations have shown that country's rightist Government and leftist guerrillas, as ever, taking their own time.
After three days of meetings in a Mexico City hotel, the eighth round of talks since last April, the two sides on Sunday reported some progress in discussions on human rights issues.
But after seeming near agreement on the subject, they became mired in bitter differences, diplomats and negotiators said.


2 Teen-Agers Shot to Death in a Brooklyn School
Two teen-agers were shot to death at point-blank range in the hallway of a Brooklyn high school yesterday morning, little more than an hour before Mayor David N. Dinkins was to visit the troubled school to tell students they had the power to break free of the world of violence and drugs.
The brazen killing at Thomas Jefferson High School took place just 15 feet away from two police officers who were part of the school's normal security detail, the police said.
Thirteen security guards were also in the school, and an additional 10 police officers were assigned outside for the Mayor's visit.


How 'Free Agents' Alter the Standings
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas has not won a primary contest yet.
But the candidate leads the Democrats in number of delegates.
Sound implausible?
Not when most of these delegates act essentially as free agents.
The Democrats have 772 of such "superdelegates," including members of the Democratic National Committee, Democratic governors, senators and representatives, and they are free to promise their support as they wish or to support no one at all until the convention.


Where a Youth Program Maintains a Burial Fund
In the gritty, insular world of East New York, adolescent life can end over a book bag, a snide remark or a betrayal.
It was apparently the conviction by one thief that he was cheated by another, ignited by a heated confrontation in the days before Christmas, that left two teen-agers dead yesterday and a third charged with their murder, the police said.


Slopes Now Offer Discounts Plus Fun in the Sun
For many skiers, spring brings an automatic reaction: pack away the skis and move on to other activities.
But experienced skiers know that spring is the time to get serious.
"The irony is, in spring, when skiing is the best, skiers stop skiing," said Marilyn Hertz, a Camelback, Pa., skier who leads groups on spring trips to the Rockies and Europe.
"It's then that the days are longer and sunnier. You can ski without bulky clothing. You might also get a big snowfall for powder skiing." The Price Is Right


United Way Seeks to Calm Affiliates
The president of The United Way of America, who has come under mounting criticism in recent days, is expected to speak to 1,400 local affiliates by closed-circuit television on Thursday to try to allay their concerns about reports of his spending and management practices.
Senior members of the organization's governing board held an emergency telephone conference this evening as advisers to the group's president, William Aramony, drafted a text to help guide him and his associates in the televised question-and-answer session.


With N.R.C. Approval, Shoreham Changes Hands
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission yesterday approved the transfer of the Shoreham nuclear plant from its builder, the Long Island Lighting Company, to the Long Island Power Authority, which plans to dismantle it.
The approval is something of a postscript to a 25-year saga of tooth-and-nail combat between the utility, which spent $5.5 billion to build the plant, and opponents who swore from the start that it would never run.
Until very late in the game, almost no one thought the reactor would be both completed and abandoned.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Almanac; Maryland Profile


Critic's Notebook; Retreating Into Music of a More Comforting Era
The way the Grammy Awards told it on Tuesday night, the best song of 1991 was written in 1951.
It was "Unforgettable," the title song of a Natalie Cole album that was showered with awards -- album of the year, record of the year and awards for its producer, its engineers and its arranger -- by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences.
To hear Ms.
Cole singing along with the voice of her father, Nat (King) Cole, induced self-righteous ecstasy among a plurality of the more than 7,000 Grammy voters.
One explanation for the award is the academy's reverent necrophilia.
The award for the cross-generational, deceased-parent duet -- not the first, since Hank Williams Jr. won a Grammy for a duet with his father's voice -- can only lead to more of the same.
I'm bracing myself to hear Julian Lennon adding his voice to John Lennon's "Tomorrow Never Knows," or perhaps Rick Nelson's blond-maned twin sons, a k a Nelson, joining on a remake of "Garden Party" -- a song about not wanting to sing oldies.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ice Cube  Apollo Theater
Not much happened at Ice Cube's show on Saturday night.
Ice Cube, whose album "Death Certificate" (Priority) pretty much compiles a list of those he hates -- women, Jews, middle- or upper-class black people, homosexuals, Koreans -- has, predictably, been the focus of a lot of surely welcome attention, along with hand-wringing on the part of apologists for the lout wing of the rap world.
In concert, moral indignation and hate usually make for good drama; as both Public Enemy and Guns 'n' Roses have made clear, the concertgoing experience is given a sense of authenticity and spectacle when the people on stage rant and spew.
Given the decline of drama in politics and the decline in public speaking in general, concerts have to do as a substitute.


Review/Theater; He Lies. He Cheats. He Should Be a Success
Facing bankruptcy and far over his head in back taxes, Martin Mirkheim has only one marketable asset: a natural ability to lie.
Obviously, he will try to enter the movie business.
In Howard Korder's malevolent comedy, "Search and Destroy," Mirkheim cheats and schemes his way to the top.
This is a play about the American dream, or, if you will, the death of the American dream.
In the new work, as in "Boys' Life," Mr.
Korder demonstrates a sharp wit and an insider's grasp of contemporary jargon.
There is often a David Mamet beat to his language, with half-sentences repeated and inverted, as in "Top of the food chain, you're not," offered as a key comment on the shallow protagonist of "Search and Destroy."


Sanitation Agreement Marks a Major Step
To the Editor:
Contrary to your Feb. 14 report on New York City's tentative agreement with the Uniformed Sanitationmen's Association, there is agreement on both sides to adjust the "regular" collection routes so as to get back to pre-recycling workloads.


Treatment for an Eye Disease May Worsen Condition, Study Finds
The standard treatment for a painful eye disease, optic neuritis, is not only ineffective, doctors say, but may actually worsen the condition.
Patients who are not treated, they said, recover just as fast and have fewer relapses.
The finding has major implications for people with multiple sclerosis, the researchers said, because the two diseases can be virtually identical and are often treated the same way.
The standard therapy is a two-week course of prednisone pills, a powerful anti-inflammatory drug.


New York Election Law Seriously Needs Fixing
To the Editor:
Re: "Mr. Bush's New York 'Victory' " (editorial, Feb. 11):


Revco Parent Posts Profit
The Anac Holding Corporation, parent of the Revco pharmacy chain, said today that it earned $16.2 million in its third quarter ended Feb. 8.
Revco D.S., which operates 1,150 pharmacies in 10 states, is reorganizing under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
Creditors have until March 6 to vote on Revco's reorganization plan, and a bankruptcy judge set a hearing for March 11.


Seeing The Jazz In African Textiles
AROUND New York, West African kente cloth on hats, pocketbooks and other items has become an urban emblem.
The origins of kente cloth and other vibrant African fabrics are explored in "African Improvisation: Textiles from the Indianapolis Museum of Art," on view at the American Craft Museum in New York through April 19.


CHRONICLE
The talk at a dinner party that GREGORY MOSHER, a former director of the Lincoln Center Theater, gave on Tuesday at his Manhattan apartment for ANATOLY SMELYANSKY, a director of the Moscow Art Theater and the head of its school, turned inevitably to the mood of the literary world in Moscow.
"Life in Moscow is simple survival," said Mr.
Smelyansky, who is now a guest professor at the Yale School of Drama.
"In times like these, one questions the value of everything: whether the theater, literature, anything has any value.


McCrory Chain Files for Bankruptcy
Joining a growing list of retailers, the McCrory Corporation, one of the nation's largest operators of dime stores, yesterday filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from creditors.
McCrory, which employs 17,000 people, is controlled by the financier Meshulam Riklis.
It operates 820 stores under the names McCrory, G. C. Murphy, J. J. Newberry and S. H. Kress.


Greenspan Backed for Another Term
Despite the complaints of many senators that the Federal Reserve had moved too slowly to end the recession, the Senate Banking Committee voted overwhelmingly today to confirm Alan Greenspan to a second four-year term as chairman of the central bank.
The vote was 20 to 1, with Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, casting the vote against.


Corrections
An article on Feb. 20 about a Food and Drug Administration hearing on the safety of silicone-gel breast implants misstated the home of Dr.
John Tebbetts, a plastic surgeon, and misstated his role at the hearing.
He is from Dallas, and he testified in behalf of McGhan Medical Corporation, a maker of the implants.


A Solid Rally Raises Prices Of Treasuries
The Government securities market turned in its strongest performance in weeks yesterday, as prices of Treasury notes and bonds posted solid gains and interest rates fell.
Dealers said a highly successful auction of new five-year Treasury notes was the main catalyst for the rally.


Harry Sheppard, 47, Dancer and Teacher
Harry Whittaker Sheppard, a dancer and choreographer active in post-modernist companies in New York City, died on Friday in the Zieken Huis Rijnstate DH, a hospital in Arnhem, the Netherlands.
He was 47 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Yoshiko Chuma, whose company, the School of Hard Knocks, he joined in 1984.


Moscow Journal; That's Funny, Those Pickles Don't Look Russian
Middle-aged women in white smocks and yellow rubber gloves sat in a room at the McDonald's food-processing plant last month, peeling onions and dropping them into buckets.
They are reassigned now, and the onions are gone.
So is the machine that sliced them into slabs for hamburgers.
The pickle operation has also disappeared from the plant on the outskirts of Moscow, turned over like the onions to a Russian supplier.
In this case, a farm that grew and sold cucumbers to McDonald's now also pickles them, then cuts and delivers them in Russian-made plastic bags.


Charles Nagel, 93, Former Head Of the Brooklyn Museum, Dies
Charles Nagel, a former director of the Brooklyn Museum and other art institutions, died last Thursday at a hospital in Wareham, Mass.
He was 93 years old and had lived for the last seven years in Marion, Mass.
He died of pneumonia, said his wife, the former Lucie Lull Oliver.


Random Notes on Random Rangers
A month with the Rangers leaves so many impressions, some perhaps debatable, including these:
THE LEADER: Mark Messier throws fewer body checks than ever before.
Despite impressive statistics, his ineffective shifts are more than rare.
But even when he seems exhausted and overworked, he pulls game-winning plays out of his back pocket the way a magician pulls quarters from your ear.
It is impossible to understate the confidence he generates throughout the roster.
These players revere him the way the Bruins did Bobby Orr.
THE REPORTER: John Davidson's Olympic hiatus was good for CBS, good for him and good for hockey on the national level.
But he was missed on the air of the MSG network and in the corridors near the locker rooms at Madison Square Garden.
Aside from Tony Kubek, what other former athlete takes his reporting role so seriously and does it so well?
THE FIGHTER: People who oppose fighting in hockey should hear the Garden crowd cheer and chant "Domi! Domi! Domi!" before and after Tie Domi throws punches.
Some people go to the circus to see the clowns; some go to hockey to see the goons.
No, that doesn't make it right.
But when Domi is on the ice, he has everyone's attention, from the bench to the back rows.
THE CUSTOMERS: Speaking of back rows: When the league's best team is averaging more than 1,000 unsold seats a game for the season, and when tickets are unsold at the door for a high-profile team like Chicago, it suggests that hockey seats, in this economy, are priced too high for this market.
Teams in smaller markets, with worse records and less advertising, draw a better percentage of capacity.
THE GOALIE: Where would the Rangers be without goalie John Vanbiesbrouck, who has started the last 12 games while Mike Richter has been injured?
Vanbiesbrouck shakes off trade rumors, the occasional soft goal and the odd bad game with a mental toughness that is extraordinary.
THE IMPORT: Like many European players in their first North American season, Sergei Nemchinov seems to be tiring from the grinding number of games.
After scoring 23 goals and 17 assists in the team's first 53 games, he has had only one goal and no assists in the last 11.
He remains a diligent worker, but it is Darren Turcotte, with 25 goals, who is emerging as the No. 2 center.
Will Nemchinov move over to the "checking line" and Turcotte go alongside Mike Gartner?
The Rangers' depth is only adequate at this position and don't be surprised to see a fresh face, perhaps Rob Zamuner, getting a longer look there in the next few weeks.
THE FACILITY: There are minor league buildings with better ice surfaces and better press boxes than Madison Square Garden, but there are few pro teams in any sport with a better public relations department than the Rangers.
Still, no amount of news-media savvy and sophistication can put a positive spin on unsafe work conditions for the players and a substandard work environment for the press.
Hockey knockers in the news media who say this great sport is a bush-league business need not look any further than the most famous rink in the biggest city.
THE PLAYOFFS: Despite their undeniable success this season, the Rangers are hardly guaranteed playoff success.
They still don't match up well with the Washington Capitals, who have a 4-2 record against them this season after bouncing them from the first round in six games last spring.
This time, the Rangers could last four rounds or leave in four games.
Impossible?
Look up last spring's records, which showed the Blackhawks first over all in the regular season and among the first to exit in the first round of the post-season.
THE TRADING DEADLINE: General Manager Neil Smith now admits it was a mistake last spring to acquire Joe Kocur at the trading deadline and put pressure on him to be the enforcer.
It damaged the chemistry of the team, as a major slump followed.
Will that experience inhibit Smith at this year's March 10 trade deadline?
THE FUTURE: The Rangers might not be the team that pries Eric Lindros from the Quebec Nordiques, but it won't be for lack of effort.
Their interest is frequent and serious, backed with money and players.
As a junior, Lindros displayed a bubble-gum card of Messier on his locker.
They became friendly at the Canada Cup last September.
Now that he is 19 years old and much maligned, Lindros needs someone such as Messier as a mentor.
The Rangers will be among the finalists in the bidding.


Saks Plans Aggressive Expansion
Saks Fifth Avenue yesterday outlined an ambitious plan for aggressively expanding and enhancing its business, thus stifling persistent rumors of its imminent demise.
The retailer will receive a $300 million equity infusion from Investcorp, the group largely backed by anonymous Arab investors that together with management bought Saks for $1.5 billion in 1990.
The new money will enable the company to proceed with a business strategy that includes opening several new stores, renovating or rebuilding older locations, introducing specialty stores and bolstering its balance sheet by reducing long-term debt.
Clearing Up Uncertainty
Saks, where generations of affluent women have shopped for luxury and designer goods, also appeared to anoint Philip B. Miller, one of two company vice chairmen, as heir apparent, clearing up any uncertainty about the chain of command.
Mr.
Miller will add the title of chief operating officer, putting him in line to succeed Saks's chairman, Melvin Jacobs, who is scheduled to retire in April 1993.


High-Level U.S. Trip to Hanoi
The Bush Administration is preparing to send the highest-level official delegation to Vietnam since the end of the war, led by Assistant Secretary of State Richard H. Solomon, diplomats and Congressional aides say.
The State Department declined today to comment on the reports, but an announcement of the mission is expected this week.
The Administration team, which is to leave on Saturday, is apparently planning to visit Laos and Cambodia as well as Vietnam.


Events: Flowers And Shows
Designing Water Gardens
Reeves-Reed Arboretum, 165 Hobart Avenue, off Route 24, Summit, N.J; (908) 273-8787.
A class on using water in backyard landscapes will be held from 10 to 11 A.M. on Saturday.
Future courses cover perennials (March 14) and flower arranging (March 24).
Fees range from $14 to $28 ($12 to $23, members).
Reservations required.
Philadelphia Flower Show
Philadelphia Civic Center, 34th Street and Civic Center Boulevard; (215) 625-8253.


Sports of The Times; Hitting, Pitching, Stitching
ON the first full day of spring training, everybody brought their tools of the trade.
Frank Howard had his lethal fungo bat.
Pascual Perez draped his entire collection of gold jewelry around his neck.
And Hiroshi Suzuki carried a sewing machine, a pair of scissors, a hole-puncher.
All were assembled at Yankee camp yesterday, the day baseball fans have been awaiting since the Twins beat the Braves 'round midnight one Sunday in late October.


Bush May Back Renewed Elephant Hunting
A week before the United States and 111 other nations are to meet in Japan to consider protections for endangered animals and plants, the Bush Administration said today that it was sympathetic to a proposal by South Africa and other African nations to relax protections and open international trading in elephant hides and meat.
John F. Turner, director of the Federal Fish and Wildlife Service, said the United States was awaiting the report of an international panel of scientists studying elephant populations in Africa before a final decision would be made about allowing what he called "limited" hunting of one of the world's most admired and endangered animals.


GAMBINOS TO QUIT TRUCKING BUSINESS IN A PLEA BARGAIN
Two sons of the late Carlo Gambino, the crime boss, and others allied with them agreed yesterday to quit the trucking business and pay a $12 million fine in exchange for being spared prison sentences.
Prosecutors said the plea bargain would break organized crime's half-century stranglehold on New York City's dwindling garment industry.
Their efforts, which began with undercover state police officers posing as clothing manufacturers and truckers in a sting operation, represented the most ambitious effort ever to dislodge the underworld from control over one of the city's most important industries.


COURT OPENS PATH FOR STUDENT SUITS IN SEX-BIAS CASES
The Supreme Court ruled today that the Federal law barring sex discrimination in schools and colleges permits students to sue for damages for sexual harassment and other forms of sex discrimination.
In a surprisingly broad 9-to-0 decision, the Court rejected the Bush Administration's argument that the law, Title IX of a 1972 education law, did not authorize monetary damages as a remedy for illegal discrimination.


Marguerite Ross Barnett, 49, Dies; Was Head of Houston University
Marguerite Ross Barnett, who as president of the University of Houston was the first black woman to lead a major American university, died yesterday at Maui Memorial Hospital in Wailuku, Hawaii.
She was 49 years old.
She had a blood disorder involving hypoglycemia and metastatic cancer, said Timothy Maloney, the hospital administrator.
Dr.
Barnett was on medical leave from the University of Houston, where she had been president since 1990.
She was visiting Hawaii with her husband, Walter E. King, on a trip to where they had spent their honeymoon.


Israelis Propose Some Self-Rule By Palestinians
Israel has offered the Palestinians an outline for self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip that would give Palestinians control over many aspects of their daily lives, but would maintain Israel's control over security affairs and prevent the Palestinians from establishing any framework for an independent state.
The Israelis presented their draft proposals on Monday to Palestinian negotiators at the Washington peace talks, and disclosed some of the contents today.
The Palestinians presented their plan for self-rule during the previous round of talks last month.


Panel Proposes Tough Rules to Maintain Delaware River's Quality
Four states and the Federal Government proposed unusually tough rules today to preserve the high quality of the upper Delaware River.
The plan would prohibit new pollutants that would be legally permissible elsewhere but would damage the nearly pristine water of the northernmost 121 miles of the river, between Hancock, N.Y., on the southwestern edge of the Catskills and Delaware Water Gap, near Stroudsburg, Pa.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY 2 TEEN-AGERS KILLED IN BROOKLYN SCHOOL
Two teen-agers were shot dead at point-blank range in the hallway of a high school in East New York, an hour before Mayor David N. Dinkins was to visit the troubled school to tell students they had the power to break free of violence and drugs.
The shootings dramatized the volatile mix of children and guns and gave new urgency to a debate over school safety.
A1.


Mastercard Account Is Under Review
After months of speculation that it would put its estimated $60 million account into review, Mastercard International notified Lintas New York, its agency since 1987, that a review was forthcoming.
The announcement was made on Tuesday by Peter Dimsey, president of Mastercard's United States operation, who said the company was seeking to broaden its creative options.
Lintas accepted an invitation to take part in the review.
The remaining contenders will be selected by Mastercard with the assistance of Morgan Anderson &amp; Company, a consulting firm in New York.


Walter Loria, 84, Dies; Lawyer and Inventor
Walter J. Loria, a lawyer in Manhattan for 63 years and an inventor of electronic devices, died on Monday in Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manhattan and Palm Beach, Fla.
He died of complications from a stroke suffered a year ago, his family said.


Future Worth: Before It's Hot, Grab It
WILY collectors, having noticed a brisk trade in the ephemera of not- so-long-ago, have begun stocking up on the ephemera of
now.
Their targets are things that can be had for no money:  items given out as advertising or meant to be tossed away.
"There's still plenty of great stuff you can get for free," insisted Fred Boyle, the director of Cudahy's, a Manhattan gallery of contemporary art.
To Mr.
Boyle, Joe the camel matchbooks are great stuff.
To judge by the rise in trading clubs and publications, so too are airline soap, fast-food give-aways, expired American Express cards and cereal boxes.
Anything with a licensed character, an advertising emblem or a modicum of graphic interest is fair game.


The Youngest, Cruelest Justice
Only four months after taking his oath as a Justice, Clarence Thomas finds himself rebuked by a seven-member majority of the Rehnquist Court for disregarding humane standards of decency.
The withering reprimand, included in the Supreme Court's majority opinion in a prison case Tuesday, is this:
To deny, as the dissent does, the difference between punching a prisoner in the face and serving him unappetizing food is to ignore the concepts of dignity, civilized standards, humanity, and decency that animate the Eighth Amendment.


Home Video
Nominees on Cassette
As happens every year, the Oscar nominations announced last week find top films with their video plans spread across the calendar.
Of 14 movies named in 6 major categories (picture, director, actor, actress, supporting actor and actress), only 3 are out on tape.


For the Yankees, Gang's All Here, Including Perez
Pascual Perez bounded into camp and then bounded out to the field today, all smiles and jewels.
Don Mattingly was here, there were television cameras all around and several hundred people in the stands, oohing and aahing every time a fly ball sailed over the wall.
It is only spring training -- only the first of many days under the bright Florida sun -- but the atmosphere was almost electric, as if this were opening day, not just the opening workout.
"There's a sense of urgency now," Manager Buck Showalter said during an afternoon break.
"Things have picked up. There are so many things we have to cover, and while I know there's plenty of time, I still want to get them done.
"I'm feeling a lot better now that we've got everybody here."
That included Perez, who said he considered himself on time even though he reported five days after the other pitchers and catchers.
And it included Mattingly, who seemed content to be back despite suggesting last season that he might be happier with another team.
Spirits Not Dampened
There was rain, but spirits weren't dampened.
Before it poured, Mattingly took his first swings in the batting cage and drove eight pitches over the fence in right.
Danny Tartabull, the richest of all Yankees, broke a bat on his fourth swing, then followed with a few line drives.
Kids called out for autographs, took snapshots and seemed enraptured by the day's events.
So did the players, who still find a sense of renewal when spring training officially begins.
"You have a chance to start all over again and look forward," said pitcher Tim Leary, reluctant to look back at a 4-10 record.
"It's a chance for the team and for individuals to start reaching for goals. You think back to last August and September when the team was out of the race and you felt miserable. This game is supposed to be fun, and now it is again."
The game may have lost its enjoyment for Mattingly as much as anyone.
In August, he was caught in a ludicrous controversy over the length of his hair.
Then, on the day his locks were cut, he revealed that he had discussed with General Manager Gene Michael the possibility of trading him.
By the end of the season, Mattingly said he would think about whether he wanted to stay.
In December, he said he would.
Looking Ahead
Today, he just wanted to look ahead.
"I don't think it much matters how I felt," he said.
"Last year is gone. I'm here now and ready to go. It's a fresh start for our ball club."
Part of his dissatisfaction might have stemmed from his troubles at the plate.
Although he played in 152 games and appeared to push his chronic back problems into the past, he was clearly unhappy with his production: a .288 average, 9 homers and just 68 runs batted in.
"I felt that part of my problem was that, in thinking about goals, I wanted to complete the season and stay on the field," he said.
"I took it for granted that if I stayed on the field, I would have success. It's not that easy. I set my goals too low. I expected them to happen instead of making them happen."
Perez may have more to prove.
Two seasons of shoulder injuries have resulted in three pitching victories, but Perez still reported to camp when he was ready.
He flew here from the Dominican Republic on Monday, he said, then took care of personal business.
"I'm on time," he said, and recited his reasoning: "Because I know that pitchers and catchers are here on the 21st, I got my visa and everything on time. But I had things to do at home, so I figured I would be here on the 26th."
And he was, irrepressible as ever.
He loped onto the field, kidded with his teammates, smiled and played catch, saying later that his injury was no longer a concern.
He said he would take part in regular drills with the other pitchers and throw off a mound in about a week.
Showalter, asked how he felt about Perez's tardiness, said, "Me, upset? Certainly we'd like to have all our players here under the same guidelines, but from a legal standpoint, he's on time."
Then, he added, "I'm sure we'll talk about it."
Perez hardly seemed concerned.
When he was done, he changed and showered, then covered himself with an array of jewelry: five rings, a diamond-encrusted watch, nine necklaces and medallions and two bracelets.
"I'm the only one who enjoys himself," he said, pointing at a reporter.
"You only have one life. You have to enjoy it."
One more thing about Pascual Perez.
He said that he recently purchased a $57,000 black limousine that seats eight people and that he will use to transport him to the ball park here and in New York.
After it has been equipped with a compact disk player, a television and videocassette recorder, he will unveil it.
The license plate, Perez said, will read, "ON TIME." Of course.


Gretzky Sidelined
WAYNE GRETZKY, the Los Angeles Kings center and the National Hockey League's scoring leader, will miss at least one game because of a sprained right knee, it was announced yesterday.
"He's listed day to day," said SUE CARPENTER, the Kings' director of media relations. (AP)


New British Magazine Denies That Youth Must Be Served
Its logo is a triangular British road sign that features two stooped elderly people, one with a cane.
It promises to "out" people who lie about their age.
It hopes to be very politically incorrect and has started by calling itself The Oldie.
The Oldie, a new biweekly magazine, wants to be a sort of Rolling Stone for the graying set.
Mixing humor and rant with serious reportage, it wants to do battle with the cult of youth.
To borrow a phrase from Huey Lewis and the News, a group few at the magazine would have heard about, The Oldie wants to make it hip to be square.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Freudenberg Nonwovens Limited Partnership, Chelmsford, Mass., the North American manufacturing and distributing unit of Freudenberg &amp; Co., Weinheim, Germany, promoted Jeffrey A. Templar to president and chief executive from vice president of finance.
He succeeds Manfred H. Wennemer, who will return to Germany. *
MCI Communications Corp., Washington, named Carol Herod senior vice president of business marketing, succeeding C. Thomas Faulders 3d, who resigned to become chief financial officer of the Communications Satellite Corp.


Report Says F.D.A. Is Lax On Over-the-Counter Drugs
Deficiencies in the Food and Drug Administration's system of approving and monitoring over-the-counter drugs have left it with little data on the number and types of adverse reactions and virtually no system of obtaining any, according to a Government study.
The report by the General Accounting Office, to be released on Thursday by a subcommittee of the House Small Business Committee, noted that some over-the-counter drugs were known to cause serious problems under some conditions.
For example, aspirin can cause internal bleeding.


Abrams Takes On Senator Pothole; Attorney General Charges D'Amato Doesn't Serve Constituents
No one goes on at greater length about bucking politics as usual than State Attorney General Robert Abrams.
So it can be jarring to watch him run for the Democratic nomination for the Senate, attacking Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Republican Senator known for old-style pork-barrel politics.
Mr.
Abrams is proposing to out-D'Amato Mr.
D'Amato.
Senator D'Amato "has cut and hurt and punished New York," Mr.
Abrams told reporters he summoned in late January to the modest Nassau County home of Ken and Betty Koch -- "middle-class people," he said -- to shift his year-old campaign into high gear.
Partly because of Mr.
D'Amato, he said, New York receives fewer dollars back than it sends to Washington in taxes.
"And Al D'Amato has the gall to say that he has delivered for New York," Mr.
Abrams said.


Suspected Mob Capo, 51, Shot in Brooklyn
A man described by the authorities as a captain in the Colombo organized crime family was shot and seriously wounded yesterday morning in a fusillade of bullets in front of a social club in Brooklyn that had been the scene of a drive-by shooting last month.


Fun and Games For Town Children
PARENTS seeking respite from Mutant Ninja Turtles and Barbie Dolls may want to consult Archisources, a catalogue of toys and activities published by the Center for Understanding the Built Environment, otherwise known as CUBE.
CUBE, financed by the American Institute of Architects, is devoted to teaching children about "the things that are all around them," Ginny Graves, the director, said.
The catalogue is intended for teachers, but parents and children may find many items -- gargoyle masks, for instance -- of interest.


Essay; Comeback Coming
To the question on the cover of U.S.
News "How Weak Is Bush?" -- G.O.P. voters of South Dakota replied: weaker than any sitting Republican President since Hoover.
With nobody else on the ballot, Mr.
Bush was actively disdained by one-third of his own party's voters.
That's not weakness; that's decrepitude.
Here's the comeback scenario:


Two Girls Will Face Off In the Nets
For the first time in a New Jersey state hockey tournament, two female goaltenders will be in the nets for opposing teams this afternoon.
Liz Hill of Lawrence High School and Claudine Pietrucha of Verona will be in the nets, but they cannot recall whether they had opposed each other in goal before.
"I really don't remember," said Pietrucha, who became friendly with Hill at the Babson College women's ice hockey camp in Massachusetts.
The two met three years ago and have not talked since.
"We shared ice sessions together and we played on the same level," Pietrucha said.
"So we must have scrimmaged at some point."


Running Back Arrested
A day after the Nebraska football coach, TOM OSBORNE, kicked two players off his team after their arrests for their part in a brawl with members of the university's baseball team, he found himself in court at a bond hearing for another Nebraska running back, SCOTT BALDWIN.
Baldwin remained in the Lancaster (Neb.) County Jail without bond yesterday after his attorney entered pleas of innocent and innocent by reason of insanity on two assault charges.
County District Judge PAUL MERRITT set a trial date for the week of April 6 for Baldwin in the beating of a 23-year old Lincoln woman on Jan. 18.


Computers Spell Change in the Pits
It may have been a shaky start, but like the tentative steps of a child first learning to walk, nine traders at the two main futures exchanges here gingerly began punching hand-held computers that are likely to forever change the way they do business.
Instead of quickly jotting their trades on the cards used for as long as anyone can remember, four traders at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and five at the Chicago Board of Trade pecked at computers that registered their transactions on a remote system.
The system allows the exchange staff to match and monitor trades as they happen.
Opportunity for Fraud
The move into a more modern era comes three years after agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation working undercover swooped into Chicago's trading pits and charged dozens of traders with manipulating transactions and skimming millions of dollars from their customers.


Texas Health Officials Unable To Verify School H.I.V. Cases
The Texas Department of Health said today that it had not been able to verify a report that an unusually high number of students at a northeastern Texas high school had been infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
The Health Department said in a statement that it had found no information in the case management files of Dona K. Spence, a Ark-Tex Council of Governments employee, to verify independently "specific claims of H.I.V. prevalence in Northeast Texas schools." The council said today that Ms.
Spence had resigned.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment Democratic Free-for-All; Expectations of an Orderly Campaign Fade As Voters Choose One Man, Then Another
Forget about all the neat scripts for an orderly Democratic primary campaign, from the "Triumphant March of the Early Front-Runner," starring Bill Clinton, to the "Unstoppable Surge of the New Hampshire Underdog," featuring Paul E. Tsongas.
The voters are involved now.
The plot lines are messy.
And the Democratic nomination is still very much up for grabs.
One sure sign was the rough new attack mounted by Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska in Georgia today, where he took aim at Gov.
Bill Clinton's draft record and his chances against President Bush in the fall.


Susan Hopwood, 55, A Manager of Sales And Ad Marketing
Susan Kaplan Hopwood, a marketing and sales executive in New York City, died on Feb. 8 at her home in Newtonville, Mass.
She was 55 years old.
She died of a pulmonary embolism, her family said.


Motorola Payment Of $15.1 Million
Motorola Inc. agreed to pay the General Services Administration $15.1 million to settle claims that the company had violated the False Claims Act.
The civil settlement, the agency's largest in a single case, involved claims that Motorola failed to disclose the discounts it offered to commercial customers and knowingly sold the Goverment refurbished computer equipment it had represented as new.


Gilbert Chase, 85, Critic and Author Of Music Studies
Gilbert Chase, a musicologist, critic and the author of important studies of American and Spanish music, died on Saturday at North Carolina Memorial Hospital in Chapel Hill.
He was 85 years old and had lived in Chapel Hill since his retirement from teaching in 1979.
He died of pneumonia, said his wife, Kathleen van Barentzen Chase.


What Is It? Since You Ask, It's Art
The Gannett Outdoor Group, a billboard advertising company, has a new campaign to promote its business: 13 surreal photos and drawings of dogs, children, pigs, feet and legs that are supposed to make the public think.
What they are making the public think is, "What the heck is that?"
"You know, I was just thinking, what the heck are those things?" said John Weingart, a senior official in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy, in the middle of a conversation about something else.
"First I thought they were some kind of new anti-drug message, and then I thought, it's some movie coming out. What is it?"


Garrison Honored
The fortunes of ZINA GARRISON have declined on the court since her surprise run to the 1990 Wimbledon final, but her achievements off the court earned her special recognition yesterday in New York, where she received the inaugural Family Circle "Player Who Makes a Difference" award.
Garrison donated $20,000, the cash part of the award, which will be given annually in recognition of a woman player's contributions to worthy causes, to the Zina Garrison All Court Tennis Academy, a new program in Houston for inner-city youths.


Uncovered Short Sales Are Up 2.4% on Nasdaq
The total number of shares sold short in over-the-counter trading and not yet covered rose 2.4 percent from mid-January through mid-February, reaching 352.4 million shares, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
The increase surprised some market watchers, including Michael Murphy, the editor of the Overpriced Stock Service in Half Moon Bay, Calif.
He suggested that the number of investors hedging against an overall market decline, rather than betting against a particular stock they believe to be overvalued, might be clouding the picture.


Laettner and Hurley's Return Lift Duke
Two closely related elements reappeared tonight in top-ranked Duke's lineup.
The first was point guard Bobby Hurley, sidelined for three weeks with a broken toe in his right foot.
The second was the transition game that Hurley runs so well and which had been largely missing in his absence.
The result was a 76-67 victory over the Virginia Cavaliers.
The victory raised Duke's record to 22-2 over all and 12-2 in the Atlantic Coast Conference and assured the Blue Devils of a tie for first during the regular season.


Topics of The Times; Ms. Holtzman's Artful Ads
Elizabeth Holtzman, the City Comptroller, should know better than to allow the use of city money to promote herself.
Even though she is a candidate for the Democratic Senate nomination, Ms.
Holtzman appears prominently in a full-page newspaper ad for new low-denomination city bonds.
She's heard in a radio spot, too.
In the widely disseminated newspaper ad, Ms.
Holtzman stands with three young people.
With her hand on the youngest's shoulder, she is quoted as saying "For as little as $1,200, you can save her future."


250 at CUNY Sue New York, Citing Racial Bias in Budget
In a case that will test a legal strategy already used with some success in the South, more than 250 professors and students at the City University of New York sued New York State today, contending that the way it finances public higher education is racially discriminatory.
The suit aims to prove that the state gives significantly more money per student each year to the State University of New York, whose population is largely white, than to CUNY, two-thirds of whose students come from minority groups, and that this amounts to racial bias in financing.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Kerrey Brings Vietnam Issue to Georgia
Senator Bob Kerrey marched into Georgia today and brought the Vietnam War with him.
"I tell you today," he said, "Bill Clinton should not be the nominee of the party because he will not be able to win."
Speaking at Spelman College in Atlanta, fresh from his victory in South Dakota, Mr.
Kerrey, who won the Medal of Honor in Vietnam, said Mr.
Clinton's avoidance of the draft in 1969 would be an issue in the general election.
"This is a truth that is largely unspoken, but it is almost universally believed by those who have been through this kind of thing before."


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Rookie Paces Canadiens  Rookie Gilbert Dionne scored three consecutive goals last night as the Montreal Canadiens extended their unbeaten streak to eight games with a 4-1 victory over the Minnesota North Stars in Bloomington, Minn.
Dionne broke open a 1-1 game with two goals in a 24-second span of the second period, then added a third-period goal for the Canadiens, who are 5-0-3 in their last eight games.
The hat trick was the first for Dionne -- the brother of Marcel Dionne -- in 24 games since being called up to the Canadiens on Dec. 22.
Patrick Roy, who leads the National Hockey League with a 2.20 goals-against average, made 32 saves as the Canadiens handed the Stars their fifth loss in six games.
They were 1-4-0 on a just-completed road trip that began with an 8-0 loss in Montreal on Feb. 17. (AP) Oilers 6, Jets 1: Kelly Buchberger's shorthanded goal early in the second period deflated Winnipeg, and Edmonton went on to the victory in Edmonton, Alberta.
The victory moved the Oilers into sole possession of third place in the Smythe Division, 2 points behind the second-place Los Angeles Kings. (AP) TENNIS  No. 15 Wiesner Advances  Judith Wiesner of Austria, the world's 15th-ranked player, defeated Rosalyn Fairbank-Nideffer, 6-2, 6-2, last night in the Evert Cup tournament in Indian Wells, Calif.
Asked about the absence of the second-seeded Martina Navratilova, who withdrew Tuesday because of the flu, Wiesner said, "It's a wide-open field." Seventh-seeded Gigi Fernandez, ranked 19th, needed only one hour to defeat Kirstin Dreyer, 6-3, 6-0. (AP)


Don't Rush to Deploy ABM's
When Iraqi Scuds began slamming into Israel and Saudi Arabia, they sent a shudder through Americans.
How long would a new nuclear-armed Iraq take to build missiles capable of reaching the United States?
Sensing the anxiety, Congress wants to deploy anti-missile defenses on the ground, starting in 1996.
But why rush into a costly deployment when U.S. intelligence indicates that the danger from renegade third world nations is still on the distant horizon?
Further research is surely justified, but there is no compelling reason now to install anti-missile defenses.


BRIEFS
*
Bon-Ton Stores Inc., York, Pa., agreed to acquire Watt &amp; Shand Inc., Lancaster Pa., a retailer.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Barry's Jewelers Inc., Duarte, Calif., signed a restructuring agreement and has filed a prenegotiated reorganization plan under Chapter 11 of the U.S.
Bankruptcy Code.


U.S. TO PLEDGE AID TO FIGHT WARMING
The Bush Administration will announce today the first change in its position on a critical issue affecting efforts to negotiate a multinational treaty to control global warming, a White House official said last night.
The official, Michael Deland, the chairman of the White House Council on Environmental Quality, said the United States would pledge to contribute $75 million to help developing countries do their part in stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases produced by human activity.


Well-Built Roofs (Surprise!) Are Better
AFTER Hurricane Hugo, the Institute for Disaster Research at Texas Tech University in Lubbock, Tex., sent two roofing experts to investigate damage to homes around Charleston, S.C.
The experts, James R. McDonald, professor of civil engineering, and Thomas L. Smith, director of technology and research for the National Roofing Contractors Association, now report that much of the damage was a result of improper installation of roofs by homeowners and contractors.


The Grammy Winners
Here are the winners at the 34th annual Grammy Awards ceremony Tuesday night at Radio City Music Hall:
Record of the Year: "Unforgettable"
Album of the Year: "Unforgettable"
Song of the Year: "Unforgettable," Irving Gordon, songwriter
New Artist: Marc Cohn
Pop Vocal, Female: "Something to Talk About" (single), Bonnie Raitt
Pop Vocal, Male: "When a Man Loves a Woman" (single), Michael Bolton
Pop Vocal, Duo or Group: R.E.M.
Traditional Pop: Natalie Cole with Nat (King) Cole, "Unforgettable" (single)
Pop Instrumental: "Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves" (album), Michael Kamen
Rock Vocal, Solo: "Luck of the Draw" (album), Bonnie Raitt
Rock Vocal, Duo or Group: "Good Man, Good Woman," Bonnie Raitt and Delbert McClinton
Hard Rock: "For Unlawful Carnal Knowledge" (album), Van Halen
Metal: "Metallica" (album), Metallica
Rock Instrumental: "Cliffs of Dover" (single), Eric Johnson
Rock Song: "Soul Cages," Sting
Alternative Music: "Out of Time" (album), R.E.M.
Rhythm-and-Blues Vocal, Female: Patti LaBelle and Lisa Fischer (tie)
Rhythm-and-Blues Vocal, Male: Luther Vandross
Rhythm-and-Blues Vocal, Duo or Group: "Cooleyhighharmony" (album), Boyz II Men
Rhythm-and-Blues Song: "Power of Love/ Love Power" (single), Luther Vandross, Marcus Miller and Teddy Vann
Rap, Solo: "Mama Said Knock You Out" (single), L. L. Cool J
Rap, Duo or Group: D.J. Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince
New Age: "Fresh Aire 7," Mannheim Steamroller.
Contemporary Jazz: "Sassy" (from "The Offbeat of Avenues"), Manhattan Transfer
Jazz Vocal: "He Is Christmas," Take 6
Jazz Instrumental, Solo: "I Remember You" (from "Serenity"), Stan Getz
Jazz Instrumental, Group: Oscar Peterson Trio
Large Jazz Ensemble: "Live at the Royal Festival Hall," Dizzy Gillespie and the United Nation Orchestra
Country Vocal, Female: "Down at the Twist and Shout," Mary-Chapin Carpenter
Country Vocal, Male: Garth Brooks
Country, Duo or Group: "Love Can Build a Bridge" (single), the Judds
Country Vocal Collaboration: "Restless" (single), Steve Wariner, Ricky Skaggs and Vince Gill (from the album "The New Nashville Cats")
Country Instrumental: "The New Nashville Cats" (album), Mark O'Connor
Bluegrass: "Spring Training," Carl Jackson, John Starling and the Nash Ramblers
Country Song: "Love Can Build a Bridge," Naomi Judd, John Jarvis, Paul Overstreet, songwriters
Rock/Contemporary Gospel: "Under Their Influence" (album), Russ Taff
Pop Gospel: "For the Sake of the Call," Steven Curtis Chapman
Southern Gospel: "Homecoming," the Gaither Vocal Band
Traditional Soul Gospel: "Pray for Me," Mighty Clouds Of Joy
Contemporary Soul Gospel: "Different Lifestyles," BeBe and CeCe Winans
Gospel Choir or Chorus: "The Evolution of Gospel," Sounds of Blackness, Gary Hines, choir director
Latin Pop: "Cosas del Amor," Vikki Carr
Tropical Latin: "Bachata Rosa," Juan Luis Guerra y 4.40
Mexican-American: "16 de Septiembre," Little Joe
Traditional Blues: "Live at the Apollo," B. B. King.
Contemporary Blues: "Damn Right, I've Got the Blues," Buddy Guy
Traditional Folk: "The Civil War (Original Soundtrack Recording)," various; Ken Burns and John Coldy, producers
Contemporary Folk: "The Missing Years" (album), John Prine
Reggae: "As Raw as Ever" (album), Shabba Ranks
World Music: "Planet Drum," Mickey Hart.
Polka: "Live! At Gilley's," Jimmy Sturr and His Orchestra
For Children: "A Cappella Kids," The Maranatha Kids
Comedy: "P. D. Q. Bach: WTWP Classical Talkity-Talk Radio," Prof. Peter Schickele
Spoken Word: "The Civil War," Ken Burns
Musical Show: "The Will Rogers Follies"
Instrumental Composition: "Basque," (from "The Wind Beneath My Wings"), Elton John
Instrumental for a Motion Picture or Television: "Dances With Wolves" (album), John Barry
Song for a Motion Picture or Television: "(Everything I Do) I Do It for You" (from "Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves") single, Bryan Adams, Robert John (Mutt) Lange and Michael Kamen
Music Video, Short Form: "Losing My Religion," R.E.M., Tarsem, video director, Dave Ramser, video line producer
Music Video, Long Form: "Madonna: Blonde Ambition World Tour Live"
Arrangement on an Instrumental: "Medley: Bess You Is My Woman/I Love You Porgy" (from "The Gershwin Connection"), Dave Grusin, arranger
Instrumental Arrangement Accompanying Vocals: "Unforgettable" (single), Johnny Mandel (from "Unforgettable")
Best-Engineered Album, Non-Classical: "Unforgettable" (album), David Reitzas, Al Schmitt, Woody Woodruff and Armin Steiner
Producer, Non-Classical: David Foster
Album Package: "Billie Holiday, the Complete Decca Recordings," Vartan
Album Notes: "Star Time," James Brown (introduction), Cliff White, Harry Weinger, Nelson George and Alan M. Leeds
Historical Album: "Billie Holiday, the Complete Decca Recordings," Steven Lasker and Andy McKaie
Classical Album: "Bernstein: Candide," Leonard Bernstein, conductor; London Symphony Orchestra
Orchestral Performance: "Corigliano: Symphony No. 1," Daniel Barenboim, conductor; Chicago Symphony Orchestra
Opera: Wagner: "Gotterdammerung," James Levine, conductor; Metropolitan Opera Orchestra and Chorus
Choral Performance: Bach: "Mass in B Minor," Georg Solti, conductor; Chicago Symphony Chorus and Orchestra; Margaret Hillis, choral director
Soloists With Orchestra: Barber, "Piano Concerto Opus 38," John Browning, pianist (Leonard Slatkin, conductor; St. Louis Symphony Orchestra)
Classical Soloist: Alicia de Larrocha
Chamber Music: Brahms, "Piano Quartets (Op. 25-26)" Isaac Stern and Jaime Laredo, violinists, Yo-Yo Ma, cellist, Emanuel Ax, pianist
Classical Vocal: "The Girl With Orange Lips (Falla, Ravel, Kim, Stravinsky, DeLage)," Dawn Upshaw, soprano
Contemporary Classical Composition: "Symphony No. 1," John Corigliano, composer (Daniel Barenboim, conductor; Chicago Symphony Orchestra)
Best Engineered Recording, Classical: "Bernstein: Candide," Leonard Bernstein, conductor; London Symphony Orchestra, Gregor Zielinski, engineer Classical Producer: James Mallinson


End of Plant Predictable, But Closing Still Hurts
Two days after General Motors shocked Westchester County with news that it would close its huge plant here in 1995, the fallout seems certain to be painful, but limited, across a suburban landscape where welding metal, stamping plastic and other manufacturing has long been a relic of the industrial past.
In this Hudson River village, 18 miles north of Manhattan, as elsewhere in New York State, a chorus of angry charges is being directed at General Motors, which received rich subsidies in the mid-1980's to keep the plant open.


Stocks Dip in Tokyo
Stock prices posted slight losses in Tokyo today.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 stocks was down 31.07 points, or 0.15 percent, to 21,333.70.


Review/Pop; The Musical Horizons of Iris Williams
When the Welsh contralto Iris Williams made her New York cabaret debut last year in the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel, singing a program of Jerome Kern songs, her rich, foggy voice and refined elocution handsomely matched the pristine melodiousness of the Kern material.
In her return engagement at the club, where she is appearing through March 21, Ms.
Williams has expanded her musical horizons in a show that has separate sections devoted to Rodgers and Hart, the Gershwins, Harold Arlen, English pop composers and Edith Piaf songs.
This time, although Ms.
Williams's beautiful voice, with its deep, smoky timbre, buzzing vibrato and letter-perfect diction, gives the songs respectable formal readings, the rhythmic subtleties of the Gershwin and Arlen material elude her.
And the tea-party politeness of her Piaf interpretations misses the passion that is essential to bring songs like "La Vie en Rose" and "Je ne Regrette Rien" to dramatic life.


Poor Choice for U.N.
To the Editor:
Many in the international law community will be distressed if, as "Thornburgh Is Seen Likely to Take a U.N. Job" (news article, Feb. 11) predicts, Richard Thornburgh is appointed to a high position in the United Nations Secretariat.
Mr.
Thornburgh is known to the international law world chiefly by his sponsorship of the policy under which the Department of Justice indicated it would pursue alleged violators of United States law in foreign countries even where that pursuit violated international law.
This policy, about which the department was highly secretive, was defended by Mr.
Thornburgh's assistant and successor, but as Attorney General, Mr.
Thornburgh must be regarded as responsible for it.


CHRONICLE
DOROTHY SCHULMAN, the honorary chairwoman of a Chanel fashion show this evening at the Henry Flagler Morrison Museum in Palm Beach, Fla., has received 60 letters pleading for tickets.
"They say, 'Why am I being turned away?' " Mrs.
Schulman said yesterday.
" 'I am crying, and I want to be part of it.' "
The sold-out event, which will benefit the Children's Medical Center at St.
Mary's Hospital in Palm Beach, is costing Chanel $250,000.
It is easy to see why, from the explanation of the logistics by JULIE MANNION, the producer of the show and a partner in the public relations firm of Keeble, Cavaco &amp; Duka.


Demolition Starts on San Francisco Building.


Oscar Broneer, 97, Archeologist Who Found Ancient Greek Shrine
Dr.
Oscar T. Broneer, an archeologist and former professor of the University of Chicago who discovered an important Panhellenic shrine dating from the seventh century B.C., died on Saturday at his home in Ancient Corinth, Greece.
He was 97 years old.
He died of heart failure, said Dr.
Elizabeth Gephardt, Dr.
Broneer's successor as director of the University of Chicago's excavations in Isthmia, Greece.


Calendar: A Stroll In Harlem
Harlem With Soul
Harlem, Your Way!
Tours Unlimited, 129 West 130th Street; (212) 690-1687.
A presentation on African-American history in Harlem will precede a walking tour of the neighborhood, with visits to the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture and the Abyssinian Baptist Church, on Saturday starting at 1 P.M.
There will be a soul-food reception afterward, with poetry and music.
Fee, tour only, $15; reception only, $15; combined ticket, $25.
Reservations required.
City and Environment
Parsons School of Design, 25 East 13th Street; (212) 229-8955.


A-Plant Shut Down, Ending Industry's Test Case
A reactor that the electric industry intended to be the test case for proving that nuclear power plants could operate safely for up to 60 years will instead be permanently shut immediately, its owners decided yesterday.
The 32-year-old reactor, Yankee Rowe, in Rowe, Mass., had been shut temporarily since September for safety tests.
The 10 New England utilities that own the plant voted yesterday to retire the plant to avoid the high cost of determining whether it is safe to run.
Demand for power has been declining in New England as a result of the recession, and cheap electricity is available from other sources because of the reduced demand.


Pipe Bomb Explodes Outside Syria's Mission to the United Nations
A bomb exploded outside a Manhattan building that houses missions to the United Nations early yesterday morning, and a passer-by spotted a second, identical bomb in a cardboard box inside a telephone booth on the Upper West Side a few hours later, the police said.
A note found near the second bomb said "Free Syrian Jews," and the remnants of what appeared to be another note were found near the first bomb, said Sgt.
Peter Sweeney, a police spokesman.
The Syrian mission is in the building where the bomb exploded.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Dire Straits
Brendan Byrne Arena East Rutherford, N.J.
If Dire Straits hadn't been right there onstage on Sunday night, you might have thought you were sitting at home listening to the group's albums on the stereo.
The sound was digitally perfect, mixed so that the singer Mark Knopfler's guitar notes were always at the forefront.
The songs, spanning the band's recording history from "Sultans of Swing" in 1978 to the latest album, "On Every Street" (Warner Brothers), were often flawless reproductions of the studio originals.
The audience was polite and restrained; no one stood up, no one yelled or whistled in the quiet parts.
The only things missing were a couch, to stretch out on and maybe doze a little, and a remote control, to skip over the boring songs, of which there were many.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; New Marketing Specialists Tap Collegiate Consumers
AFTER paying for essentials, the average college student spends $135 a month on movie tickets, compact disks, taco chips and other impulse purchases.
That makes the campus an attractive target for many corporations.
"It's a market that doesn't save," said Glenn Yago, vice president of corporate development for the American Passage Media Corporation, a Seattle marketing company.


INSIDE
Aging Nuclear Plant to Close
Owners of the nation's oldest nuclear power plant decided to close it immediately rather than pay the large sums needed to determine whether it was safe to run.
Page A12.
Easy Drugs, but Safe?
A Government study strongly criticized the F.D.A. for not scrutinizing non-prescription drugs for possible hazardous side-effects.
Page A12.
Elephant Hunting Weighed
The Bush Administration said it was sympathetic to a proposal by several African nations to open trading in elephant hides and meat.
Page A11.
Expansion Plans at Saks
Saks Fifth Avenue outlined an ambitious $300 million plan that includes opening new stores, renovating or rebuilding older stores and introducing specialty stores.
Page D1.
Canadian Troops to Go Home
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's Government has announced that Canadian combat forces will leave Europe by the end of 1994.
Page A9.
Pioneering Educator Dies
Marguerite Ross Barnett, the first black woman to head a major American university, died of cancer at the age of 49.
Page B7.


Tambrands Official Promoted to President
Tambrands Inc. announced yesterday that Charles J. Chapman had been promoted to president and chief operating officer of the company, which specializes in personal-care products like Tampax tampons.
Mr.
Chapman, who was also elected to the board, will be responsible for Tambrands' worldwide operations.
The company, based in White Plains, does business in 135 countries.
Previously he had been executive vice president, in charge of Tambrands' business in North and South America.


Ex-Aide to Dinkins Is Guilty in Forgery
A former aide to Mayor David N. Dinkins pleaded guilty yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan to charges that he forged his naturalization certificate and other documents in order to obtain security clearance for his city position.
The former aide, Frank T. Ling, formerly assistant director of the Mayor's Community Assistance Unit, faces a maximum term of one year in prison and a $100,000 fine.
He is to be sentenced on April 29.
Mr.
Ling will face possible deportation proceedings after serving his sentence.


Corrections
Two sports pictures in some copies yesterday had incorrect or missing captions.
A hockey photo on the first sports page, showing a skater and a goalie in front of the net, pictured Tony Amonte of the Rangers and Dominik Hasek of the Blackhawks.
A basketball picture of two Celtics under the basket showed Dee Brown (7) and Ed Pinckney.


Diller Intrigues Hollywood By Giving Up a Power Post
HOLLYWOOD, Feb. 26 --
It seemed like business as usual today for Barry Diller.
The 50-year-old chairman and chief executive of Fox Inc. spent the morning at his weekly staff meeting in his sleek, modern office and the afternoon with senior executives to discuss the Fox network's news programming.
But like the Orson Welles character in "Citizen Kane," perhaps his favorite film, Mr.
Diller has wrapped himself in mystery.
He fielded phone calls from close friends but yielded scant information about his plans, avoided reporters and told associates and friends that as every hour passed he would diminish his control over the company's movie and television operations and finally step aside, at least for the moment, as one of the most powerful people in Hollywood.


Corrections
A headline on Feb. 11 about a lawsuit in which an organization is accused of discrimination against homosexuals referred to the group imprecisely.
It is the American Institute of Wine and Food, not the Wine Institute.
The Wine Institute is a trade association for the California wine industry.


Perils and Triumphs of the Rare-and-Exotic-Plant Collector
SOME things never change.
For bring'em-back-alive plant hunters like Paul W. Meyer, there is still danger and exhilaration in scaling mountains and trekking forests.
His quest?
Splendid new species for gardeners back home.
Never mind that a four-wheel drive has replaced the donkey or yak as preferred transportation.
Or that the once-cheap labor is now a major expense.
Modern plant hunters continue a tradition that some believe started with the pharaohs' search for fruiting plants.
Finding prize exotics was also a lucrative pursuit among Renaissance merchants and a fashionable diversion among Victorians.


Get Out the Protractor For Cup at Meadowlands
With the announcement of 1994 World Cup soccer venues less than a month away, Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., is at the center of international debate on the geometry of the sport.
A decision on the controversy could occur as early as this weekend, when Alan Rothenberg, president of the World Cup Organizing Committee, travels to Zurich to speak with officials from FIFA, the sport's international governing body.
Among the topics of discussion: two different proposals by the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, and how they would affect the integrity of the game.


Canadian Troops to Pull Out of Europe by '94
Reflecting eased East-West tensions and Canada's severe budget constraints, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's Government has announced that it will pull out all its combat forces from Europe by the end of 1994.
The decision, which was disclosed late Tuesday in the Government's newest budget, a fiscal blueprint for the coming 12 months, has stirred angry reactions from the Bush Administration and NATO headquarters, mirroring fears that it will increase Congressional pressures for faster American withdrawal and unravel the 43-year-old North Atlantic Treaty Organization.


In the House, Taxes and Posturing
The election campaign came to the floor of the House of Representatives today as both parties used their tax bills to argue about who cared most about the middle class and who wanted to stimulate economic growth.
Republicans argued for President Bush's short-term agenda, featuring a reduction of taxes on capital gains to 15.4 percent from 28, as a measure that would produce more jobs.
"It will put Americans back to work and preserve the jobs of Americans already working," said Representative Bill Archer of Texas.


Jaspers Earn 20th Victory
The Manhattan College basketball team reached another milestone last night, posting its first 20-victory season since the Eisenhower presidency, with an 80-68 triumph over Siena.
In their final home game of the season, the Jaspers pushed their record to 20-6 with two regular-season games remaining, matching the record of the Manhattan team of 1953.


Fairway Is Playground For This 16-Year-Old
Standing alone on the ninth tee of the elegant Riviera Country Club, Eldrick (Tiger) Woods dropped his impassive game face for a moment and enacted a brief fantasy appropriate for the youngest player ever to compete in a PGA Tour event.
"I'm going to be right here on Friday," said Woods, who will be 16 years 1 month 28 days old when he tees off in Thursday's first round of the Nissan Los Angeles Open, "and it's going to be like, 'Ladies and gentlemen, already 19 under par for 26 holes -- just playing his normal game -- the leader, Tiger Woods.' "


Quotation of the Day
"Anybody could just come up to you and shoot you. I've just grown used to it because I've lived here all my life." -- EDDIE ALVAREZ, a 14-year-old student at a Brooklyn high school where two other students were shot dead yesterday.  [ B2:1. ]


PARENT &amp; CHILD
TO many parents and teachers, helping motivate children who have learning disabilities is as tricky as walking a tightrope.
If you don't push at all, they may interpret their disability as a sign that they're doomed to failure.
But if you ignore their learning difficulties, they'll become even more frustrated.
"If you push too hard, your child will get angry and rebel, or will withdraw and get depressed," said Dr.
Larry B. Silver, the director of training in child and adolescent psychiatry at Georgetown University School of Medicine in Washington and the author of "The Misunderstood Child" (Tab-McGraw-Hill; 1992).


Stocks Advance, With Dow Gaining 25.49
Stock prices scored solid gains yesterday, helped by strong performances for a few industrial issues and stronger-than-expected data on durable goods orders.
The Dow Jones industrial average rang up a 25.49-point gain, again eking out a new high of 3,283.32.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange hit 241.5 million, up from 210.4 million on Tuesday, as the composite index gained 2.55, to 229.23.
The number of issues gaining almost doubled those declining, 1,141 to 578.


Growing
I AM designing a medieval kitchen garden in the shape of a giant egg.
An egg in a square.
It's taking shape slowly in the abandoned chicken yard of our Maryland farm.
I've been reading about the great gardens of the world and a central axis, like the four poles, is etched in my brain.
But I can't get my mind to think in linear patterns.
It likes circles.
So now I have a design that's kind of like a Greek Easter egg.
An egg with a cross in it.


Witness Describes Scene At Murder of Castellano
A witness gave a graphic account yesterday of the assassination of Paul Castellano on a Manhattan street in 1985 and identified a close associate of John Gotti as one of the gunmen.
With dramatic gestures, the witness, Jeffrey Davidson, said he had just left his office in a midtown public-relations company and was walking along East 46th Street on the evening of Dec. 16, 1985, when he came upon the murder scene.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Saks Fifth Avenue outlined an ambitious expansion plan,stifling persistent rumors of its imminent demise.
A $300 million equity infusion from Investcorp paves the way.  [ Page D1. ]


Plan to Ease Rule on Buying Radio Stations
In a move likely to raise hackles in Congress, a staff report by the Federal Communications Commission recommended that a single company be allowed to acquire as many radio stations in a city as it wanted until it had 25 percent of the audience.
In a highly fragmented market like New York City, for example, a company could own four of the largest stations, or many more smaller stations, without exceeding the 25 percent limit.


Hewlett to Join Two-Way TV Effort
Furthering the link between computers and consumer electronics, the Hewlett-Packard Company said today that it would collaborate with TV Answer Inc. to develop the first national "interactive" television system.
The product would let viewers use their television sets to shop, bank, pay bills, and order food and other services.
Using technology from TV Answer, a developer of wireless data services based in Reston, Va., Hewlett-Packard will manufacture and market devices to control a two-way television system in the home.


Books of The Times; 2 Justices Are Dead. Who Profits?
The Pelican Brief  By John Grisham  371 pages. Doubleday. $22.50.
At the opening of John Grisham's intriguing but ultimately specious new thriller, "The Pelican Brief," two Supreme Court Justices, one liberal and one highly erratic, are murdered in a single evening, one of them at home, the other at a pornographic movie theater for homosexuals.
The President of the United States is delighted.
As his chief of staff assures him: "This is the perfect crisis, Mr. President. Think of it. We didn't create it. It's not our fault. No one can blame us. And the nation will be shocked into some degree of solidarity. It's rally round the leader time. It's just great. No downside."


Fleming Cos. Forms Mexico Venture
The Fleming Companies, the nation's largest distributor of wholesale foods, said today that it had entered a venture with Grupo Gigante S.A. of Mexico to develop retail stores stocked with groceries and consumer goods in Mexico.
The Mexican Government convinced Fleming that Mexico "is a country that's moving upward, that you can count on," said E. Dean Werries, the chairman.
"If the free-trade agreement is approved, the opportunities for Fleming and many U.S. firms will be much bigger."


Congress Advised to Limit Bailout Funds
The General Accounting Office advised Congress today to reject the Bush Administration's request for an immediate $55 billion to complete the savings and loan bailout, saying Federal regulators were unable to keep track of the billions of dollars in assets they now oversee.
Shortly before Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady conveyed the Administration's request to the Senate Banking Committee, G.A.O. officials recommended that Congress instead offer just enough to continue the bailout until the spring of next year.
They cautioned that granting the full amount would make the Administration less accountable to Congress.


An Art Dealer Realizes His Hollywood Dream
Arne Glimcher was in mambo heaven.
To his left stood the legendary percussionist Tito Puente, fronting a hot band at the Roseland Ballroom on West 52nd Street in Manhattan.
And milling on the dance floor were some of the leading citizens of the Hollywood-SoHo axis, fresh from an advance screening of "The Mambo Kings," Mr.
Glimcher's debut as a director.
As Mr.
Puente and Armand Assante, one of the film's co-stars, engaged in a fierce percussion duel that sent pieces of broken drumstick flying, the likes of Julian Schnabel and Richard Serra, Michael Ovitz and Barry Diller struggled with heaping plates of Cuban food.


Republicans vs. Democracy in New York
Confronted with a chilling new round of ballot warfare, Saul Weprin, Speaker of the New York State Assembly, is moving to restore democracy and common sense.
Mr.
Weprin, a Democrat, has introduced legislation to insure a place on the state's April 7 Presidential primary ballot for all the major contenders.
That would spare New York a national embarrassment.
Legal challenges brought by the fringe New Alliance Party to enforce the state's nitpicking petition rules threaten to keep Paul Tsongas and Jerry Brown off the Democratic ballot.
And the New York Republican primary has been canceled because Patrick Buchanan, up against a state party controlled by President Bush, didn't even bother to file the petition signatures he collected.


Layoffs Announced At Orion Pictures
Orion Pictures said yesterday that it planned to lay off much of its 400-member staff.
While some published reports yesterday said the company would not release its completed films this year, an Orion spokeswoman said this was not true.


Topics of The Times; Franking Follies
When the check-bouncing scandal broke last fall in the House of Representatives, Jim Nussle, Republican of Iowa, protested Congressional "perks" by putting a paper bag over his head when he spoke on the House floor.
But before that, Mr.
Nussle was just one of many members to take unseemly advantage of franking, the Congressional free mailing privilege.
Running for re-election against another incumbent in a district altered by reapportionment, he used that privilege to flood new areas of the district with unsolicited self-promotional mail.
So has his Democratic competitor for the seat, Representative David Nagle.


Singles Players Chosen
Captain TOM GORMAN has selected ANDRE AGASSI and PETE SAMPRAS as his singles players and the doubles team of RICK LEACH and JOHN McENROE to represent the United States in the Davis Cup quarterfinal match against Czechoslovakia, March 27-29 in Fort Myers, Fla.
The same foursome defeated Argentina, 5-0, in the opening round in Hawaii.
Reuters reported that JIM COURIER, the first American to hold the No. 1 world ranking since McEnroe in 1984, declined Gorman's Davis Cup invitation because of schedule conflicts and a fear of fatigue.


U.S. Bancorp To Buy Branches
United States Bancorp, a bank holding company based in Portland, Ore., said it had agreed to acquire the Northern California and Nevada operations that the BankAmerica Corporation and the Security Pacific Corporation were divesting themselves of because of their planned merger.
The deal calls for a cash purchase of about $70 million.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  OFFER FROM ISRAEL
Israel has offered the Palestinians an outline for self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip that would give them control over many aspects of daily life.
But Israel would maintain control over security and prevent Palestinians from creating a framework for an independent state.
A1  RULING IN IRISH ABORTION CASE
The Irish Supreme Court overturned a lower-court ruling and cleared the way for a 14-year-old girl to go to Britain for an abortion.
The girl, who says she was raped, had been barred from leaving because of Ireland's own law restricting abortions.
A1  AUTO MAKERS' TWO WORLDS
When Chrysler's chairman visited Japan with President Bush, he made no mention of the Nagoya plant where Mitsubishi makes the Dodge Stealth.
But "American" cars keep pouring off Japanese assembly lines, underscoring the Big Three's dependence on Japanese factories.
A1  BENDING RULE ON SOMALI AID
The threat of starvation around Somalia's embattled capital is so serious that the United Nations is considering breaking its normal rules and giving food to armed combatants as well as civilians.
A3  SPECTATORS IN SOUTH AFRICA
Conversations in South Africa's biggest black township confirm a painful paradox: to get a fresh mandate to negotiate power-sharing with the black majority, President de Klerk has turned to the white minority that elected him.
A3  GUATEMALA ENTRENCHED IN WAR
Despite hopes that peace in El Salvador might spur an end to the civil war in Guatemala, recent negotiations have shown that its rightist Government and leftist guerrillas are taking their own time.
A6  COLOMBIA ARMY QUITS DRUG WAR
In a shift in strategy, the United States and Colombia have agreed that Colombia's army will no longer play a big role in pursuing cocaine traffickers, officials said.
U.S. aid will be redirected to the police.
A6  HOLES IN HAITIAN ACCORD
After signing an accord to end Haiti's political crisis, leaders disagree on whether it calls for the punishment of the army commander who led a military coup last year.
A8  U.S.
MAY BACK ELEPHANT HUNTING
A week before a world meeting on endangered species, the Bush Administration said it was sympathetic to a proposal by some African nations to open international trading in elephant hides and meat.
A11
Armenians overrun Azerbaijanis in a disputed enclave.  A5
Moscow Journal: On a Big Mac, a genuine Russian pickle.  A4
Canada wants to pull combat forces out of Europe by the end of 1994.
A9  National A12-23  SEX DISCRIMINATION RULING
In a broad, unanimous decision, the Supreme Court said the Federal law barring sex discrimination in schools and colleges permits students to sue for damages for sexual harassment and other forms of sex discrimination.
A1  LOOKING LIKE A LONG CAMPAIGN
News analysis: Voters in four states have now had their say about whom the Democrats should nominate to oppose President Bush, and the outcome at the convention is no clearer than it was before the balloting.
A1  TOUGH TALK FROM KERREY
Seeking votes in conservative Georgia, Senator Kerrey and his supporters bluntly criticized Governor Clinton for avoiding military service in Vietnam, and for the first time, former Senator Tsongas obliquely raised the issue as well.
A22
Polling in South Dakota reveals problems for the candidates.  A22
Maryland appears to be ideal Tsongas country.  A23
Washington and Idaho are eager for the Democrats to come West.
A23  END FOR A NUCLEAR PLANT
The nation's oldest nuclear power plant will be closed immediately, ending the industry's hopes that the plant would be allowed to prove that nuclear plants could operate safely for up to 60 years.
A12  HOME ON THE RANGE
Ault Journal: Buffeted by hard times, ranchers are getting fewer and older, but for those who remain it's still a life where miracles master misery.
A12  COMMON DRUGS AND SAFETY
Possibly dangerous side-effects of some over-the-counter drugs are going unreported, a Government study said, because the Food and Drug Administration's system of approving and monitoring those drugs is inadequate.
A12  A TREATMENT BACKFIRES
In a finding with major implications for people with multiple sclerosis, doctors reported that the standard treatment for a painful eye disease closely related to m.s. may actually worsen the disease.
A14  U.S.
SHIFT ON WARMING
The Bush Administration is to announce plans to help developing countries pay for limiting the emission of gases that cause global warming.
A14  TAKING AIM AT COMMISSIONER
Saying the Commissioner of Food and Drugs is biased on the issue, a leader of plastic surgeons began a campaign to bar him from making the decision on whether silicone gel breast implants are safe.
A20
Fewer unmarried white women are putting their babies up for adotpion.  A15
A teen-ager whose arms were reattached goes home.  A20
Texas has been unable to verify an AIDS cluster in a small town.
A20  Metropolitan Digest, B1 GAMBINO PLEA DEAL MADE
Two sons of the late crime boss Carlo Gambino and others allied with them agreed yesterday to quit the trucking business and pay a $12 million fine in exchange for being spared prison sentences.
Prosecutors said that the plea bargain would break organized crime's half-century stranglehold on New York City's dwindling garment industry.
A1  TWO DEAD IN SCHOOL SHOOTINGS
Two teen-agers were shot dead in a Brooklyn high school just before Mayor Dinkins was to visit the troubled school to tell students they had the power to break free of the world of violence and drugs.
A1  Business Digest, D1 The Home Section C1-12  Future worth: grab it now, before it's hot.
C1  Waifs return, for the last laugh.
C1  Design's own dialect.
C1  Parent &amp; Child C12  Arts/Entertainment C13-26  Newark's arts center plan.
C14  Why Frohnmayer is out.
C15  Art dealer directs a movie.
C15  Los Angeles Opera grows up.
C15  Sports B9-16  Baseball: Yankees hail Perez's arrival to spring training.
B9  Basketball: Knicks lose.
B9  Seton Hall edges Georgetown in overtime.
B9  Obituaries B6-7  Jean R. Yawkey, Boston Red Sox owner and a philanthropist.
B6  Oscar T. Broneer, archeologist.
B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  Youngest, cruelest Justice.
Don't rush to deploy ABM's.
G.O.P. vs. democracy in N.Y.
Topics: Franking follies.
Letters A24  William Safire: Comeback coming.
A25  Anthony Lewis: The hunt for Red October.
A25  Seymour Melman: Shaping a civilian economy.
A25  Ellen Haas: Tighten the rules on seafood safety.
A25


New York in Accord On Malt Liquor Ads
Robert Abrams, the New York State Attorney General, yesterday announced an agreement under which the McKenzie River Corporation will stop advertising its St.
Ides Malt Liquor in a way that suggests the product and its high alcoholic content increases male sexual prowess.
McKenzie, based in San Francisco, signed the agreement without admitting any wrongdoing; it will pay the state's investigation costs of $50,000.


For the Few Who Visit, One Less Place to Stay
BAD news is no news in this beleaguered Connecticut city, which has teetered on the verge of bankruptcy, watched its university struggle to survive and seen two of its banks go under.
So it was just another blow to Bridgeport's image and economy when its Days Hotel abruptly closed last week.
The eight-story hotel's sunny yellow-orange logo has been removed, the curtains are drawn in its 240 rooms and its restaurant, Otto's Lounge, is boarded shut.
As security guards prowl the property, near Interstate 95, prospective guests are further deterred by a mysterious yellow ribbon saying "crime scene," blocking the parking lot entrance.


A New Momentum at Mellon
Five years after a double slug of bad real estate and energy loans sent it reeling, the Mellon Bank Corporation has regained much of its strength.
While problems remain, like the fallout from past real estate lending, the bank founded 123 years ago by the wealthy Mellon family has broken with its past as a corporate lender and managed to find profits elsewhere.
Under Frank V. Cahouet, the folksy banking veteran who is chairman, president and chief executive, Mellon has sharply reduced its inventory of bad loans and curtailed its corporate lending, where the headaches are big and the profits small.
The strategy, which Mr.
Cahouet began putting into effect almost as soon as he joined Mellon in 1987, calls for lending to small companies and consumers, where the growth and profits seem limitless.
Centerpiece of Recovery
Most important, Mr.
Cahouet (pronounced COW-et) has expanded Mellon's service businesses, like overseeing personal investments, managing cash for corporations and handling data-processing for smaller banks.
While these businesses had been important to Mellon, under Mr.
Cahouet they have become the centerpiece for the bank's recovery, contributing a rising share of revenues and the largest single portion -- an estimated 40 percent -- of Mellon's record 1991 profit.


Irish Court Says Girl Can Leave to Obtain Abortion in Britain
The Irish Supreme Court ruled today that it was legal for a 14-year-old pregnant girl who says she was raped to travel to Britain for an abortion.
Overturning a lower-court ruling that had provoked wide controversy, the five-member court, in a one-line decision, allowed the girl to travel.
Abortion is not permitted in Ireland unless a mother's life is at stake.


Principal Who Left New York Will Return, to a Private School
Naomi Hill, a New York City school principal who took early retirement in June and joined the school system in Tenafly, N.J., will return to Manhattan in July as director of the Dalton School program for students in kindergarten through third grade.
She decided on her second move in a year, Mrs.
Hill said yesterday, because Dalton had recruited her just as New Jersey rejected her petition for certification as a principal for "the second or third time."


Breeders' Cup to Santa Anita
Santa Anita Park in California was selected today as the site of the Breeders' Cup championships for 1993.
The selection ended a period of estrangement between the track and officials of the series over the assignment of box seats for the day of the seven Breeders' Cup races.
The Breeders' Cup organization customarily takes control of all box seats at the host track and allocates them according to its own priorities.


Switzer Case Begins
Longhorn country was never friendly territory for BARRY SWITZER when he patrolled the sidelines as the University of Oklahoma football coach, and it wasn't yesterday as jury selection began for the lawsuit by a newspaper reporter who has accused Switzer of libel, slander and invasion of privacy.
The charges stem from Switzer's autobiography, "Bootlegger's Boy," in which he wrote that a former Dallas Times Herald reporter, JACK TAYLOR, was part of a scheme to plant drugs on an Oklahoma football player.
Taylor, now a reporter with The Los Angeles Daily News, and his wife, MYRNA LEE TAYLOR, seek $5 million in damages and a $25 million punitive award.
Other defendants in the case are an Austin writer, BUD SHRAKE JR., a co-author of the book, and the book's publisher, William Morrow &amp; Co.
Inc. (AP)


Bitter Debate On Scanning For Firearms
The fatal shooting of two students at Thomas Jefferson High School has spotlighted a long-seething three-way dispute over how much money to spend on metal detectors to scan students for weapons.
Officials of the school system, the Dinkins administration and the United Federation of Teachers all insisted yesterday that they had supported the expansion of the metal detector program, but there were sharp conflicts in their positions.


Accounts
*
Mattel Inc., Hawthorne, Calif., to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Los Angeles, for the toy maker's games division, previously handled by Ogilvy &amp; Mather Los Angeles.
Billings were estimated at $3 million. *
Conrail Mercury, Plymouth Meeting, Pa., to the Gillespie Organization, Princeton, N.J., for the freight service's print and direct-mail advertising and public relations.
Billings were not disclosed.


Jean R. Yawkey, Red Sox Owner And Philanthropist, Is Dead at 83
Jean R. Yawkey, the majority owner of the Red Sox, a fixture at Fenway Park for almost half a century and a major Boston philanthropist, died yesterday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, six days after suffering a severe stoke.
She was 83 years old.
Despite reports that she had been in failing health last year, Mrs.
Yawkey had continued to attend Red Sox home games.


Group Finds A 65% Rise In Bias Crime
Hate crimes against homosexuals increased 16 percent last year, but the severity of the crimes decreased, according to a report released yesterday by the New York City Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence Project.
The study, based on incidents reported to the project, pointed out that the 16 percent increase followed a 65 percent rise recorded in 1990 -- a "particularly violent year," said Matt Foreman, director of the project, a victim-assistance agency founded in 1980.


U.N. SEES DANGER OF SOMALI FAMINE
The threat of starvation among hundreds of thousands of people around the embattled capital of Somalia has become so serious that the United Nations is considering breaking the normal rules of humanitarian aid and giving food to armed combatants as well as civilians.
James Jonah, an Under Secretary General of the United Nations, said he believed this was the only way of getting food to those in desperate need, mostly women and children.
The usual methods of delivering food have been ineffective because the soldiers on both sides were also hungry and would fight for the food, Mr.
Jonah said in an interview here today.


New Chief Executive At Century Telephone
Century Telephone Enterprises Inc., a small though well-regarded telephone company based in Monroe, La., has given its president, Glen F. Post 3d, the additional post of chief executive.
Mr. Post, 39, replaces Clarke M. Williams, 70, who remains chairman of the board.


Major Step Against Sex Discrimination
Fourteen months after two Brooklyn College professors filed a wide-ranging sex-discrimination complaint against the college's athletic department, Federal civil rights officials have largely upheld the complaint, and the college has agreed to implement broad reforms.
As a result, college and Federal officials say that Brooklyn College athletics should be a model of sexual equality by this fall.


Braves Embark On Road To Encore
Rain interrupted the Atlanta Braves' first full-team spring workout today, but it didn't rain on their parade last October, and that was important to Bobby Cox.
After greeting the returning National League champions with a 20-minute address, Cox sat in the dugout at Municipal Stadium and recalled the scintillating but disappointing World Series.


Stock Sale Set At Pergament
Fending off bankruptcy, Pergament Home Centers Inc. said yesterday that it would issue equity in exchange for more than 50 percent of its long-term debt, thus reducing interest expenses.
The restructuring will give the company a new $40 million credit line to pay its suppliers, some of whom have been withholding shipments since Pergament stopped paying its bills late last year.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Mao Zedong's 1950 telegrams about the Korean War failed to credit a source.
The source, an analysis of the documents by Thomas Christensen, an Olin fellow at the Center for International Affairs at Harvard, is to appear as an article in the summer 1992 issue of the journal International Security.


Northwest by North Jersey
It has been nearly three years since the Portland Trail Blazers traded Sam Bowie to the New Jersey Nets.
But he hasn't forgotten.
"I still haven't accepted the way my 'firing' was done or my 'replacement' was done," said Bowie, who was sent to the Nets along with a 12th round pick in the 1989 draft for Buck Williams.


Murray's Presence Gives Special Boost To Optimistic Mets
There is no cheerleader in Eddie Murray.
The first baseman for the Mets does not embroider his public comments with the filigree of phony enthusiasm or false advertising.
At 36 years old, Murray is direct and proud, his confidence as cool as it comes.
And so Murray the personality is a lot like Murray the player.
His statistics don't so much knock one over as wear one down with their consistent, insistent quality.
His trademarks are not staggering averages or sexy power numbers, but endurance, durability and a heroic appetite for the clutch hit.
His ultimate destination could be Cooperstown.


Shirley Levittan, 73, Judge in New York And Legal Lecturer
Shirley R. Levittan, an Acting State Supreme Court judge from 1974 until she retired last year, died yesterday at New York University Hospital.
She was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of pemphigus vulgaris, a rare skin disease, a court spokeswoman said.


Haitian Pact Signers Define Their Own Meanings
The parties affected by an agreement signed in Washington this week to end Haiti's political crisis are sticking to widely divergent interpretations of what had been agreed upon and where the country was headed.
Before leaving Washington for Geneva on Tuesday, the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, told reporters that in keeping with the agreement brokered by the Organization of American States that is aimed at restoring him to office, he would continue to seek the removal and punishment of Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, the army commander, whom he has held responsible for the Sept. 30 coup in which he was ousted.


Black Inventor Who Changed Shoemaking
To the Editor:
I agree with Ralph Schoenstein in "Nothin' but a Hound Dog Idea" (Op-Ed, Jan. 27) that Elvis Presley is not a fitting subject for a United States postage stamp.
However, Jan Matzeliger, inventor of the shoe-lasting machine, does not deserve to be minimalized, much less ridiculed.


Tribute to Sondheim Rescheduled for June 10
A gala tribute to the composer and lyricist Stephen Sondheim is to take place at Carnegie Hall on June 10.
The tribute, "Sondheim -- A Celebration at Carnegie Hall," originally scheduled for April 22, will be a benefit for the hall.
Among the performers expected to participate are Jerry Hadley, Madeline Kahn, Dorothy Loudon, Patti LuPone and Mandy Patinkin.
The show is to be directed by Scott Ellis, whose credits include the New York City Opera production of Mr.
Sondheim's musical "A Little Night Music," and conducted by Paul Gemi gnani.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; We Won, Really, Unopposed Bush Camp Says
President Bush, his White House aides and his re-election strategists are all agreed: the President's showing in Tuesday's South Dakota primary, in which he captured 69 percent of the vote on a ballot that included no opposition, was a triumph.
"It was a good victory," Mr.
Bush told reporters as he arrived here for a seven-nation summit meeting about drugs.
"Sixty-nine percent. Good victory."


Tax-Exempt Yields Slide; Taxable Funds Are Steady
Yields on tax-exempt funds continued to drop in the week ended Monday, while short-term taxable funds held virtually steady in the week ended Tuesday for the first time in many weeks, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
"The yields on the short-term taxables appear to have bottomed finally," said Walter Frank, economist for Donoghue's.
"They have felt the full impact of the decline that was triggered by the Federal Reserve's lowering of the discount rate in late December. It takes time for the initial decline in open market yields, such as Treasury bills and commercial paper, to work its way through money fund yields."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Lygya Barreto
Ballroom 245 West 28th Street Manhattan Through Saturday
Brazilian carnival spirits took over on Tuesday evening with the arrival of Lygya Barreto; a samba band; three dancers, and Papa Linley, a Jamaican performer.


Fox Promotes An Executive
Two days after the resignation of Barry Diller as chairman and chief executive of Fox Inc., the company said today that it had given Chase Carey, an executive vice president, the additional title of chief operating officer.
The appointment was announced by Rupert Murdoch, who is replacing Mr.
Diller as head of the film and television company.
Mr.
Murdoch, whose News Corporation owns Fox, said the heads of Fox's operating divisions would report to him rather than to Mr.
Carey.


Fewer Children Up for Adoption, Study Finds
The number of children placed for adoption has sharply declined in the last 20 years, mainly because more and more unmarried white women are keeping their babies, according to a study made public yesterday by a family-planning research organization.
The group also found that women were twice as likely to give up girls as boys.


Ault Journal; The Miracle of Birth Amid Questions of Survival
The cow meant business.
Bellowing like a foghorn, she cast a suspicious eye at anyone who came near her newborn calf.
For emphasis, she drew a line in the dirt with her hoof.
"Nobody's going to hurt you or your baby, mama," whispered Dean Kanode, a broad-shouldered rancher with a black cowboy hat and eyes as blue as the Colorado morning sky.
"I promise. Nobody at all."
The cow bleated again, sounding a bit plaintive.


Behind Frohnmayer Losing an Arts Post
Shortly before the news broke last Friday that President Bush had deposed John E. Frohnmayer as head of the National Endowment for the Arts, Mr.
Frohnmayer had discreetly begun looking for another job.
One of the places where he applied was the Washington law firm of Dickstein, Shapiro &amp; Morin.
It seemed a good bet.
His elder brother, David, the former Attorney General of Oregon, once had been a roommate of one of the partners.
Mr.
Frohnmayer offered his services as "an arts advocate and First Amendment lawyer," a source at the law firm said.
He did not get a job offer, but Mr.
Frohnmayer's characterization of his professional interest was revealing.
The First Amendment is a field in which he had specialized before coming to Washington two and a half years ago, but, according to his own self-description in the Martindale-Hubbell law directory, "arts advocate" would be something new for his practice.


Newark Unveils Arts Center Design
The architectural design for the first phase of a proposed $200 million arts complex near Newark's central business district was made public today by the New Jersey Performing Arts Center.
The first building of the complex, an ambitious Lincoln Center-like arts plaza that is intended to stimulate growth in Newark's downtown area, includes a 2,700-seat multi-purpose theater, a 500-seat hall for repertory, concerts and lectures, two restaurants, banquet rooms and a gift shop.
At the center of the complex will be a new public plaza called Theater Square.
The comprehensive master plan for the arts complex, in preparation for more than a year, was designed by Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill and James Stewart Polshek &amp; Partners.


Soviet Central Asia's Politics Aren't Simple; Siberian Timber Rush
To the Editor:
"Experts Say Logging of Vast Siberian Forest Could Foster Warming" (Science Times, Jan. 28) quotes Roger Sedjo, an expert in world forests, as saying that Siberian logging operations would be among the costliest in the world.
Because wages in Russia are extremely low compared with United States standards -- $100 month is a substantial salary -- the costs Dr.
Sedjo speaks of are presumably from transportation.


Another Plan for Condominiums Unveiled for Undeveloped Island
A developer who has tried unsuccessfully for most of a decade to build a $1 billion condominium complex on an undeveloped island off the coast here unveiled a new proposal today that he hopes will win the approval of state environmental regulators.
The project, the largest ever proposed for Westchester's shoreline, has been fiercely opposed by environmental groups and municipal officials who say that what is good for New Rochelle's economy may not be worth the cost to the region's fragile environment.


U.S. Report Faults Mayor On Boycott
The United States Civil Rights Commission will issue a report today that criticizes Mayor David N. Dinkins's handling of the boycott of a Korean grocery store by black shoppers in Brooklyn two years ago, the Dinkins administration said yesterday.
In volunteering the information about the report, administration officials emphasized that the criticism was only a small part of the Federal agency's 200-page study of increasing acts of bigotry against Asian-Americans throughout the United States.


Woman Is Killed and Subway Conductor Injured as Gunman Opens Fire on Train


White House Will Not Fill Comptroller's Post for Now
Bruised by the Senate's embarrassing rejection of Robert L. Clarke for a second term as Comptroller of the Currency, the White House has decided to leave the office vacant for now.
The agency that regulates the nation's largest banks will remain, for the time being, in the hands of a caretaker, Stephen R. Steinbrink, one of Mr.
Clarke's deputies.
If the President did offer another candidate, the Senate would be unlikely to act before Election Day, Administration officials and Senate aides said today.


A Houston Banker Returns to San Diego
Robert D. Richley, president and chief operating officer of the First City Bankcorporation of Texas, announced yesterday that he was resigning to join the First National Corporation in San Diego as president and chief executive.
Mr. Richley will assume his new position on Sunday.


U.S. SEIZES YACHT CARRYING 85 ALIENS
A yacht carrying 85 people from the People's Republic of China was seized this week by Federal authorities, who said the people were apparently being smuggled into the United States.
It was the fourth time in six months that officials have reported capturing a large group of illegal Chinese immigrants who had crossed the Pacific Ocean aboard a Taiwanese fishing vessel.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; G.O.P. Air War Reflects Competitiveness of Georgia Contest
Somewhere between New Hampshire and Georgia, the economy dropped off the screen and was replaced by good, old-fashioned Christian values.
In a new high-voltage negative commercial that went on the air here Wednesday, Patrick J. Buchanan attacks President Bush for "investing tax dollars in pornographic and blasphemous art."


Corrections
A headline yesterday about a report on hate crimes against homosexuals in New York City misstated the 1991 increase.
According to the report by the New York City Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence Project, such hate crimes increased by 16 percent, not 65.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
The House passed a tax cut for the middle class, with intense leadership pressure holding just enough Democrats together for a 221-209 vote.
The bill is strongly opposed by Bush because it raises taxes on upper-income individuals to 35 percent from 31 percent.  [ Page A1. ]  A roll-call of the vote.  [ D4. ]
House Democrats were divided, not only on taxes but on their leadership, with some saying they resented what they considered 'arm-twisting.' Reporter's Notebook.  [ D4. ]


Art in Review
Sal Scarpitta  Leo Castelli Gallery 578 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through tomorrow Annina Nosei Gallery 100 Prince Street SoHo Through March 7
Sal Scarpitta has not been an easy artist to keep track of.
Although he was born in New York in 1919, he has exhibited as frequently in Italy as in the United States, and his art has remained closer to European models than to American ones. (The influence of Lucio Fontana, among others, is discernible.) These two exhibitions offer a bookends view of his still very active career, with early work at Castelli, where he first showed in 1959, and more recent work at Nosei.


Sports of The Times; For Bonilla, No Problems Coming Back
GROWING up in New York, New York, was a form of urban orienteering.
If you could survive there, you could survive anywhere, as the song might have put it.
Bobby Bonilla could even deal with coming over to the other side.
He put on his blue Mets No. 25 uniform for the first time yesterday, and said it felt quite natural, even though he had spent the past five full seasons in Pittsburgh, chasing and eventually catching those formerly haughty Mets.


Reporter's Notebook; Democrats Are Divided, And Not Only on Taxes
House Democrats were divided today, not only on taxes the leadership was able to eke out only a 12-vote victory -- but on the leadership.
While some members resented what they considered arm-twisting, others said the leadership's get-out-the vote effort was wimpy, a reflection of why the Democratic-controlled Congress has been taking it on the chin.
"Pressure around here is the Speaker asking: 'Are you going to vote for this bill? Oh, no? Why not? Oh, that's O.K.,' " complained Representative John Bryant, Democrat of Texas.
"That's why nothing happens around here. The Speaker should say, 'This bill is important to me -- I need your vote.' "


Sounds Around Town
American Jazz Orchestra
American Jazz Orchestra, "Alternative Visions," the Great Hall, Cooper Union, Seventh Street at Third Avenue, Manhattan, (212) 353-4195.
The American Jazz Orchestra's programs have usually focused on the music of the most popular big jazz bands of the Swing Era.
But tonight, Loren Schoenberg will conduct the work of arrangers of the period who were ahead of their time, exemplified by the "Alternative Visions" of the big-band scoring of Gil Evans in the 1940's and 50's (writing for Claude Thornhill's orchestra and for Miles Davis) and of Eddie Sauter in the 30's and 40's.
Sauter, after writing with freshness and imagination for Red Norvo and Benny Goodman, took Ray McKinley's band way out on a limb with "Hangover Square," "Sandstorm" and "Idiot's Delight." The earlier innovators will include Gus Wilson, Teddy Wilson's brother; Jelly Roll Morton, and Don Redman.
Tickets for the concert, which is at 8 P.M., are $20.


Critic's Choice/The Arts; Environmental Festival
The World Financial Center will celebrate the environment with a month of films, dance, music, children's programs and even an underwater installation.
The center's Environmental Festival begins on Sunday with the openings of three exhibitions.
They include "Brian Eno Tropical Rain Forest Sound Installation," in which 102 hidden speakers will create a two-hour sound environment incorporating sounds of the Colombian Amazon rain forest in Mr.
Eno's music.
Shows are at 1 and 7 P.M. most days in the Winter Garden, that elegant oasis in the midst of Wall Street's steel-and-granite canyons.
In Liz Phillips's "Mer Sonic Illuminations," which opens on Monday and may be seen from noon to 6 P.M. daily in the Lecture Room Gallery, 225 Liberty Street, the movement of visitors in the room and of fish in a large tank alter sound and light in the space.


Diner's Journal
A Bistro Classic
When it comes to homey, gutsy bistro food (the gastronomic buzzwords of the 90's), few dishes match the rustic French specialty called pate de tete.
This combination of meats from the head of a pig -- tongue, cheek and other bits -- is bound with gelatin and served in slices with cornichons and hot mustard.
One of the best renditions of this peasant appetizer is available at Cafe des Sports, a timeless 33-year-old bistro at 329 West 51st Street, Manhattan.
The only fault an aficionado could find with it is size.
Customers receive two giant circular slabs the thickness of a ham steak for $4.50 at lunch, $5 at dinner.
It is wonderfully fresh, bound with a flavorful gelatin and firm-textured.
It goes beautifully with a chilled glass of Beaujolais.


Gambino-Morgenthau Accord: After a Day, the Re-examination Begins
A day after two Gambino brothers agreed to pay a $12 million fine and turn over a portion of their business to avoid a potential prison sentence, there is some disagreement over who blinked first -- the reputed heirs to the late Carlo Gambino or the Government.
But even if the plea bargain in State Supreme Court in Manhattan does not "drive the Gambinos from the garment industry," as District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau says, law-enforcement officials and experts on the Mafia say it does reflect a significant advance in tactics against organized crime's longstanding corruption of legitimate businesses.


CHRONICLE
ALEXANDER D. FORGER'S affiliation with the Boy Scouts came to an abrupt end 60 years ago.
"In Scout camp," he recalled, "I fell out of a canoe and nearly drowned. They had to dive in and extract me."
That did not deter the Greater New York Council of Boy Scouts of America from honoring Mr.
Forger, the chairman of the New York law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy, with its Good Scout Award at its third annual lawyers' luncheon Wednesday at the Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza.


Johnson, in Center, Hopes Fans Will Say Hey!
The clubhouse was crowded with players dressing, the parking lot starting to empty.
And in an otherwise deserted center field Howard Johnson ran after yet more and more fly balls.
Johnson broke back and then broke in.
He raced to his right, turned, and raced to his left.
The routes differed, the routine became dizzying.
But when it was done, Johnson's vision of his ultimate destination was as clear as ever: center field, Busch Stadium, St.
Louis, April 6.


Art in Review
Jiri Georg Dokoupil  Robert Miller Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
The Czechoslovak-born artist Jiri Georg Dokoupil has made paintings with soot and milk, among other unorthodox materials.
Now he is presenting a series of mostly very large canvases whose abstract patterns, like streaks of brilliantly colored fireworks, were produced by tires dipped in paint.
The canvases were laid on the floor and saturated in water.
The tires were then thrown at them or rolled (not driven!) across them, sometimes leaving tracks, sometimes creating puddles of color.
There are also, in several cases, water stains, stains from rusted nails and the traces of the artist's footsteps.


Topics of The Times; A Promising Start
Saul Weprin, the new Speaker of the State Assembly, knows a bad thing when he sees it and, to his considerable credit, has done something honorable about it.
Mr.
Weprin has resigned from his law firm to devote full time to his new position.
For influential state legislators to try juggling their public and private positions often invites worry.
They can get caught up in conflicts of interest, or appearances of conflict.
Holding two jobs is also, minimally, distracting for legislators in key positions.


Shaper of Trenton's G.O.P. Victories; Despite His Success, Robert Franks Is Still Hungry for More
The Republicans hold absolute control of New Jersey's Legislature, and Robert D. Franks is chairman of its newest, most powerful and most visible committee.
He is also the Republican state chairman and the man who engineered the overwhelming Republican victory over the Democrats last November.
In 1985 he did the same thing for the Republicans in the Assembly, and in 1987 he helped them keep control of that house.
Mr.
Franks loses no opportunity to savage Gov.
Jim Florio for "runaway spending," "arrogance" and being "out of touch with the people of New Jersey."


MCI Is Awarded Government Telephone Contract
The MCI Communications Corporation won a contract today to provide international long-distance telephone services to Federal agencies, giving the company the toehold it had long sought in the Government market.
MCI officials said the five-year contract would probably generate between $50 million and $75 million in sales annually.
Government agencies would still be allowed to buy international long-distance service from other carriers, but the contract gives MCI a big advantage because an agency would be able to buy service from the company without having to go through the complex process of seeking and obtaining a new round of competitive bids.


New York City to Slash Borrowing Under Pressure From Bond Raters
Under pressure from bond raters, the Dinkins administration said yesterday that it would greatly reduce its plans for borrowing money to help keep New York City's budget balanced over the next four years.
This move succeeded in preserving the credit rating in anticipation of a bond sale next week and drew some praise from state fiscal monitors.
But it also raised a range of new questions about the plans for closing $9 billion in budget gaps in coming years.


John Wilson, a Joffrey Founder, Choreographer and Teacher, 64
John Wilson, a founding member of the Joffrey Ballet and a composer and teacher, died on Monday in the Veterans Administration Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 64 years old.
He died of AIDS, said his sister, Diane Wilson Lloyd.


Sharper Image Begins Its First Campaign in Newspapers
USUALLY, when a retail business starts having financial difficulties, its advertising budget is the first to get the guillotine.
But at the Sharper Image -- the gadgetry emporium that in the 1980's became a nouveau hardware store for America's affluent young professionals -- hard times have instead led to its first print advertising campaign.
Full-page newspaper ads are appearing in large metropolitan areas around the country.


Kaufman Exceeded the Law in Death Sentence of Rosenbergs; His Deliberations
To the Editor:
As a close friend of Judge Irving R. Kaufman from his days as an assistant United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, I had occasion to discuss with him the troubling considerations involved in his decision in the Rosenberg case.


The Spoken Word
SYMPOSIUM, Paine Webber Building, 1285 Avenue of the Americas, at 51st Street.
A symposium on Mexican handicrafts, with discussions of "The Saltillo Serape," today at 10 A.M. followed by "The Mask in Modern Mexico," at 2 P.M.
Participants include Gobi Stromberg, the deputy director of the Mexican Cultural Institute of New York; Jill Vexler, a cultural anthropologist, and Maria Esther Echeverria, the director general of the Mexican National Fund for the Promotion of Handicrafts.
Admission: $5.
Reservations: (212) 595-9533.
LITERARY CONFERENCE, Hostos Community College, 500 Grand Concourse, at 149th Street, the Bronx.
"Pedro Mir in Walt Whitman's Native Land," a series of discussions on the works of Pedro Mir, the poet laureate of the Dominican Republic, with a dramatic reading of his "Countersong to Walt Whitman" by Josefina Baez, a radio personality, and Mateo Gomez, an actor, and closing remarks by Mr.
Mir.
Tomorrow, 8:30 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free.
Reservations: (212) 518-6666.


Kohl and Havel Sign Pact but Issue Remains
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany and President Vaclav Havel signed a treaty today aimed at laying to rest the ghost of the 1938 Munich agreement that led to the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia by Nazi Germany, but both leaders acknowledged the treaty failed to tackle one of the most contentious issues dividing their nations.
The ceremony, in the glittering Spanish Hall of the Prague Castle, opened a new chapter in German-Czechoslovak relations, in which the most important issues between the two nations will be economic, not political.


The Art Market
Rent Before Buying
"Rent now, buy later" could be the slogan for a brand new venture started by an entrepreneur, an investment banker, an art publisher and a money lender who are out to democratize the art world and challenge the conventional gallery system.
The venture, called Art America, offers collectors and corporations contemporary artworks for rent with an option to buy at wholesale prices.
The company's mission is to make art accessible to more people at a time when money is tight.


Review/Film; Chevy Chase And a Bagful Of Tricks
It is said of Nick Halloway (Chevy Chase), the title character in "Memoirs of an Invisible Man," that he "has the perfect profile: he was invisible before he was invisible." He had no particular convictions or interests beyond the mundane, and neither does this film about his adventures.
As directed by John Carpenter, "Memoirs of an Invisible Man" does much more with special effects than it does with character, and even the visual tricks begin to seem commonplace when they've been repeated too often.
Is it unfair to expect an invisible man to be something out of the ordinary?


Iraqi Dissenters Fail to Hold a Broad Meeting
Leaders of the political opposition to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq have failed to hold an expected comprehensive meeting of the diverse religious, secular and ethnic groups seeking to oust the Baghdad Government.
A year after Iraqi forces were forced from Kuwait in the Persian Gulf war, the failure to hold the broad meeting here this week underlines the continued inability and ineffectiveness of Iraqi opponents of the Government who live in exile.


Marilyn Horne, Free
Marilyn Horne, the mezzo-soprano, is to present a free recital at noon tomorrow at Alice Tully Hall.
The concert, in honor of the Rossini bicentennial, will be an all-Rossini program, accompanied by Martin Katz.
Seating will be on a first-come-first-served basis.
Information: (212) 875-5050.


Indonesia to Try 8 in Killings in East Timor
Three officers have been dismissed and eight officers and soldiers are to be tried in the killings of dozens of anti-Indonesia protesters in East Timor last November, an army commander said today.
The violence in Dili, East Timor's capital, erupted when a march honoring a slain supporter of independence activist turned into a protest of Indonesia's occupation.
Indonesia invaded the former Portuguese colony in 1975.


For Children
African Mask-Making Workshop  Studio Museum in Harlem 144 West 125th Street Manhattan (212) 864-4500, extension 230 Recommended ages: 6 and up Tomorrow
The power of a mask is undeniable, and in this workshop, children and adults can make their own, as somber or unrestrained as they wish.
First they'll tour the museum's exhibition "Africa and the Diaspora," which examines the influences of African art and culture in the Americas and Caribbean from the fifth century to the present.
The masks in the show are from Africa and were used for such things as initiation rites and festivals.
Participants in the workshop can then dream up their own.
The two-hour workshop, which includes the gallery tour, is at 2 P.M.; the fee is $7, and includes materials and museum admission.
Reservations suggested.


Review/Film; A Love Triangle of Murder Suspects
Simon Moore, an English playwright and television dramatist, makes his theatrical film debut as the writer and director of "Under Suspicion," a taut and entertaining mystery melodrama set in the English Channel resort city of Brighton in 1959.
The year is important.
The death penalty was still in effect.
England's divorce laws had not yet been changed, and adultery was still the favorite ground for dissolving a marriage.


A Selection of Culinary Oases For Department-Store Wanderers
FINALLY, the coast is clear.
President's Day sales are over.
Christmas is long past, and every last pesky unwanted gift has been returned.
Serious weekend shoppers are sighing with relief.
No more dodging dawdlers on the escalators of New York City's department stores and clothing emporiums.
No more wishing for copies of The National Enquirer at the cash-register lines.
And, most important, no more taking a number to get something to eat at one of the restaurants that appear amid the shoes or luggage like friendly St.
Bernards.


'Buffoon!' It's Britons' Reply To Australian Chief's Vitriol
Prime Minister Paul Keating of Australia and British politicians exchanged a furious verbal volley today, the latest round in a building war of words over Mr.
Keating's attitude toward Britain and Queen Elizabeth.
Members of Parliament in London called the leader of their former colony and Commonwealth ally "an utter buffoon" and "an idiot" whose rudeness was explained because he presided over "a country of ex-convicts," an allusion to Australia's settlement in the 19th century as a British penal colony.
They demanded that Mr.
Keating apologize to Britain.


Housing Agency Contractor Named in Fraud Indictment
Three executives of a Queens company that the New York City Housing Authority paid $9.6 million for construction work were indicted yesterday on charges they secretly funneled more than $1 million in profits to an associate of the reputed Mafia leader John Gotti.
Federal authorities said the $1 million from city funds was used to help build and run a $5 million, thoroughbred-breeding farm in Florida for Anthony J. Gurino, who law-enforcement officials say is an associate of the Gambino organized-crime family and who was among the six people indicted yesterday.


CHRONICLE
Now there's a fashion hat in the political ring in Italy, where elections for the Senate are to be held April 5.
LUCIANO BENETTON, founder of the Benetton sportswear empire, will run for Parliament, The Associated Press quoted Republican Party officials as saying yesterday.
Mr.
Benetton joins a list of notables being courted by Italian political parties, which are banking on name recognition to garner votes in a system in which no single party wins an absolute majority.
Another candidate with a famous name is ALESSANDRA MUSSOLINI, granddaughter of the dictator and niece of Sophia Loren.
She is runnning on the neo-Fascist ticket.
In 1987, ILONA STALLER, a former porn star known as La Cicciolina, which means "little pot of flesh," ran a successful race.
But more on her later.


Myricks Going for Fifth Title
Larry Myricks has won the indoor long jump championship in two different decades and will try for a third tonight at Madison Square Garden in the Mobil Indoor championships.
The 33-year-old Myricks was inactive at the last two championships having been suspended after positive tests for a stimulant, ephedrine, during the 1990 season.
Now that he is reinstated, his path to a fifth long-jump title has an obstacle, Carl Lewis.
Lewis is a four-time champion who has won the event 20 consecutive times in indoor meets since 1981.
Mike Powell, the world outdoor record-holder, will not be competing.


At the Movies
Return of Rasputin
He's not baaack, as they say of monsters. But he seems to be on the waaay.
Who?


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Noonan Is Hired as a Speechwriter for Bush
President Bush's campaign announced today that it had hired Peggy Noonan, the former White House speechwriter credited with some of the best oratorical efforts of Mr.
Bush and Ronald Reagan.
The campaign said it has also hired James H. Lake, a longtime campaign organizer who will coordinate the Bush supporters now being used to attack Patrick J. Buchanan.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 589 money market mutual funds increased by $15.23 billion, to $512.86 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 216 institutional funds rose by $14.4 billion, to $179.86 billion.
The 282 general-purpose funds were up by $98.7 million, to $181.89 billion.


Serbian President Supports U.N. Troops for Yugoslavia
Faced with widespread discontent among Serbs over the civil war with Croatia and the resulting damage to Yugoslavia's economy, President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia said today that he regarded the impending deployment of United Nations troops in Serbian-held areas of Croatia as "the beginning of a peaceful solution to the Yugoslav crisis."
Mr.
Milosevic's hard-line posture toward Croatia, especially after the republic declared independence in June, was a major factor in setting off the civil war.
And before a United Nations-brokered cease-fire took hold on Jan. 3, the Serb-led Yugoslav Army had seized one-third of Croatia.
But in his first speech since then, delivered in a televised address today, Mr.
Milosevic appeared eager to present himself as conciliatory.


Software Detente For I.B.M.
I.B.M. has quietly retreated from its loudly announced plan to battle the Microsoft Corporation for leadership of the personal computer software industry.
The decision by I.B.M. to avoid thrusting its OS/2 program into direct competition with Microsoft's Windows means that Microsoft can count on the continuing allegiance of hundreds of computer makers and software publishers, and millions of users.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY SCHOOL SLAYINGS: THE DAY AFTER
One day after the shooting deaths of two students at Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez sought to calm fears and dampen anger by fashioning a plan to expand the use of metal detectors at the city's most troubled schools.
A1.
The trials of a principal.
B2.


U.N. Says Iraq Defies Order to Destroy Weapons
Iraq has said it will not cooperate with plans to eliminate its weapons of mass destruction unless the United Nations Security Council starts relaxing its trade embargo, a senior United Nations official said today.
Even then, Iraq still remains opposed to the Council's plans for long-term monitoring of its military industries to insure it does not try to make nuclear, chemical or biological weapons again, the official said in a new report to the Security Council.


Professor Steps Up Fight With Harvard
In an unusual challenge to Harvard Law School, Derrick Bell, the law professor who took a leave of absence protesting the school's failure to hire a tenured black woman professor, has asked Harvard to change its rules on leave time to allow him to continue his protest.
Harvard's rule limits leaves of absence to two years, which would mean Professor Bell's would end in early summer.
But Professor Bell, Harvard's first black law professor, said today that he would challenge the two-year limit on the grounds that the rule "doesn't apply to people who have walked away for reasons of conscience."


An Honor for Rhodes
RODRICK RHODES, a 6-foot-7-inch senior at St.
Anthony High School in Jersey City, has joined some illustrious company in his selection to Parade magazine's all-America first team.
Other New York area schoolboys so honored include KAREEM ABDUL-JABBAR and KENNY ANDERSON.
Rhodes, who will attend the University of Kentucky, averages 24 points a game for St.
Anthony's. (AP)


Economic Scene; Failure Looming For Trade Talks
A failure of trade negotiations under the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is looming -- primarily as a result of the refusal of France to cut its agricultural subsidies and the inability of France's partners in the European Community to persuade the French to compromise.
But many Europeans blame the United States for the impasse.
Jacques Delors, who heads the European Commission, accuses the Americans of "not budging because they think they can divide the Europeans, and they are wrong about that."


Art in Review
Pieter Laurens Mol Louver Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through March 14
There's a distinctly Dutch flavor to the Conceptual photographs of Pieter Laurens Mol, expressed both in their subjects and in their quirky humor.
In "Fight Between Carnival and Lent" (1980), Mr.
Mol himself, whose mixed-media sculptures were shown in this gallery in 1990, appears in a black-and-white photograph wearing a conical party hat and looking glum.
Arranged around this central image are 10 landscapes, all recalling Rembrandt's drawings of the distinctive Dutch countryside; on the far horizon of each picture appears a black church steeple, providing a somber echo to Mr.
Mol's festive attire.


Topics of The Times; Greed, Sequestered
Only in New York are judges so distrusted that the law gives them no discretion to decide whether a criminal jury needs to be locked up and lodged overnight.
This unique extravagance costs $2 million a year.
In this year of budgetary pain, that waste has become an outrage.


A Principal's Successes Are Overshadowed by Violence
She cleared out the incorrigibles, students and teachers alike.
Low morale went the way of the graffiti.
Attendance rose, the dropout rate fell.
Where once was despair, she, by sheer force of will, demanded better.
Now, the day after two students were shot to death in a crowded hallway at Thomas Jefferson High School in East New York, Carol A. Beck says she feels overwhelmed.
The killings threaten to overshadow, if not undo, the changes she has made.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  No. 1 Edberg Is Upset  Jan Siemerink of the Netherlands upset top-seeded Stefan Edberg of Sweden, 7-6 (7-5), 6-2, in the second round of the ABN tournament yesterday in Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Siemerink is ranked 42d on the ATP Tour.
Second-seeded Boris Becker of Germany won in straight sets, beating Anders Jarryd, 6-2, 6-4. (AP) Mancini Advances in Arizona: Alberto Mancini of Argentina, seeded fourth, beat a countryman, Gabriel Markus, 4-6, 6-4, 6-2, in the second round of the Purex Championships in Scottsdale, Ariz. (AP) Seles Moves to Quarterfinals: Top-seeded Monica Seles defeated Tami Whitlinger, 6-2, 6-3, to advance in the Evert Cup tournament in Indian Wells, Calif.
Seles will face seventh-seeded Gigi Fernandez in the quarterfinals today. (AP) N.H.L.
Olympian Starts Fast  Playing in his first National Hockey League game since leading the Unified Team to the Olympic gold medal, Igor Kravchuk broke a third-period tie to lead host Chicago over Detroit.
Kravchuk, a former member of the Red Army team, was signed only eight hours earlier to a two-year contract plus an option year. (AP)
Blues 7, Capitals 3: Brett Hull scored three goals for the seventh time this season as host St.
Louis ended Washington's winning streak at four games.
Hull, who leads the N.H.L. with 62 goals in 64 games, took over the scoring lead with 97 points. (AP)
Whalers 8, Penguins 4: Murray Craven scored twice and Hartford snapped a road streak without a victory at 13 games by beating Pittsburgh. (AP)
Bruins 4, Maple Leafs 2: Dave Poulin scored the 176th goal of his career in his 1991-92 debut as Boston beat visiting Toronto.
Poulin had abdominal surgery in December. (AP)
Flyers 3, Flames 0: Rookie goaltender Dominic Roussel recorded his first N.H.L. shutout, leading visiting Philadelphia over Calgary. (AP)


Once Again, New York's Arcane Election Laws Shape Race
For the past two days dozens of dutiful state employees have been holed up in an Albany office building, riffling through a mind-numbing list of names.
Surrounded by volumes of voter registration records and fueled by a steady stream of coffee, they are carrying out one of the basic rituals of New York democracy: preparing to throw candidates out of elections.
Usually the intricate and stunningly complex system works -- and works well -- against candidates for local and state office.
But today, for the first time in years, New York appears on the verge of striking a leading Democratic Presidential contender from the ballot.


U.S.-Israeli Gap Widens Over Issue of Jewish Settlements


Lamont's First Day of School
Gene Lamont woke up at 5 A.M. yesterday and left home before the morning paper arrived to prepare himself for his first full-squad workout as the Chicago White Sox manager.
"I don't come to the ball park that early, but I told my wife I had to go," Lamont said in Sarasota, Fla.
"I needed a glass of water during my speech, but I made it through."
Frank Thomas also said he hoped to reach a contract agreement by the weekend.
Thomas's agents were continuing negotiations in Sarasota.
Thomas, whose shoulder problems limited him to 56 games at first base in 1991, earned $120,000 last year. (AP) Chicago Cubs
Manager Jim Lefebvre was back on the pitcher's mound throwing batting practice a day after getting hit in the face by a ball.
"I've got a hard head," said Lefebvre, hit by a ball off the bat of outfielder Doug Dascenzo at the team's camp in Mesa, Ariz.
Lefebvre suffered a bruised left cheekbone, a black eye and a badly split lip. (AP) Montreal Expos
Montreal Expos catcher Gilberto Reyes says he is a new man since he abandoned drugs and alcohol for religion.
"My best friend now is the Bible," Reyes said Thursday at the Expos training camp in West Palm Beach, Fla.
Reyes, 28 years old, was suspended for the season's first 60 days by Commissioner Fay Vincent after testing positive for illegal drugs while playing winter ball in his native Dominican Republic in November.
He plans to appeal the suspension at a hearing next month: "I want to show them that I've changed, that I'm not the same guy."
Reyes batted .217 in 83 games last season but threw out 39 of 77 potential base stealers for a National League-leading 50.6 percent success rate. (AP) Kansas City Royals
Mark Gubicza seems completely recovered from a rotator-cuff injury.
"All the difference in the world from last spring," Guy Hansen, the Royals' pitching coach, said in Haines City, Fla.
"Now he's turning it loose. We've got him working from a full windup."
Gubicza was injured June 29, 1990, and had surgery to repair a partial tear of the rotator cuff.
He was 9-12 last year.
"Last year was a disaster, something I consider a rehab year," Gubicza said.
"So far, everything is going great." (AP) San Francisco Giants
Reliever Jeff Brantley won't have trouble seeing the catcher's signs this year.
Brantley, who wore contact lenses on the mound last year, will be wearing prescription sunglasses this season.
"The glasses have created a whole new world for me," Brantley said in Scottsdale, Ariz.
"I can read the scoreboard at the ball park now, and I can read road signs."
Brantley had a 5-2 record with a 2.45 earned run average and 15 saves last year.
He said that with contact lenses, he "had difficulty picking up the signs." Brantley has 20-40 eyesight in one eye and 20-50 with an astigmatism in the other. (AP) Boston Red Sox
Before the start of practice in Winter Haven., Fla, Haywood Sullivan, minority owner of the team, gathered the players together to speak of Jean Yawkey, the majority owner who died Wednesday at the age of 83.
"It would probably be the greatest honor anyone could bestow if we went out and won a championship for her," Sullivan said.
The Red Sox last won a World Series in 1918.
Once practice started, Mo Vaughn drew attention for having shed 30 pounds and for hitting a couple of balls over the net behind the right-field fence.
Vaughn, the probable first baseman now that Carlos Quintana is out because of a broken arm, weighs 227 pounds.
He said he had been dieting, exercising and staying away from alcohol. (AP)


Art in Review
Lois Dodd  Fischbach Gallery 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
Lois Dodd's latest paintings have a spirit of confidence and freedom.
These scenes of quarries and covered bridges, waterfalls and barns are shot through with sun-baked colors that can recall Matisse in Morocco.
Milton Avery also comes to mind.
Ms.
Dodd will occasionally allow a few jagged lines to suffice for a rock wall or a waterway, so that the works hover between abstraction and realism.
Like sketches, they can give the impression of having been painted all at once, as if to capture a particular effect of light and shade before it disappears.
What holds many of them together is a quirky kind of geometry that has always been a strength of the artist's work; the loose grid of "Barn Window With Small White Square" is one of the clearest examples.
The 19 works in this show, painted in the last four years, are some of Ms.
Dodd's finest.


Gunplay in the Schools
The killing of two teen-agers in New York City's Thomas Jefferson High School this week intensifies the need to get handguns off the streets and out of the schools.
The city requires all children to attend school; it surely has an obligation to insure that they can do so safely.
Mayor David Dinkins certainly needs no instruction on the urgency of the problem.
An hour before he was scheduled to speak at Jefferson, a 15-year-old student walked up to two other students in a school hallway and shot and killed them, just 15 feet away from two police officers.


Review/Film; E.M. Forster's First Novel, Played Out in Tuscany
E.
M.
Forster's characters violate all the rules of contemporary mainstream film making.
Their thoughts are complicated, and not always honestly expressed.
Their behavior can be misleading.
Their problems are seldom resolved simply, and those resolutions that do occur are often too subtle to be dramatized with ease.
Their inner natures, put through the prism of Forster's uncommon acuity, can yield startling moments of truth, and yet the process whereby those ideas are revealed is unfailingly gentle.
It remains an unexpected delight that so much of this author's work has found its way to the screen.
Forster's first novel, "Where Angels Fear to Tread," is as enveloping as any of the other Forster books that have been filmed ("A Passage to India," "A Room With a View," "Maurice" and the masterpiece "Howards End," which will arrive here in a high-wattage Merchant-Ivory adaptation in two weeks' time).
Its story of prim, provincial English characters who lose their bearings upon foreign soil will be instantly recognizable to admirers of Forster's work.
The way the foreign land becomes a crucible for character, one in which the story's principals find themselves assessed and altered, will also have a familiar flavor.


Panel Is Appointed to Design Better and Cheaper Schools
Chris Whittle, the communications entrepreneur, said today that he had hired a seven-person team to figure out how to create new and better schools that can earn a profit.
The seven, an eclectic group of education theorists, journalists and business people, will seek to design a network of 200 corporate-owned elementary and secondary schools by 1995.
The project will be financed by Whittle Communications, Time Warner, Philips Electronics and Associated Newspapers Holdings, which have agreed to spend up to $60 million for the three-year study.


On Stage, and Off
Who's Acting? Who's Watching?
Applications for membership are now available for Audience Equity, a new organization formed to protect the rights of theatergoers who volunteer or are otherwise actively caught up in a performance.
Because there are no salaries, there are no dues.
Special workshops will be held in avoiding eye and body contact with actors who invade the audience.
Those who plan to attend the Blue Man Group's "Tubes" will be given hazard compensation as well as free helmets and ponchos as protection against flying paint and marshmallows.


Review/Film; A 'Doctor' Who Learns On the Job
"Paper Mask," which opens today at the Quad Cinema, is the story of a medical fake whose willfulness knows no bounds.
Originally a London hospital aide named Matthew Harris (Paul McGann), he takes on the identity of Dr.
Simon Hennessey after Hennessey is killed in an accident.
He then applies for a job at a hospital in Bristol without benefit of formal medical training, and quickly tries to achieve a minimal level of proficiency by tutoring himself.
"I don't know what you see in these skinny women," says one of Matthew's friends when he finds a teaching skeleton hidden in Matthew's bed.
Bluffing his way into a privileged position -- the camera lingers fondly on perks like "Doctors Only" signs in hospital parking lots -- he does rather well, under the circumstances.
Talent and luck are at least as important to Matthew's success as real knowledge would have been.
Intuition helps, too; he is able to make a diagnosis of cirrhosis simply by spotting a bottle of liquor hidden in a patient's bed.
Also immeasurably helpful is Christine Taylor (Amanda Donohoe), a smart, sexy emergency-ward nurse who seems at least as knowledgeable as most of the doctors working around her.


Almanac


Art in Review
Moshe Kupferman  Bertha Urdang Gallery 23 East 74th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
One of the consistently engaging features of Israeli artist Moshe Kupferman's work, apparent in this two-decade survey, is how he has personalized the grid form, which he adopted early as the central structure of his work.
In a 1971 drawing, for example, vertical and horizontal graphite strokes are repeated as an adamant, unbroken obliterating gesture, In other drawings, exuberant abstract patterns -- fountainlike sprays in one instance -- are visible behind a screen of gray lines.


United Way Head Is Forced Out In a Furor Over His Lavish Style
The president of the United Way of America was forced out of his job today as leader of the nation's largest network of charities, caught up in a wave of anger over disclosures of high expense-account living and questionable management practices.
Although the executive committee of the organization's board said it had asked the president, William Aramony, to stay on until a replacement was found, it accepted his "thoughtful and sensitive offer to retire immediately." At least one board member told associates that Mr.
Aramony would take a vacation or leave of absence within days, and was unlikely to return.


Lachance Gets the Gold As Islanders Bank on Him
When Scott Lachance donned his new Islanders jersey at a news conference this afternoon, the number on the back was "44." In another sport, in another era, another athlete around here wore the same number, with notable success.
"Reggie Jackson," said a smiling Lachance, who grew up as a Yankee fan in Bristol, Conn.


A Greek Orthodox Bishop Is Shot on a Brooklyn Street
A 48-year-old Greek Orthodox Bishop was shot and wounded in his Brooklyn neighborhood late Wednesday night by teen-age robbers apparently undeterred by the religious robes he was wearing.
"He felt God would protect him," George Panagiotopoulos said of his older brother, Bishop Alexios, as he lay unconscious in a bed at Kings County hospital.
The Bishop was in stable condition yesterday with a bullet in his stomach, where doctors, who operated to seal broken blood vessels, planned to leave it, Mr.
Panagiotopoulos said.


HOUSE DEMOCRATS APPROVE TAX CUT FOR MIDDLE CLASS
House Democrats barely held together today to win the first battle of the election year over taxes, passing a middle-class tax cut that instantly became a political football for both parties.
No one present contended that the bill, adopted on a vote of 221 to 209, had much chance to become law in anything close to its present form.
But its vitality as an issue was shown when President Bush immediately attacked the House for rejecting his growth program in favor of "tax and spend policies." He renewed his threat to veto the bill.


Kaufman Exceeded the Law in Death Sentence of Rosenbergs
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 3 obituary of Judge Irving R. Kaufman states that he will be mostly remembered for his role in the espionage trial of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg and for the death sentence he imposed on the defendants -- a sentence, you remind us, that was widely criticized in many quarters.


Tokyo Stocks Are Flat
Stock prices were flat today in Tokyo.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues ended the day at 21,338.81, up 5.11 points.
For the week, the index was virtually flat, rising 48 points.


Art in Review
'How It Is'  Tony Shafrazi Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through tomorrow
"The Shock of the Now" might easily be the subtitle of this big group show.
Featuring works by 32 youngish artists, it has the look of a slightly under-age Whitney Biennial, and about as much coherence.


Witness Identifies Castellano Gunman As Gotti Associate
A new witness testified yesterday about seeing the slaying of Paul Castellano on Dec. 16, 1985, and identified Anthony Rampino, a John Gotti associate, as a gunman fleeing the scene.
It was the second successive day that a witness described the shooting and identified a participant as someone the prosecution portrayed as a Gotti associate.
The Castellano slaying is a central charge in Mr.
Gotti's racketeering-murder trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Drug War to Widen on Same Budget
President Bush and six Latin American leaders ended a two-day conference on the drug problem today with promises to broaden the war on drugs, but with no pledges of more money to fight it.
Mr.
Bush said at a news conference here that they had "established an aggressive agenda for the rest of the century" for battling drugs.
The initiatives include new legal efforts to curb money laundering, international controls on the sale of chemicals used to manufacture cocaine and missions to Canada, Japan and Europe to involve the rest of the industrial world in the anti-drug battle.


Excerpt From a Speech By Vice President Quayle
Following are excerpts from a speech by Vice President Dan Quayle at a dinner of the Economic Club of New York yesterday:
As we seek our economic security in this uncertain world, we must learn what works and what doesn't.
Let us look at this great city.
It attests to what becomes of those who put their faith in the benevolence of the state.
In what should be a liberal paradise, what do we find instead?


Divac Stays a Laker
VLADE DIVAC formally ended speculation that he might play in Europe next season by signing a multiyear contract with the Los Angeles Lakers yesterday.
Terms were not announced.
Divac, 24, was activated only a day earlier after undergoing rehabilitation for back surgery on Nov. 27.
"Although there were tempting offers to return to Europe, I love playing for the Lakers, and it was always my top choice to remain with them," Divac said.
"I'm looking to becoming a U.S. citizen. My family is here. My son was born here." (AP)


A Striking Turnaround for Philips
In a remarkable corporate turnaround at a time of industrywide difficulties, Philips N.V., Europe's largest consumer electronics business, today announced a net profit of $175.8 million in the fourth quarter, against a loss of $1.32 billion in the 1990 period.
For the year Philips had a net profit of $645.1 million, compared with a loss of $2.28 billion in 1990.
Revenues for the year rose 2.1 percent, to $30.63 billion, from $29.98 billion in 1990.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Common  *
Hospital Corp. of America's offering of 34 million class A common shares has been priced at $21.50 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The Nashville company operates more than 120 hospitals.
Ratings  *
Gerber Products Co.'s senior-debt rating has been raised by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. to AA- from A+.
The rating service, which said about $100 million of debt was affected, said that Gerber's share of the baby-food market now exceeds 70 percent, giving it economies of scale and price leadership.


Woman Shot to Death on Subway Train
A young woman was shot and killed and a subway conductor critically wounded yesterday by a man who had argued with the woman and then opened fire with a handgun on a subway train on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, the police said.
The shootings occurred just minutes before noon as a southbound B train pulled into the 103d Street station at Central Park West, the police said.
The man and woman, described as in their 20's but not identified by the authorities, entered the train at 125th Street and proceeded to argue loudly, police detectives said.


New Dispute Roils Western Sahara: Who'll Vote?
In this once-desolate landscape of dunes and sand walls, a vast and teeming tent city has sprung up in recent weeks as tens of thousands of people, mostly descendants of nomads, have gathered to take part in a United Nations-sponsored referendum on Western Sahara.
But it could turn out to be a long wait.
The referendum was supposed to end a 17-year conflict between Morocco and the Polisario Front, a Libyan- and Algerian-backed guerrilla movement.


Chamberlain Reported In Excellent Condition
WILT CHAMBERLAIN was in excellent condition at a hospital yesterday, a day after experiencing a slightly abnormal heart rhythm at a basketball game, doctors said.
"Considering he has an arrhythmia, he's in excellent condition," said Chamberlain's personal physician, Dr.
ELLEN GOUDLOCK.
"He's in absolutely great spirits. He's laughing, and watching TV."


Review/Photography; Two Additional Chapters In the Jewish Experience
The story told in "Gay Block: Rescuers of the Holocaust," now at the Museum of Modern Art, is deeply moving, if not altogether unfamiliar: during World War II, a few Gentiles risked their own lives to shelter Jews from the methodical campaign of deportation and murder being carried out by the Nazis.
Featured in the exhibition are recent color portraits of 21 of these rescuers by Gay Block, a Los Angeles photographer, along with extensive excerpts from interviews with them conducted nearly 50 years after the fact by the writer Malka Drucker.
A different aspect of Jewish experience is the subject of a show now at the International Center of Photography.
"A Moment Before: Jews in the Soviet Union" presents photographs made by Frederic Brenner, a French Jew who traveled to all 15 republics of the former Soviet Union between 1985 and 1991 to record the varieties of Jewish life there.


Law Supports Reporters in Hill-Thomas Case
To the Editor:
The effort by the Senate's temporary independent counsel, Peter Fleming, to compel testimony from two reporters, Timothy M. Phelps and Nina Totenberg, for the disclosure of Anita F. Hill's allegations of sexual harassment against Judge Clarence Thomas, the President's Supreme Court nominee, is not only a flagrant and outrageous violation of the First Amendment in broad terms, as you suggest in "Newsday Refuses to Reveal Source" (news article, Feb. 14).
The subpoenas issued to Ms.
Totenberg and Mr.
Phelps also fly in the face of numerous Congressional and judicial precedents for the rights of reporters to protect their sources.


Stars Enter du Pont
The Tour du Pont, 150 miles shorter this year and $50,000 lighter in the purse, has still attracted the sport's big names.
MIGUEL INDURAIN of Spain, the reigning Tour de France champion, and GREG LeMOND will compete in the event in May, the largest cycling event in the United States.
The $200,000 Tour du Pont is 1,000 miles this season.
Between the race's start on May 7 in Wilmington, Del., and the finish on May 17 at R.F.K.
Stadium in Washington, cyclists will pass through four Eastern states and three mountain ranges: the Allegheny, Blue Ridge and Pocono. (AP)


Walking in Kenosha and Taking On Rest of World
Debbi and Don Lawrence are athletes in the right place at the right time.
Their sport is race walking and the right place for them tonight is Madison Square Garden at the Mobil Indoor track and field championships.
Debbi, who this year has set an American record for the mile and had the world's best time in a 1,500-meter race, will compete in the women's 3,000-meter walk.
Don will compete in the men's 5,000-meter walk.
"I'm what you would call a national class walker," said Don.
"But Debbi, she's world class."


Levi's 64 Takes Lead but Woods Wins Gallery
As Tiger Woods made history and John Cook attempted to repeat some, Wayne Levi rifled his irons at the flagsticks today, shot a seven-under-par 64 and seized the lead after one round of the Nissan Los Angeles Open.
Levi, the 1990 PGA Tour player of the year who slumped badly last season, was a shot better than five players who burned up the classically designed Riviera Country Club with 65's: Keith Clearwater, Buddy Gardner, Doug Tewell, Mark Carnevale and Chris Tucker.


Art in Review
Helen Miranda Wilson Jason McCoy Inc. 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through March 7
Helen Miranda Wilson's small depictions of city, country, coastline and desert are irresistible.
Her latest drawings and paintings on panel, two dozen of which are here, place the viewer at some miraculous height, floating above the Tuscan hilltops or the roofs of Paris.
Sometimes the image consists of only a sliver of landscape at the bottom edge of a panel, above which stretches a portentous sky.
In the case of "Swallows," the gaze is straight up, where twirling clouds and birds turn the scene into an arabesque.


Robben Island Journal; Will Apartheid's Prison Become a Tourist Mecca?
Since 1615, when 19 condemned English convicts were put here to build a provisioning station for ships sailing around the Cape of Good Hope, Robben Island has gained notoriety as a penal colony.
The first African political prisoner was consigned by the Dutch in 1658.
Over the centuries, Robben Island was used to hold political dissidents as well as lepers, paupers and the insane.
Its recent inmates constitute a Who's Who of the black liberation struggle.
Nelson Mandela and Walter Sisulu, the leaders of the African National Congress, served 18 years on Robben Island before being transferred to mainland prisons.
Japhta Masemola, the head of the Pan-Africanist Congress before his death, was locked up for 26 years, and the wooden sculptures that he carved still stand in a prison yard.


Books of The Times; Mousy, Sniveling Heroine Finds Her Fantasy Cad
A Closed Eye  By Anita Brookner  263 pages. Random House. $21.
Harriet, the timid housewife in "A Closed Eye," is immediately recognizable as one of Anita Brookner's mousy, cautious heroines.
Like Kitty Maule in "Providence," like Frances in "Look at Me" and like Blanche in "The Misalliance," Harriet is a woman who can be described with a limited set of adjectives: meek, passive, virginal, mild-mannered, timid, unsophisticated and lonely, the sort of woman a therapist would diagnose as completely lacking in self-respect and self-esteem.
In Ms.
Brookner's cruel Darwinian world, Harriet belongs to the group of martyrs, those unfortunate weaklings who fall prey to the bold, the worldly and the ruthless.


Vincent and Yanks' McCarthy Finally Get Together
Daniel McCarthy met with Commissioner Fay Vincent for two and a half hours yesterday and emerged smiling, an indication that, for at least a day, hostilities between the men had ceased long enough for McCarthy to resume his pursuit of a permanent appointment as managing general partner of the Yankees.
McCarthy, who must secure the approval of Vincent as well as the owners of the 25 other major league clubs, declined comment following the session at Vincent's Manhattan office.
However, Sheldon Sager, McCarthy's partner in a Cleveland-based law firm, described the meeting between Vincent, major league baseball officials, and McCarthy and a handful of his associates as "cordial."


Verona Goaltender Wins Rare Duel
Who's the best girl goaltender in the state of New Jersey playing for a boys' high school hockey team?
If you go by yesterday's unprecedented head-to-head battle between two female goalies, Liz Hill of Lawrence and Claudine Pietrucha of Verona, the undisputed title goes to Pietrucha.
She turned aside 56 of 62 shots in a 6-5 loss yesterday in a state tournament game at the Mercer County Park in West Windsor.
Hill managed to stop 12 of only 17 shots.
The victory propelled Lawrence into the first round against Seton Hall Prep on Monday.


BRIEFS
*
American Telephone and Telegraph Co., Basking Ridge, N.J., agreed to buy Dataid, a French software and information services company, for about $88 million. *
Avis Europe, a unit of Avis Inc., Garden City, L.I., agreed to sell its European vehicle leasing and fleet management business to the Fleet Services division of GE Capital Corp., Stamford, Conn.
Terms were not disclosed.


DDB Needham Gets More of Volkswagen
After more than two years of waiting and a five-month presentation process, DDB Needham Japan has been awarded the Volkswagen account in Japan, with billings estimated at $20 million to $25 million.
"It's exciting and extremely important," John Bernbach, president of DDB Needham Worldwide, the parent agency in New York, said yesterday.
His agency now handles Volkswagen "just about everywhere," he added, except for South America and Australia.


Kaufman Exceeded the Law in Death Sentence of Rosenbergs; His Mind Made Up
To the Editor:
Your obituary on Judge Irving R. Kaufman omits his most egregious acts in the case of the Rosenbergs.
According to Roy Cohn's autobiography (pages 65-70 and 77), Judge Kaufman told Cohn "
before
the trial started that he was going to sentence Julius Rosenberg to death."


Trenton Sues Freeloaders Over Their Auto Insurance
Taking aim at the pocketbooks of out-of-state drivers who illegally register and insure their cars in New Jersey, state officials today filed civil complaints against 200 residents of New York, Connecticut and Pennsylvania.
The complaints seek fines of up to $30,000 per driver.
Already, state officials said, 125 motorists have settled claims by paying more than $300,000.
In one case, a New Yorker who owned five luxury cars, including a Rolls-Royce, paid a $10,000 fine.


Weicker to Veto Almost Any Expansion of Gambling
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. vowed today to veto almost any expansion of legalized gambling in Connecticut, including slot machines, which are being pushed by many lawmakers as a way to improve the fortunes of the ailing cities and to compete with the Indian-owned casino that opened this month.
"Gambling is going to be the No. 1 issue in the legislature," Mr.
Weicker said.
"And I think it poses far and away the greatest threat."


Review/Art; Stacks of Odds and Ends That Tease the Mind
THE French artist known simply as Arman is a master orchestrator of everyday objects, which makes his retrospective at the Brooklyn Museum great fun.
But his work rarely progresses beyond the level of light entertainment.
It is clever in concept, skilled in execution but eerily devoid of emotional depth.
Venture beneath the surfaces of his often flamboyant accumulations of saxophones, paint tubes, car parts or other manufactured goods and you tend to come up empty.
The show, "Arman 1955-1991: A Retrospective," brings together 60 sculptures that trace the course of a nearly 40-year career spent in New York and the artist's native France.
From 1962 there is a wall relief in which 20 old, black banged-up typewriters are arranged in rows against a bright red backdrop.
From 1973 comes "Achilles Syndrome," a pile of shoe trees arranged in the shape of a foot.
To make "Going Up" from 1981, Arman welded dozens of crocodile pliers into a silvery veil that also suggests a school of fish rising to the surface.
The freestanding "Office Fetish" of 1984, a pyramid of black telephones, is a slightly ominous ode to progress.


Curbs Placed On Spending At Housing
Asserting control over New York City's embattled Housing Authority, the newly appointed chairwoman, Sally Hernandez-Pinero, yesterday canceled all agency American Express cards, imposed a freeze on hiring and promotions and made three surprise visits to public housing projects.
Jeanne Nathan, Ms.
Hernandez-Pinero's spokeswoman, said the chairwoman revoked the credit cards and banned hiring and promotions to gain control over the agency's expenses and staffing.


Tandy Offering To Buy Back Stock
The Tandy Corporation, the electronics concern based in Fort Worth, said it would start a share repurchase plan today, offering to buy 12 million shares, or about 16 percent of its stock, from its own shareholders.
To finance the purchase of the common, it will use the proceeds of a recent issue of preferred equity redemption cumulative stock, a type of security that pays a higher dividend than common stock but has a limit on how far it can rise in value.


House Budget Panel Backs Shift of $15 Billion From Military
A Democratic plan to cut the military budget by about twice as much as the White House wants next year picked up important support today when the House Budget Committee proposed shifting $15 billion from the Pentagon either to domestic programs or to deficit reduction.
The action by the committee embraces a plan for cutting military forces and spending outlined last week by Representative Les Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat who heads the House Armed Services Committee.


Foreign Affairs; Who Loves Israel?
A majority of Israelis favor suspending settlement-building on the West Bank as a path to genuine peace with the Arabs.
Probably a majority of American Jews feel the same way.
Does that make them self-hating Jews?
Many Jews in both countries believe that Yitzhak Shamir and Ariel Sharon are leading Israel away from its most cherished principles and toward a rift with America.
Can Jews love Israel only if they agree with Shamir-Sharon policies and oppose Bush Administration efforts to change those policies?


A Fortune Remains For Milken
The $500 million in cash and securities that Michael R. Milken recently agreed to pay to settle the civil claims against him represents "about 80 percent of his personal remaining wealth," lawyers in the case disclosed yesterday on orders from the judge.
The carefully worded disclosure implied that Mr.
Milken, who rose and fell on the junk bond craze he started at Drexel Burnham Lambert, could look forward to a net worth of $125 million upon leaving prison.
Setting the total of Mr.
Milken's remaining wealth at far less than published reports had suggested, the disclosure was seen by some involved in the case as an effort to blunt criticism that a prominent white-collar criminal had gotten off too easily.


Sedative Overdosage Will Lead to Trouble
To the Editor:
In "Depression Worsened" (letter, Feb. 11), John Burwell describes taking Halcion (triazolam) at an initial dosage of .5 mg, twice the manufacturer's recommendation.
"Before many weeks," he states, "I upped the dosage." Five months later, he was taking 12 to 15 tablets a day.


'900' Phone Operation Draws a Lawsuit
New Jersey officials today announced a civil suit against a New Jersey-based company that they say tricked customers into phoning a 900 number to claim what they were led to believe was an undelivered package.
Attorney General Robert J. Del Tufo said the company, Infotrax Communications Inc. of Mount Laurel, collected $677,479 alone between last July and September from 66,135 consumers who called four of the more than two dozen 900 number lines the company operated.


Searching for Milky Way Above the Great White One
Bundled against the cold on a patch of Great Kills Park on Staten Island, eight men and women took turns the other night looking into a telescope at Jupiter and three of its moons.
They searched for Orion, Taurus and other constellations that alternately appeared and disappeared above the clouds.
For a few hours, these urban astronomers pushed aside thoughts of pressured jobs amid the architectural canyons of New York City.
As they turned their attention to the sky, little else concerned them.


Corrections
A table at the end of the Credit Markets column in Business Day on Wednesday, listing results of the Tuesday auction of two-year Treasury notes, misstated the maturity date of the notes.
It is Feb. 28, 1994.


Stock Sale Is Planned At Domino's
Tom Monaghan, the entrepreneur who owns Domino's Pizza Inc., has decided to sell stock in his company to the public later this year, the company said today.
Accordingly, Mr.
Monaghan, who now serves as Domino's president, is cleaning up Domino's balance sheet to make the company more attractive to investors by writing off bad loans and selling Domino's assets not related to pizza.


Maas Fears His Swing May Not Mean a Thing
The swing was built for Yankee Stadium and the face was meant for Broadway, but Kevin Maas conceded today that eventually he may have to move on.
Perhaps this year, more likely later.
But one day, it will probably happen.
There are too many players and not enough jobs.
In the Yankees spring camp, Maas is playing behind Don Mattingly at first base and contending with Mel Hall for designated hitter.
He is trying to sort out his problems from last season and concerned that he could become a bench player this season if the team doesn't make a trade by April.


Restaurants
Few restaurants in New York City, or in the United States, for that matter, are as steeped in culinary history as La Cote Basque.
The grand premises on East 55th Street in Manhattan previously housed Le Pavillon, the most influential French restaurant in America in the 1940's and 50's.
In 1957 the legendary owner, Henri Soule, had a dispute with the landlord and moved Le Pavillon to East 57th Street.
Two years later, he returned to open a second restaurant, called La Cote Basque, in the original space.
Since 1979, the chef and owner has been Jean-Jacques Rachou, who came to the United States in 1963 to work at another renowned establishment, the Colony in Manhattan.
Under Mr.
Rachou, La Cote Basque has seen spectacular success over the years and a sizable expansion.
The recession has hurt, of course.
And Mr.
Rachou's decision three years ago to leave the kitchen and act as dining-room host was equally calamitous -- much as if Itzhak Perlman put down his violin to act as master of ceremonies for the New York Philharmonic.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Atlantic Bank, New York, a unit of the National Bank of Greece, appointed Peter L. Venetis president and chief executive. *
Bell &amp; Howell Co., Skokie, Ill., named Nils A. Johansson senior vice president and chief financial officer.
He had been treasurer and vice president of finance.


Review/Film; Finns' Plea for Amazon
"Amazon," a Finnish film made in Brazil with a mostly English-language sound track, is another exotic-looking, earnestly considered plea by well-meaning outsiders to save the Amazon rain forest.
It opens today at the Angelika Film Center.
The director is Mika Kaurismaki, the brother of Aki Kaurismaki, Finland's better-known director.
The screenplay is by Mika Kaurismaki and Richard Reitinger, who collaborated with Wim Wenders on the script for "Wings of Desire." By any Kaurismaki standards, "Amazon" is quite conventional, though it has a nicely casual way of dealing with the cliches of the screen's pro-environment literature.


New Campaigns
*
The comedian Tracey Ullman is appearing in a series of television and radio commercials for Virgin Atlantic Airways by Korey, Kay &amp; Partners in New York.
The spots are built around Ms.
Ullman's trademark, a chameleon-like ability to assume offbeat personae; among characters she portrays are an obsequious male Hollywood agent and an Italian mother. *
Doo-wop singing groups harmonize for new Multi Grain Cheerios in television commercials by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York.
The cereal, made from oats, corn, rice and wheat, is being introduced in the eastern half of the country.
The spots say the cereal offers "four good O's for one great taste."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Clinton Seeks to Regain His Agenda
The Clinton campaign, still jittery from weeks of bad news, is moving to take the reins of Presidential campaign dialogue back from the four other Democrats who have managed to tarnish the Arkansas Governor in the most effective possible way.
They have each won -- or nearly won -- a primary or a caucus.


Penitence Behind Garden Plexiglas
The bad boys come off the ice breathing hard, praying, "Kill the penalty, please, guys," and then the bolt snicks shut, locking them in, and they sit tensely on purple folding chairs muttering, "Get it off, get it off," and counting seconds until they are set free.
In hockey, there is no shame in crime and punishment unless the other team scores while you are in the penalty box.
"It's a very stressful two minutes in the box," said Joe Cirella, a Rangers defenseman.
"If the other team scores on a power play, when they let you out, you have to skate all the way across the ice to your bench and everyone sees whose fault it was."


CHRONICLE
There's something new about the sixth edition of "Dr. Spock's Baby and Child Care," to be published on Monday, besides its attention to homelessness, drug abuse violence, poltiical activism and other contemporary issues.
On the jacket is a new cover girl: LILY ALICE APPLEBAUM.
Her father, IRWYN APPLEBAUM, is the president and publisher of Pocket Books, which has printed the paperback versions of the book since 1946.
"It was important to find a quintessentially cute baby, and since I happened to have one in my own personal home, it was not a problem," Mr.
Applebaum said yesterday.
"We searched the distance between my office and the Wall Street area where I live, and there she was -- at home."


Truce Crumbles in Nagorno-Karabakh


New Niche for Moscow Entrepreneurs: Real Estate
Albert Andonian, a Frenchman who lives half the year in Moscow, stood in the hallway of a two-room apartment and scoffed at the owner's $5,500 selling price.
"The space is badly laid out," he said, and grabbed the kitchen door frame, as if to pull down a partition.
He railed that the nearest subway station was not within walking distance.
But finally he offered $5,000, in dollars.
"I would like this apartment for one of my sons," he said.


Review/Dance; Novices and Veterans
The seventh Annual Morningside Dance Festival, which runs through Sunday afternoon, is presenting both novice choreographers and veterans.
While this range can be found in other modern-dance showcases, the first of this season's three programs on Tuesday night at the Theater of the Riverside Church (121st Street and Claremont Avenue) confirmed the festival's virtue.
Creativity rather than a single esthetic line is de rigueur here.


2 Koreas Caught in Another Snag
North Korea appeared today to raise new obstacles to inspection of its secret nuclear research program, creating further suspicion that it is stalling for time to build an atomic weapon.
According to a statement by the South Korean Government's Office of North-South Dialogue, officials of North and South Korea, meeting on the border at Panmunjom, were unable to settle differences over how to implement a Dec. 31 accord that is intended to keep the Korean peninsula free of nuclear weapons.


Philharmonic Plans Its 150th Season
The New York Philharmonic, the country's oldest orchestra, plans to throw itself a 150th-birthday bash all next season.
Kurt Masur, the Philharmonic's music director, and Deborah Borda, its managing director, yesterday announced an ambitious 1992-93 season schedule that includes the largest commissioning program the orchestra has ever undertaken and an array of special concerts, telecasts, exhibitions, publications, chamber music programs, children's concerts and a 25-day European tour.
"My history with the New York Philharmonic is very short, of course," said Mr.
Masur, who is midway through his first Philharmonic season.
"But we began with a lot of dreams and ideas, and when we assembled these programs, we tried to put those ideas in place. I feel like a composer who has just finished his work."


Beirut Seeks to Free the Last of the Hostages
In the first move of its kind since Muslim fundamentalist kidnappings of Westerners began in Lebanon eight years ago, the Government here announced today that it would make an official effort to secure the release of the last two Western hostages still in captivity.
The announcement came after the new leader of the Party of God, the organization believed to serve as the umbrella for the kidnappers, said his group continued to place a high priority on the release of Lebanese captives held by Israel, hinting that he remains ready for an exchange of prisoners with Israel despite the assassination of his predecessor in an Israeli helicopter attack last week.


Antifreeze Maker Develops Recycling Plan
The maker of Prestone antifreeze announced yesterday that it had developed the first economical way to recycle its product.
The First Brands Corporation of Danbury, Conn., said it planned to sell franchises for the preparation of antifreeze for re-use at service stations and other car-care locations.


Kaufman Exceeded the Law in Death Sentence of Rosenbergs; Asked Truman to Act
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 3 obituary of Judge Irving R. Kaufman was of special interest to me because of a conversation I had with David K. Niles, an assistant to President Truman in 1952, when the Rosenberg appeals were pending before the Supreme Court.


Coke Is Sued By Seven-Up
The Seven-Up Company said today that it had sued the Coca-Cola Company, accusing it of trying to corner the market for lemon-lime soft drinks by stealing away Seven-Up's bottlers with "lies" and "coercion."
Seven-Up contended that Coke was using illegal means to persuade independent bottlers to abandon Seven-Up and sell Coke's Sprite instead.


Review/Art; At Dealers' Show, an Array of Works Over Many Centuries
When asked if he is planning a winter break, this critic usually says: "No. Why should I? 'The Art Show' is my winter break."
By "The Art Show," I mean the annual exhibition organized by the Art Dealers Association of America and held at the Seventh Regiment Armory.
It has a brief but vivid life, and offers the committed gallerygoer a crash course in disorientation.
It's not the beach.
Nor is it a hammock under a palm tree.
But it helps us to see the galleries, and perhaps to see ourselves in a different way.


Buchanan Tops in a Financing Race
Patrick J. Buchanan beat President Bush in one contest today, winning the most Federal matching money for March.
The Federal Election Commission approved $947,730 for Mr.
Buchanan, while it approved only $593,330 for Mr.
Bush for the month of March.
The money will be distributed next month.


Hold the Cheers on Haiti
Democratic principle gained next to nothing from the bargain agreed to by Haiti's exiled President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and parliamentary leaders this week.
The most that can be hoped is a slowdown in army-sponsored killings of Aristide supporters.
Even that hope rests on the good will of army officers.
They are understandably grateful that the agreement promises an early lifting of the international embargo, no outside military intervention, blanket amnesty for officers involved in the coup and indefinite postponement of President Aristide's return to power.


Sounds Around Town
James Brown in Town
James Brown, the Paramount, Seventh Avenue at 33d Street, Manhattan, (212) 465-6741.
James Brown may never be more respectable than he is at this cultural moment.
The Grammy Awards and the American Music Awards both honored him recently with lifetime achievement awards; his influence on hip-hop is being recognized by fans and musicians alike, and he's no longer incarcerated.
Reissues like "James Brown: 20 All-Time Greatest Hits" (Polydor) are essential listening, proof positive that this rebel, brat and emotive genius remains as musically relevant as ever.
Tonight at 8; tickets are $35 and $50.


Ogilvy Direct Gets 12 Awards
Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct won the most awards yesterday when the John Caples International Awards for excellence in direct marketing were presented at a luncheon at the New York Hilton hotel.


Dow Down 13.87; Small-Stock Activity Is Brisk
Stocks closed mixed yesterday, with blue-chip issues down moderately and the broad market holding onto firm gains resulting from strong buying in some technology and biotechnology issues.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped by 13.87 points to finish at 3,269.45, with Walt Disney, Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing and Caterpillar being the big losers among the Dow stocks.


Block Party Leaves Blazers Out in Cold
David 2, Goliath 0.
That's the count after the underdog Nets outrebounded Portland, 64-38, tonight, then got away with a questionable blocked shot in the closing seconds and knocked off the Pacific Division-leading Trail Blazers, 98-96.


Law Supports Reporters in Hill-Thomas Case; Investigate the Senate
To the Editor:
I read with amazement your Feb. 4 report that two reporters faced subpoena to appear before a special Senate counsel investigating who may have disclosed Prof.
Anita F. Hill's complaints of sexual harassment against Clarence Thomas.


Critic's Notebook; You've Seen The Movie, Now Read the Book
READING the book on which a movie is based always reveals something the ordinary moviegoer wouldn't know.
It may be as simple as a tip on how to prepare grits. (Fannie Flagg's "Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle Stop Cafe" comes with recipes, along with the news that grits keep you regular.) Or perhaps it's the fact that most of the story (i.e., the first three-quarters of Susan Isaacs's "Shining Through," or the second half of Oscar Hijuelos's Pulitzer Prize-winning novel "The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love") never made it to the screen.
It could even be the odd fact that a book (Meg Wolitzer's "This Is Your Life") en route to the movies (Nora Ephron's "This Is My Life") got a slightly different name.
Going back to the source material is a fine way of second-guessing why film makers did what they did and what they should have done instead.
Whatever the literary merits of comparing a book with its screen adaptation, it does make for an irresistible sideline.
After all, Monday-morning quarterbacking has as legitimate a place among moviegoers as it does anywhere else.
In other words, it may not be helpful, and it's certainly not fair, but it's here to stay.


Visible, Emotional Rift Over U.N.L.V. Coach
The polarization of the University of Nevada-Las Vegas over the future of the embattled basketball coach Jerry Tarkanian created emotional confrontations in two campus episodes today.
In one, the university's president, Robert Maxson, who rejects the coach's recent insistence that his resignation has been withdrawn, was berated at a Board of Regents meeting by a supporter of Tarkanian who was in the audience.


Department Is Revamped By Merrill
Merrill Lynch disclosed last night that it had shaken up the management of its junk bond department and given refunds to nine institutional customers who bought junk bonds that Merrill Lynch traders had previously purchased.
It also said it was cooperating with government investigations of the department, but said the firm itself had not violated any rules.


New Unit Is Created At Johnson &amp; Johnson
Pushing to expand its foothold in the growing market for tiny surgical instruments, Johnson &amp; Johnson said yesterday that it would split its surgical products subsidiary into two companies.
The world's largest diversified health-care company said that its sutures and surgical supplies business would keep the name Ethicon Inc.
A new company, Ethicon Endo-Surgery, will focus on the development and marketing of endoscopic products, it said.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the start of a computerized ordering system at two futures exchanges in Chicago misidentified the maker of the Spectrix Corporation's hand-held computers.
Spectrix designed the software and the transmitting system; the hand-held device is made by Panasonic.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  A LIFELINE TO HAITIAN REFUGEES
Challenging the Bush Administration's policy, the House of Representatives passed a bill that would halt the forced return of Haitians who have fled their island.
Similar legislation is expected to be considered in the Senate, but lawmakers expect a veto by President Bush.
A2


Tsongas's New York Problem
Paul E. Tsongas is learning all about the Dickensian rules and technicalities of petitions in New York.
It may be a painful lesson.
Page B1.


House Passes Bill to Let Haitians Stay at Guantanamo for 6 Months
In a challenge to the Administration's policy on Haitian refugees, the House passed a bill today that would halt the forced return of exiles and allow them to remain at the Guantanamo Naval Base in Cuba for six months.
The Senate is to consider similar legislation, but the outcome is uncertain.
Many legislators expect a veto by President Bush if the bill passes.


Smaller CD Boxes Promised Amid Clamor About Waste
Responding to widespread environmental concern, the recording industry said yesterday that it would replace the long cardboard or plastic display boxes in which it sells compact disks with packaging no bigger than the small plastic container that holds the disk.
Jay Berman, president of the Recording Industry Association of America, said the group's members -- companies that produce and distribute more than 95 percent of the recorded music sold in the United States -- had agreed that as of April 1993, no new releases would be packaged in the 6-by-12-inch boxes, which buyers throw away when they get home.
They have adopted a size that measures 5 by 5 1/2 inches.
Record Stores Object
Other packaging details will be left to individual record companies but the final products are to have little if any disposable packaging.
The biggest members of the group are Bertelsmann, EMI, MCA, Polygram, Sony and Warner.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; QUAYLE CRITICIZES NEW YORK AS PROOF OF WELFARE'S ILLS
Vice President Dan Quayle traveled to New York yesterday and declared the city proof of the failure of the welfare state.
"The liberal vision of a happy, productive and content welfare state hasn't even worked on 22 square miles of the most valuable real estate in the world," he said in a speech to the Economic Club of New York.


Treasury Prices Are Little Changed
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed in quiet trading yesterday, as dealers paused to reassess the outlook for interest rates after Wednesday's strong rally.
Most traders acknowledged that the surge in prices on Wednesday was long overdue.
But they added that further gains before February employment data are released on March 6 will be difficult to come by.


Quotation of the Day
"It just doesn't get any worse than New York. It is the most embarrassing, politically regressive, old-fashioned electoral system in America. The system is designed to keep people out, not let people in." -- RICHARD WINGER, an election law expert.  [ B4:1. ]


Health Official Quits After Harsh Criticism
The director of the Federal Alcohol, Drug Abuse and Mental Health Administration resigned today amid a new round of criticism for his comments that appeared to suggest a scientific link between the violent behavior of monkeys and the social problems of inner cities.
The official, Frederick G. Goodwin, said in a letter to President Bush that his remarks had been distorted for political reasons to make them appear racist.
He will become director of the National Institutes of Mental Health, said his spokesman, James A. Miller.


TV Weekend; Romance Takes a Holiday, of Sorts
Love, your magic spell is everywhere.
Well, not exactly.
Certainly not on television this weekend, as various dramas -- tapping into past, present and futuristic -- explore betrayals that are less than magical and passions that can turn downright murderous.
In contrast, the romantic entanglements on a new horror series seem curiously tame.
Sunday night at 8, the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network presents "THE CLONING OF JOANNA MAY," based on a novel by Fay Weldon.
A few years ago, Miss Weldon's "Life and Loves of a She-Devil" was made into a BBC mini-series that proved far more memorable than the subsequent movie version starring Meryl Streep and Roseanne Barr (now Arnold).
Patricia Hodge had a prominent role in the mini-series, which was shown here on A&amp;E.


Public Advocate Testifies in an Effort to Save His Budget
New Jersey's Public Advocate, Wilfredo Caraballo, who angered Republicans by urging that school districts be merged to achieve racial integration, told a Republican-controlled Senate committee examining his budget that his office does a lot more than involve itself in high-profile controversy.
Before the hearing was over, two conservative Republican committee members suggested that perhaps they could use some help from Mr.
Caraballo in their own districts.


Accounts
*
Michael Foods Inc., Minneapolis, to Carmichael Lynch, Minneapolis, for Simply Eggs, its new reduced cholesterol egg product.
Billings were not disclosed.


Irish Majority Doesn't Favor Violence
To the Editor:
"Irish America Sleeps as Doherty Loses," Robert J. Hogan's impassioned Feb. 6 letter on the Supreme Court ruling that cleared the way for the deportation of the Irish Republican Army fugitive Joe Doherty, was impressive, if only for being two centuries too late.
For the benefit of Mr.
Hogan, Ireland is an independent nation that is free.
We are not under the cruel yoke of British oppression.
That myth is found only in fiction or in the money-gathering tactics of I.R.A. supporters in the United States.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising, normally found in Weekend, appear today on pages B14-15.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Colorado; In Mountain State, Tsongas Strikes Vein of Support Among Urban Voters
Its icy mountain peaks and vast, lonely plains have always given Colorado a sort of flannel-shirt image, a place where rosy-cheeked workers breathe air freshened by ponderosa pine.
But far more typically, a Colorado voter lives in a city or suburb, holds a college degree and wears a business suit to work behind a computer terminal.
Young, relatively affluent, liberal on social issues, but fairly conservative on economic issues, these are the voters who represent the heart of the Democratic electorate here.


Armani Opens Store in Saks
The designer Giorgio Armani yesterday announced the opening of the first free-standing A/X Armani Exchange stores that will be owned and operated by Saks Fifth Avenue.
The agreement is the first of its kind that Mr.
Armani has taken, and it is the first time Saks will try to operate a retail company under a name other than its own.
Saks has said it would like to pursue similar agreements.


Sailor Wins Bout to Advance In Pursuit of Olympic Berth
At the time of the 1991 United States boxing championships here last year, Sean Fletcher was a long way from this hub of Olympic activity.
Fletcher, 24 years old, was serving with the Navy during the Persian Gulf war.
"I was aboard the U.S.S. Theodore Roosevelt, the best aircraft carrier in the Navy," Fletcher recalled today.
"We were transporting ammunition and cargo."


Canada Court Says Pornography Harms Women
The Supreme Court of Canada yesterday ruled that although the nation's criminal obscenity law infringed on the freedom of expression, it was legitimate to outlaw pornography that was harmful to women.
In a unanimous decision, the court also redefined obscenity as sexually explicit material that involves violence or degradation.


30 Flavors, Big Smiles And the Fabulous 50's
IT doesn't look special.
It sits here tucked into the end of another strip mall on Tunxis Hill Road near another liquor store and another beauty parlor behind another rental video.
It could be another dry cleaners, which the building was once.
Except the sign says Doo Wop Ice Cream Shoppe.
Now, that's no computer creation.
Someone alive devised that, probably someone who was alive and breathing in the 1950's.
The Doo Wop is definitely not part of another chain whose ingredients are mixed in an industrial park outside Fort Worth.


Review/Film; Tale of Cuban Brothers in New York
About halfway through "The Mambo Kings," the adaptation of the Pulitzer Prize-winning novel by Oscar Hijuelos, there is a brief moment in which all of the elements work as they were meant to.
At a wedding reception, Celia Cruz, the veteran salsa performer who appears as a Harlem nightclub owner, can't restrain her good feelings.
Yet the Cuban-born Miss Cruz is a figure of light and shadow, a one-woman definition of chiaroscuro.
Her broad smile, the lightness of her walk, the easy way she carries herself become an expression of the exuberant Latin music that is the other side of the mismatched, melancholy lives of the film's Latin exiles.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon: Closing This Weekend
"PATTERNS OF PRESTIGE: THE DEVELOPMENT AND INFLUENCE OF THE SALTILLO SERAPE," Museum of American Folk Art, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street, Manhattan.
Forty blankets woven in northern Mexico in the 18th and 19th centuries.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Tuesday to Sunday, 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 977-7298.


People
*
Elizabeth Mason was named president of Friedman Benjamin Inc., New York.
She was senior vice president and director of business development at Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver, which closed. *
Richard W. Olsen was named executive vice president and management director responsible for the Little Caesars Pizza account at Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners, New York.
He rejoined the agency from Bozell Inc., New York, where he was senior vice president and management representative.


Review/Theater; A Losing Flight From The Demons Of the Past
"The Substance of Fire," originally produced by Playwrights Horizons, has reopened at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center.
Following are excerpts from Frank Rich's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 18, 1991.
One need not be a jaded constituent of New York's literati to recognize Isaac Geldhart, the esteemed publisher and embattled Jewish father who stands at the center of "The Substance of Fire," the new play by Jon Robin Baitz.
A childhood refugee from the "wrecked world" of the Holocaust, Isaac came to New York an orphan, reinvented himself as a bon vivant, and found fame and fortune as a rigorously independent champion of literary books that wouldn't be caught dead on a best-seller list.
By the late 1980's, when Mr.
Baitz's play unfolds, Isaac has long since been a brand name in the culture industry.
He is one of those survivors, of post-war American intellectual firestorms no less than Old Europe's bloodbaths, who run Manhattan with an iron tongue.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.93
6.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.91
3.92
6.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.96
4.00
6.07
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.99
6.98
7.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.84
7.84
8.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.84
8.87
9.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.78
6.78
7.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


What Comes Next, Pay-Per-View H-O-R-S-E?
The first pay-per-view event devoted entirely to retired, over-the-hill athletes (as opposed to boxing cards featuring recently unretired, over-the-hill pugilists) takes to an ersatz basketball court tonight when Kareem Abdul-Jabbar goes one on one in a halfcourt game against Julius Erving at an Atlantic City hotel owned by the over-the-hill real-estate developer Donald Trump.
"One on one is a part of the game that hasn't been put before the public in the right way," said Abdul-Jabbar, who will play four five-minute quarters against Erving.
"Now we can relate that to the people with great players."


Lottery Investors Unsure If Jackpot Was Virginia's
Four Australians who say they invested in a fund to play overseas lotteries also say they are expecting checks in the next few weeks.
But none of the investors say they know if the promised jackpot is from a Virginia game that drew unusual mass ticket purchases.
The investors had each sent about $3,000 to the International Lotto Fund, founded by Stefan Mandel of Melbourne, Australia.
The Australians, in telephone interviews, said the fund notified them last week that it had hit the jackpot in an overseas lottery.


White House Vows Action to Cut U.S. Global Warming Gases
The Bush Administration said today that it was taking actions that would significantly limit the United States' contribution to global warming and help developing countries address the problem.
Some environmentalists said the statement could lead to an agreement between the United States and the European Community on an issue that has deadlocked talks here on global warming: whether industrialized countries should commit themselves to stabilizing carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000 as the first step toward ultimately reducing them.


Tucker Joins Spurs
Looking for outside scoring punch, the San Antonio Spurs signed the former Knicks guard TRENT TUCKER to a 10-day contract yesterday.
Tucker, a nine-year N.B.A. veteran, replaces WILLIE ANDERSON, who is on the Spurs' injured list because of a stress fracture in his left shin. (AP)


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Book Notes column on Wednesday described the baseball careers of Nolan Ryan and Tom Seaver incorrectly in some copies.
They never pitched against each other.


Suit Seeks to Recoup Losses From Executive Life Failure
Seeking to recover hundreds of millions of dollars in losses from the collapse of the Executive Life Insurance Company, the California Insurance Commissioner today sued a host of companies and individuals, including Michael R. Milken and the insurer's former chief executive, Fred Carr.
The civil suit, filed in State Superior Court in Los Angeles, is the first effort by regulators to recoup some of the cost of bailing out Executive Life's policyholders.
The demise of Executive Life, brought on by losses in its junk bond portfolio, is expected to cost state guarantee funds and policyholders at least $1 billion and perhaps as much as $3 billion.


Sterling Optical Buyer Approved
A bankruptcy judge approved the sale of essentially all of the Sterling Optical Corporation's assets to Cohen Fashion Optical for $15 million, Sterling said.
The offer, approved Tuesday in United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York, supersedes a $10.5 million agreement the eyeglass retailer made with American Vision Centers Inc. in January.


Market Place; Funds Are Still Surging, But Pace Slows Slightly
Mutual fund investors appear to have pulled back slightly from the hectic pace of early 1992, when money was being put into long-term funds at the most rapid rate in five years.
Fund managers said yesterday that both bond and stock funds continued to pull in huge amounts of money in February, although not at January's rate.
"We are running at about half the pace of last month, but it is still a good month," said Jane White, a spokeswoman for the T. Rowe Price group of funds.
At the Vanguard Group, Brian Mattes said that cash flow was down substantially from January, but that February was still the company's third best month ever.


Researchers Retract Their Claim Of Producing Alzheimer's in Mice
Three scientists have retracted a striking claim that they had produced Alzheimer's disease in mice.
And the National Institutes of Health, which sponsored the research, has begun an inquiry into whether it should fully investigate the possibility of wrongdoing.
But one of the scientists, Dr.
Gerald Higgins of the National Institute on Aging, said in a telephone interview that the group had done nothing wrong.
"I assure you there has been no misconduct," he said.


Tarpley to the C.B.A.?
The former Dallas Maverick ROY TARPLEY, who was banned from the N.B.A. in October for at least two seasons under the league's anti-drug program, will get another chance with the Continental Basketball Association.
But not immediately.
"I talked to Roy this morning in Houston and he said he was not ready to play in the C.B.A. right now," said JOHN TRELOAR, coach of the C.B.A.
Wichita Falls Texans.
Tarpley and RICHARD DUMAS, a draft choice of the Phoenix Suns, were approved yesterday to play in the C.B.A. after completing drug programs at the John Lucas Treatment and Recovery Center in Houston.
Dumas, a former star at Oklahoma State, signed a contract yesterday to play with the Oklahoma City Cavalry.
He will be in uniform for the game tomorrow at Wichita Falls. (AP)


Traub Back in Business As Retailing Consultant
With characteristic flourish, Marvin S. Traub, the former chairman of Bloomingdale's, entered the consulting business yesterday.
Demonstrating his promotional abilities, Mr.
Traub hung out a shingle yesterday that was festooned with endorsements from the firm's first three clients, Federated Department Stores Inc., the American Express Company, and Jones New York, an apparel company.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Moving Toward a Crucial Round, Presidential Contest Turns Rough
Gov.Bill Clinton lashed out at former Senator Paul E. Tsongas today for "coldblooded" economics, while Mr.
Tsongas accused Mr.
Clinton of distorting his record and being too hot-tempered under fire.
The exchange marked a day when the candidates' gloves were off, their moods were snappish as the Presidential campaign lurched toward a critical round of primaries and caucuses this Tuesday in Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, Minnesota, Idaho, Utah and Washington.


Russia Gathering In A-Weapons Briskly
The transfer of all short-range nuclear weapons to Russia from other former Soviet republics will probably be completed by May, two months ahead of schedule, a senior Russian general said today.
Gen.
Sergei Zelentsov, chief nuclear engineer in the Russian Defense Ministry responsible for the withdrawal of about 3,000 tactical warheads outside Russia, described the new timetable here at a conference of nuclear scientists from the United States and the former Soviet Union.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about colleges on American Indian reservations misstated the affiliation of Richard C. Richardson Jr. in one reference.
As noted earlier in the article, he is a professor at Arizona State University.


Charity Leader's Success Was Also His Undoing
The key to William Aramony's downfall as leader of the United Way of America was the same key that opened the doors of prosperity for the organization for decades: he made the charity resemble a corporation.
Mr.
Aramony resigned today after disclosures about how he ran the United Way's national operation: creating profit-making affiliates that acquired luxurious condominiums, receiving annual compensation of nearly half a million dollars, flying the Concorde and riding in limousines.


At the Bar; To Attack A Lawyer In 'To Kill a Mockingbird': An Iconoclast Takes Aim At A Hero
In her prognostications for 1992, the psychic Jeanne Dixon predicted that "anti-lawyer riots will shake the profession." But could even the canniest clairvoyant have foreseen an attack on Atticus Finch?
Atticus Finch, the sagacious and avuncular lawyer-hero of Harper Lee's 1960 novel, "To Kill a Mockingbird," who earned the scorn of his segregated Southern town by defending a black man wrongly accused of rape?
Atticus Finch, who stood down a lynch mob that had come to collect his client one night at the Maycomb jail?
Atticus Finch, who taught a community and his two young children about justice, decency and tolerance, and who drove a generation of real-life Jems and Scouts to become lawyers themselves?


INSIDE
War on Drugs Short on Cash
President Bush and six Latin American nations vow to intensify their efforts, but make no pledges of more money for the fight.
Page A9.  2 Rms, Krmln Vu
A real-estate market is suddenly emerging in Moscow, as a new law makes it easier for people to own -- and sell -- apartments.
Page A10.
Aspin's Pentagon Plan Gains
Representative Les Aspin gained support for his plan to cut the Pentagon budget by about twice as much as the White House wants.
Page A12.
Canada and Pornography
The Supreme Court of Canada ruled that pornography that harms women can be suppressed.
Law, page B7.
S.
I.
Hayakawa Dies at 85
S.
I.
Hayakawa, the noted scholar on language usage who became a United States Senator, is dead.
Page B6.


After 2 Killings, a Plan for More School Security
One day after the shooting deaths of two students at Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez sought yesterday to calm fears and dampen anger by fashioning a plan to expand the use of metal detectors at the city's most troubled schools.
At an emotional meeting at which he described Wednesday as "one of the worst days of my life," the Chancellor told the city's 120 high-school principals that he was asking City Hall for money that would permit all 21 schools that are now visited weekly by metal-detector teams to receive those visits daily.
He also asked to include many other high schools in the weapons-detection program.
He suggested that he did not know how much of his blueprint would be approved.


Bernard Shanley, 88, Republican Who Aided President Eisenhower
Bernard M. Shanley, a top White House aide to President Dwight D. Eisenhower and a prominent New Jersey lawyer and politician, died on Tuesday at his home in Bernardsville, N.J.
He was 88 years old.
He died of natural causes after a brief illness, his family said.


Corrections
A brief article in the Company News columns of Business Day on Wednesday about United Telecommunications Inc.'s change of its name, to the Sprint Corporation, misstated the price paid by United Telecommunications last month to the GTE Corporation for the 19.9 percent of U S Sprint it did not already own.
It was $530 million.





On My Mind; After Saddam, What?
Two little words seem to fill Americans and our Government with such terror that we just cannot confront them.
They are: What then?
At home, if we spend a trillion or so more than we earn, what then?


Law Supports Reporters in Hill-Thomas Case; Counsel's Decision
To the Editor:
On Tuesday, Feb. 18, I hand delivered to William Safire a letter, copy enclosed, which read:


Pop/Jazz; Slightly Skewed Valentine
"We don't seem straightforward, but we are, really," says Kevin Shields of My Bloody Valentine, the British-Irish band that is to perform tomorrow night at the Ritz.
"Straightforward" may be the last word most listeners would use to describe the band's current album, "Loveless." The songs sound molten, edgeless; both the beat and the vocals are inundated by noise, some of it from guitars, some of it from less definable sources.
Within the clouds and swamps of sound are three-chord rock songs and words sung earnestly by Mr.
Shields or ethereally by Belinda Butcher, but the focus is radically different from most rock music.


Senate Rejects a Line-Item Veto
The Senate today rejected an effort by Republicans to give President Bush line-item veto authority to kill projects he opposes.
The 54-to-44 vote against the measure followed an impassioned eight-hour speech by Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, defending Congressional power over spending.


Miscellany
*
Smith/Greenland Inc., New York, acquired Marketing Alliance Inc., a sales promotion agency in New York.
Peter E. Heymann will continue as president.
Terms were not disclosed.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; In Response to Apology by Clinton, Jackson Takes a Jab
With a good showing in the Southern primaries crucial for Bill Clinton's continued vitality as a Presidential candidate, the Arkansas Governor could scarcely afford a rift with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.
When Mr.
Jackson was a Presidential candidate four years ago, he won six Southern primaries and placed second in two others with the help of an enthusiastic black vote.
So in hopes of not alienating Mr.
Jackson's core of support, Mr.
Clinton was eager today to smooth over any hard feelings he might have provoked with harsh words about Mr.
Jackson that were picked up by an open television microphone on Wednesday.


Isabelle Siegel, Sculptor, 49
Isabelle Siegel, a sculptor, died on Tuesday at her home in Santa Fe, N.M.
She was 49 years old.
She took her own life, her family said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The South; For Southerners, Issues Go Beyond the Economy
At the County Cork Pub, the owner, Art Fessenden, says the economy is probably Topic A when people think about politics, but it is not topic A, B and C the way it was in New Hampshire.
"You have people here, middle management people, that have been hit very hard, but I don't think the economy is the only thing they're thinking about," he said.


Knicks Nipped By Kings, 110-109
The Knicks ended their West Coast trip with a bitter defeat.
Mitch Richmond deflected the ball out of John Starks's hands as he attempted to take a 22-foot jumper before the buzzer, and the Knicks fell to the Sacramento Kings, 110-109.
The Knicks (34-22) finished 0-3 on their trip.
And Coach Pat Riley benched small forward Xavier McDaniel, who did not score, for the entire second half.


Art in Review
Morris Louis  Andre Emmerich Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
The dozen canvases in this exhibition are some of Morris Louis's least-known and most impressive paintings.
They were among the works in shows that the artist organized in 1959 and 1960 with the critic Clement Greenberg at French &amp; Company, the gallery, now defunct, where Mr.
Greenberg served as adviser.
Most of the works here are from those two years; "Longitude" is one of the paintings from 1954 that was included in the first show at French &amp; Company.


Stay the Course. What Course?
In the wake of George Bush's near-disastrous 53-to-37 percent win over Patrick Buchanan in New Hampshire and an embarrassing 61-to-39 percent win over Nobody At All in South Dakota, campaign commentators all say he must quickly recast his campaign.
One other thing needs reshaping first: his Presidency.
The voters of New Hampshire and South Dakota, like a lot of Americans, suffer deep anxieties.
They worry about jobs, health, education and the erosion of America's skills and competitiveness.
They sense a loss of will and direction and they expect more from their President than banalities ("Message: I care") and a cameo appearance by Arnold Schwarzenegger.


TRANSACTIONS
College
BAYLOR -- Announced the resignations of Skip Cox, associate athletic director, and Marie Abel, assistant athletic director.


Retiring United Way Head Is Defended
Several board members of The United Way of America today continued to defend the salary and management practices of the organization's president even as he cleared out his office to make room for a senior vice president who will do his job while a permanent replacement is found.
Three members of the group's governing board who agreed to be interviewed today said that although they had not been members of the committee that set the salary-and-benefits package of $463,000 for the president, William Aramony, the compensation was justified by his tenure, his talent and the vastness of the organization.


CHRONICLE
Another Florida judge, MARY E. LUPO, who presided over the rape trial of William Kennedy Smith in December, will go to New England in April to preside over a mock trial at Yale Law School.
The Thomas Swan Barrister's Union, the student organization that arranges mock civil and criminal trials before juries drawn from the New Haven area, said the case she is to hear on April 24 has yet to be decided.
"Judge Lupo was in the news at the time we were sending out feelers to various judges around the country," said GRANT DORFMAN, a third-year law student who is a director of the Barrister's Union.
"She was definitely someone we wanted to have. We thought she handled herself with considerable grace in a difficult situation."


Bader E. Howar Has Wedding
Bader Elizabeth Howar, the daughter of Edmond N. Howar of Washington and Barbara Howar of Raleigh, N.C., was married yesterday in Santa Monica, Calif., to Thomas Courtney Thayer, the son of Jeanne Thayer of New York and the late Walter N. Thayer.
The Rev.
Charles Orr, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at Michael's Restaurant.


Into the Unknown: AIDS Patients Test Drugs
Every morning and night, Jeff S. swallows a white, oval-shaped capsule that could make him ill with nausea and diarrhea or, worse, cause nerve damage in his hands and feet.
But the drug, never before tested in humans, could also stop the virus that causes AIDS from reproducing in his body.
To Jeff S., who is gay and who tested positive for H.I.V. five years ago, the trade-off of taking part in a drug trial -- the risk of the unknown for the possibility of an effective treatment -- is well worth it.


Love Takes Lead as Woods Exits
Davis Love 3d fired a scintillating eight-under-par 63 today to take a four-stroke lead after 36 holes of the Nissan Los Angeles Open, but 16-year-old Tiger Woods shot a 75 and failed to qualify for the final two rounds.
Love's two-day total of 12-under 130 over the Riviera Country Club course broke the previous 36-hole tournament record of 11 under par set by Gibby Gilbert in 1983 and matched by Michael Allen in 1990.
Love's closest pursuers are Sandy Lyle and Tom Sieckmann at 134 and the 1990 champion, Fred Couples, and Rocco Mediate at 135.


Veteran Firefighter Is Saluted at His Funeral


Review/Music; That Special Sound of the Vienna
Before hearing the Vienna Philharmonic play in Carnegie Hall on Thursday night, I visited an exhibition Carnegie is mounting in honor of the orchestra's 150th anniversary.
In a glass case, not far from Gustav Mahler's cap, Beethoven's ring and Wilhelm Furtwangler's baton, is a gold ring like the one presented each player on his 25th year with the orchestra.
Intertwined in the ring's delicate filigree are the letters in the organization's German name.
The curves of one letter are the lines of another; so thoroughly are the individual figures combined that it takes some effort to decipher their different forms.
There could hardly be a better icon for the Vienna Philharmonic, which, as it showed yet again on Thursday, can create a nearly seamless sound out of its assemblage of virtuosic talents.
One of the world's great musical instruments, it is a self-governing body, without a permanent music director.
All decisions are made democratically, and all new members must pass an audition before the entire orchestra.
It is a tradition-bound organization, founded to offer the Viennese middle class music that was once the reserve of the aristocracy, and creating, in turn, its own fraternal aristocracy.
The ceremonial ring is just one sign of a tradition that treats membership (entirely male) not as a job but as a trust, binding together generations and individuals.


One Killed And 3 Injured In a Shooting In a Pool Hall
One man was killed and three others were wounded when gunfire erupted in a pool hall on East 12th Street in lower Manhattan last night, the police said.
Two police detectives on their way into their office in the next building happened on the scene at the moment the shooting erupted.
They immediately arrested three men who backed out of the Le Q pool hall door still firing their weapons and tried to flee in a gold-colored car, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen.


China's Somewhat Capitalist Road
Beijing newspaper commentaries this week signal a new drive by Deng Xiaoping to put China back on the capitalist road, ending a two-and-a-half-year detour into Socialist stagnation.
Mr.
Deng's new course deserves American encouragement but not blind support.
The Senate's vote Tuesday to impose a whole list of impossible conditions on China's trading privileges won't help.
But neither does President Bush's repeated refusal to press any conditions on the Chinese leadership.


School Board Says Security Money Went to Cuts
The Board of Education received $31.5 million from City Hall this year to expand school security, but used most of it for general expenses after the Dinkins administration cut its regular allocation by $28.4 million, according to letters released yesterday.
The letters, from school officials to City Hall, appear to clear up a dispute over whether City Hall took back Safe Street Lottery money intended for an expansion of the metal detectors last year.
The dispute intensified after the fatal shootings of two students Wednesday at Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn, where metal detectors were not in use.


Panel Urges Tests for Cholesterol That Helps Prevent Heart Disease
A National Institutes of Health panel said today that all adults should be tested to determine their levels of a type of cholesterol that helps protect against heart disease.
The panel, which spent three days examining what is known about cholesterol levels and health, said anyone being tested to determine their total blood cholesterol count should also find out what proportion of it is so-called good cholesterol, as high-density lipoprotein, or HDL, cholesterol is known.


Review/Dance; More of Mozart, With Minnie and Mickey
Mostly too much Mozart?
Like Peter Martins in his recent "Delight of the Muses" for the New York City Ballet, Eliot Feld has taken an irreverent tack toward a sacred bicentennial cow, a year late.
"Wolfgang Strategies," which was given its premiere by the Feld Ballets/NY on Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street) tries, at best, to say something fresh about two familiar Mozart symphonies.
The title reportedly comes from the choreographer's "strategies" for translating the music into dancing.


Beliefs
Two years ago, the Supreme Court ruled in a 6-to-3 vote that the State of Oregon was justified in denying unemployment benefits to two American Indians who had lost their state jobs as drug counselors because they had participated in a religious ritual involving ingestion of peyote, an illegal drug.
Many people might consider that case, which bore the forgettable title Employment Division v.
Smith, either impossibly technical or faintly exotic.
But to many groups concerned with religious liberty, the case was an alarm bell.
The Supreme Court was petitioned to reconsider its decision by an improbable alliance that united the American Civil Liberties Union with the National Association of Evangelicals, and that encompassed Southern Baptists, Mormons and Jews. .


Barenboim as Pianist
A festival of video screenings devoted to the artistry of the pianist Daniel Barenboim will take place today at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Four screenings, at 1, 3, 5 and 7 P.M., will feature Mr.
Barenboim performing piano sonatas by Beethoven.
Tickets are $5.
Information: (212) 570-3945.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Florida; Where the Immediate Forecast Is Sunny for Bush but Cloudy for Democrats
A week and a half before the primary voting, George Bush seems poised to win all the Republican delegates from Florida, the fourth largest block in the country, but the Democratic picture is much more clouded.
Bill Clinton has far and away the best organization and the most money to spend among the Democrats, and the campaigns of his competitors have not taken root here.
But this large, diverse and rapidly growing state has a history of election surprises.
Few experts rule out the possibility that Mr.
Clinton could be overtaken on March 10, "Super Tuesday."


Returning Knicks Are Just One Big Riddle
The Knicks returned home yesterday after a three-game West Coast trip that yielded no victories and raised serious questions.
Can the Knicks (34-22), who have a 4-6 record since the All-Star Game break, figure out why they have slipped?


Sports of The Times; The Twists And Turns of Carl Lewis
Who is Carl Lewis, really?
Is he the comet with the flattop haircut?
Or the high-flying meteor with a ponytail and dreadlocks?


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Minnesota; Caucus or Primary? In One State, Confused Voters Get Both
This may be the state that prides itself as a champion of good government, but the way its voters will pick who they want for President this year is about as long, enduring and difficult to get through as Minnesota winters.
The confusion starts on Tuesday, when eligible voters go to schools, churches, recreation centers and other meeting places for precinct caucuses, as a small fraction of Minnesotans have for decades.
But that is not the end of it.
On April 7, the state will stage its first Presidential primary since 1956.
And for the first time in at least 50 years, Minnesota voters will have to declare their party affiliation at the polling stations.


The Editorial Notebook; Amid Alligators, High Tech
The expedition into Florida alligator territory chugged slowly through mangrove swamps where egrets lurk in the bushes like wraiths and herons occasionally glide overhead.
The leafless gray trees that rise above offer perches for motionless black birds sitting like vultures on the lookout.
But there seemed no reason to worry.
Slow speed was urged, to protect the cowlike manatee from propeller scrapes.
The worn 15-foot fishing boat, powered by an outboard motor, covered only by a six-foot spread of canvas overhead, carried a pair of oars and, incongruously, the latest in high tech -- a cellular telephone.


No Headline
To the Editor:
When Eric Bogosian (Op-Ed, Feb. 10) says the House Un-American Activities Committee went after the Work Projects Administration theater program "in the late 1940's," he is off by a decade.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Dr.
Oscar T. Broneer referred incorrectly to an archeologist who succeeded him as director of the University of Chicago's excavations at Isthmia, Greece.
She is Dr.
Elizabeth Gebhard.


Study for Mayor Details Bills of Ex-Housing Chief
A nonprofit foundation created with $9,000 from the New York City Housing Authority was used principally to help pay for an inauguration celebration for the former housing chairwoman, Laura D. Blackburne, and to pay for her trip to South Africa with Mayor David D. Dinkins last November, an investigation by the Mayor's office has concluded.
While Mr.
Dinkins has publicly rebuked Ms.
Blackburne for taking money from the foundation when his aides had explicitly warned her that it would be improper to do so, the investigation indicates that the foundation was established soley to finance Ms.
Blackburne's expenses.


Patents; Improved Car Jack Powered by Lighter
Edward M. Lonon, a nurse in East Orange, N.J., patented a mechanized car jack that lifts a corner of a car with power from the automobile's electric cigarette lighter.
Jacks have been powered by cigarette lighters before, Mr.
Lonon said, but asserted that they have been cumbersome and complicated to assemble.
The new device is intended to fit into a car's ordinary manual jack and essentially replaces the lug wrench that is used to crank the jack.


Classical Music in Review
Cynthia Phelps Violist Weill Recital Hall


3 Held in Attack on Bishop
Two teen-agers and a 20-year-old man were charged yesterday with shooting a Greek Orthodox Bishop in Brooklyn Wednesday night, the police said.
The Bishop, Alexios Panagiotopoulos, was shot in the stomach during a robbery attempt near his home in Crown Heights.
He was in stable condition at Kings County Hospital yesterday, a hospital spokeswoman said.
The police said the attack on the bishop was one of a series of robberies committed by a group of youths in a 16-hour period.


Dow Ends Busy Week With Yawn, Off 1.78
Stock prices were flat yesterday in choppy trading.
Concluding a roller-coaster week that included two new records and two retreats, the Dow Jones industrial average ended at 3,267.67, off 1.78 points for the day and 12.52 for the week.
Dennis Jarrett, chief market analyst with Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, said he noted some profit taking by investors and a little program trading late in the afternoon.
"This weakness in equities should not last, given the strength developing in the bond market," he said.
The firm bond market had helped to underpin stocks for most of the trading session.


Congress Has Long Poked Its Nose in the Arts; One Man's Vulgarity
To the Editor:
Eric Bogosian's "Un-American Activities" (Op-Ed, Feb. 10) rightly criticizes the rejection by the National Endowment for the Arts of a grant to Franklin Furnace, an experimental arts center.
What Mr.
Bogosian does not mention, however, is that Congress paved the way for that rejection, by insisting that the endowment "take into consideration general standards of decency" in judging grant applications.


Shift in Drug Summitry: U.S. No Longer Dictates
At the close of a summit meeting here on drug problems in the Americas, a Bolivian journalist asked President Bush why he was so insistent on the use of armed force in the drug war and so resistant to economic strategies.
The question was an echo of what Mr.
Bush had been hearing for two days from the leaders of the six Latin American countries attending the conference.


Who's the Phone For? Depends on the Ring
Anyone with teen-agers in the house knows how annoying it can be to pick up a ringing phone only to find out, once again, that it's not for you.
Or if you have small children, you understand how embarrassing it can be to get a business call and discover that your 4-year-old has already picked up the receiver and explained that you are in the bath or yelling at your spouse.
To help avoid such irritations, regional telephone companies are gradually introducing a service for the home that lets you know, by the ring pattern, what kind of call you are receiving.
Tested first in 1989 by BellSouth, the service is now spreading slowly through the Northeast.


Bill Would Allow Towns to Set Nightly Curfews and Punish Parents of Violators
A bill that would allow municipalities to impose curfews to ban teen-agers from the streets after 10 P.M. and fine parents who fail to keep them home is moving through the New Jersey Legislature.
The bill's author, Senator Ronald L. Rice, a Democrat and former Newark police detective, said the bill was primarily intended to make parents responsible for their children.
Parents of curfew violators could face fines of as much as $1,000 or court-ordered community service.


G.D.P. Gain Is Revised Up to 0.8%
The nation's economy grew at a faster rate in the fourth quarter than was previously reported, the Government said today, but the pace of growth was still sluggish.
The Commerce Department revised the annual rate of growth upward to eight-tenths of a percent, from an estimate of three-tenths of 1 percent made a month earlier.
The change largely reflected a buildup in inventories rather than new strength in the economy.


Building Code Revision Needed for Entryways
To the Editor:
Some time has passed since the tragic deaths at the celebrity basketball game at New York's City College, and fingers have been pointed at nearly everyone with any responsibility for the event.
Even so, I need to point in yet another direction that could have prevented the tragedy, namely the physical design of the gymnasium entrance.


Taiwan May Trim Bid For McDonnell to 25%
An executive of the Taiwan Aerospace Corporation was quoted today as saying the company might purchase as little as 25 percent of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation's commercial aircraft business, rather than the 40 percent the companies originally anticipated.
McDonnell Douglas and Taiwan Aerospace have said since the deal was announced last year that Taiwan Aerospace might opt to take less than 40 percent.
But the suggestion that Taiwan Aerospace might decide on 25 percent seemed to confirm speculation that the deal is encountering political and financial problems in Taiwan.


EXECUTIVE
*
Aldus Corp., Seattle, a software designer, named Edward Walter vice president of engineering. *
American Olean Tile Company, Lansdale, Pa., a unit of Armstrong World Industries, named Robert J. Shannon president, succeeding William L. Snyder, who resigned to become president and chief executive of Rinker Materials Corporation, West Palm Beach, Fla.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Kerrey and Clinton See Their Roles Reversing
Gallant visits the sick in hospitals and talks to fifth-graders about patriotism and friendship.
Goofus calls Jesse Jackson a backstabber on an open microphone.


Vincent Says No To Choice of McCarthy
Lawsuits not only continue to foil George Steinbrenner's attempts to return as head of the Yankees, but they also appear to have tripped up his designated successor, Daniel R. McCarthy.
Yesterday, McCarthy's bid to become managing general partner of the Yankees was rejected by Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball and the man McCarthy sued in 1990 in a failed attempt to save Steinbrenner's reign as Yankees boss.


Chairman Is Selected For First Data Corp.
The First Data Corporation said yesterday that Henry C. (Ric) Duques would be chairman and chief executive of the renamed American Express information services unit that he helped to build.
First Data, based in New York, plans to sell a 45 percent interest to the public in April, for about $1 billion.
Mr.
Duques (pronounced doo-KEZ) had been president of the American Express Information Services Corporation.
Its businesses include computerized processing of credit cards for American and British banks -- but not for the American Express card division -- and handling transactions for hospitals, mutual funds, television cable companies and "800"-number telemarketing firms.


The Message of Millicent's Death
How well do New York City authorities protect children?
The question arises once again because of the recent death of 6-year-old Millicent Ayala, allegedly at the hands of her aunt and foster mother.
The question is depressingly hard to answer because the state's confidentiality law limits access to information in child abuse cases.
As this tragedy demonstrates anew, the law needs reform.
Since March 1989, Millicent and a younger sister had been in the care of an aunt, Mary Ann Ayala, because of neglect by their mother.
Millicent died when, according to court records, the aunt struck her with a shoe, placed her in a tub of cold water "for an extended period of time," and then taped her mouth shut.
Ms.
Ayala has been charged with the murder of Millicent and the attempted murder of her 4-year-old sister.


Washington Memo; Congress Anxiously Waits to See House Bank's Deadbeat List
The televised debates on the floor of the House this week were about taxes, Presidential politics and Haitian refugees.
But the impassioned whispers in the corridors and cloakrooms were about another question: Who will be on list of the House Bank deadbeats?
With Congress in a defensive mood and an election just over the horizon, a few bad checks loom as more career-threatening than an anemic economic recovery plan and more embarrassing than a botched campaign speech.


Herschel B. Chipp, Art Historian And Picasso Expert, Dies at 78
Herschel B. Chipp, an art historian and authority on the work of Pablo Picasso, died on Feb. 8 at Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in San Francisco.
He was 78 years old and lived in San Francisco.
He had been hospitalized several weeks earlier after a stroke, a spokesman for the University of California at Berkeley said.


Ciba to Pay New Jersey For Illegal Waste Dumping
In a court-approved settlement, the Ciba-Geigy Corporation agreed today to pay New Jersey $62 million to end seven years of litigation over the giant chemical company's violation of state environmental regulations at its Toms River plant.
State officials said the agreement saved 6 to 10 years of court battles and produced both money and an increased commitment from the company to clean up its 14,000-acre site.
The company had been accused of illegally dumping laboratory wastes, polluting groundwater and filing false reports.
It pleaded guilty today only to the dumping but also agreed to pay other cleanup costs.


For 3 Yankee Pitchers, Bloom Is Off Throws
Last spring's phenoms are a year older and a year wiser.
And they are no longer the talk of Yankee camp.
Now, new names come up.
The sudden wave of enthusiasm over pitchers Wade Taylor and Jeff Johnson is over.
If they don't win a job in the starting rotation this spring, it's back to Columbus.


Democrats Assail Quayle On Welfare
In a swelling chorus of outrage that was colored by partisanship, New Yorkers -- at least Democratic politicians -- today lambasted Vice President Dan Quayle and called his criticism of the state and its welfare system little more than a thinly disguised appeal to racism.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said Mr.
Quayle's stinging rebuke on Thursday of New York's "liberal economics" and its welfare system should have made the audience ill and was part of a calculated political effort to blame the recession on the unemployed.


Prospect and Poet Cross Paths at Brooklyn School
The letters come from athletic departments of distant colleges no one in the home has heard of.
The telephone rings and suddenly there is one-sided conversation with men who want Antonio Carrasquillo, a high school senior taking mostly sophomore courses, to know more about their schools of higher education.
"Sometimes it's hard to believe that they're calling up about me," said Carrasquillo, the starting center for the Lafayette High School basketball team.


Review/Film; Mixture of Kitsch and Camp
"La Paloma" was shown as part of the 1974 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Nora Sayre's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 9, 1974.
The film, in German with English subtitles, opens today at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street in Manhattan.
When you play with cliches, you have to be very careful that they don't backfire; the little things have a way of maiming almost everything around them.


Los Angeles Shortens List for Police Chief Post
A citizens panel today chose five officials from within the Los Angeles Police Department and the police commissioner of Philadelphia as finalists to replace Chief Daryl F. Gates when he retires in June.
The choices raise the possibility that an outsider will head the department for the first time in more than half a century and that the department will get its first black police chief.


A Wake-up Call for City Hall
How many more knocks must the Dinkins administration absorb before it realizes that quick fixes won't solve its fiscal problems?
The latest bad news was an implicit warning from bond rating agencies that they would downgrade New York City's bonds if the city relied on borrowed money to plug its budget gap.
So the city scaled back its borrowing plans, saying it would make up the difference with a patchwork quilt of savings -- including $100 million from the Municipal Assistance Corporation and money from the city's reserve fund, its fiscal safety net.


E.P.A. Is Called Lax With Contractor
The Inspector General of the Environmental Protection Agency said today that mismanagement had enabled the agency's largest contractor to gain control of virtually all of its computerized information systems and may have led to millions of dollars in improper payments to the company.
In a 205-page report, John Martin, the Inspector General, said the contractor, the Computer Sciences Corporation, a computer services company whose headquarters are in El Segundo, Calif., functioned as a private government within the environmental agency by developing and operating its most sensitive computerized information and data retrieval systems without supervision.


Philadelphia's Williams Banned for Two Games
On Thursday night in Charlotte, N.C., the Philadelphia 76ers suffered the worst loss in their history.
Yesterday, they lost JAYSON WILLIAMS for two games for fighting, and Williams took a beating in the wallet as well from the National Basketball Association.
ROD THORN, the N.B.A. vice president of operations, announced yesterday that Williams, a former St.
John's forward, had been suspended for two games and fined $10,000 for leaving the bench, going onto the court and starting a fight night by punching the Hornets' J. R. REID in the head.


Dr. Anne Forbes, 80, Endocrinology Pioneer
Anne Pappenheimer Forbes, a noted endocrinology researcher and clinician, died on Tuesday at her home in Milton, Mass.
She was 80 years old.
She died of Hodgkin's disease, her family said.


Thumb-in-Fish Case Solved
A severed thumb that turned up in the stomach of a lake trout has been traced to its owner.
Mike Vase, the Sweetwater County coroner, said Thursday that he had confirmed that the thumb belongs to 32-year-old Robert Lindsey, of Green River.
It was found on Feb. 13, when a fisherman caught the trout.
Mr.
Lindsey said he lost his thumb and index and middle fingers in a boating accident on the Flaming Gorge Reservoir south of Green River on July 27.
The fingers were found and reattached, he said.


Fight After Fight
The police intervened in a domestic dispute between TERRY NORRIS, the World Boxing Council super-welterweight champion, and his pregnant wife, KELLY NORRIS, at a San Diego hotel after an all-night celebration of his latest title defense, officials said yesterday.
The dispute occurred Sunday morning after Norris defeated CARL DANIELS in the ninth round Saturday night.
A police spokesman, BILL ROBINSON, said the dispute began when Kelly Norris arrived at the San Diego Princess Resort Hotel, where her husband spent the night celebrating.


Reformulated Gas: Cleaner and Greener
The tiger in your tank is about to be reformulated.
Federal and state air-pollution regulations have already required some changes in gasoline around the nation, and many more are coming by 1995.
The object is to clean up what comes out of the tailpipe.
The question is: How will the engine like it?


Thomas Lifts Islanders in Overtime
Steve Thomas was the big hero for the Islanders tonight in their clash with the Devils and the stretch run to the playoffs.
The left wing tied the score in the third period and scored in the overtime to give the Islanders a 3-2 triumph.
The victory before a sellout crowd at Byrne Meadowlands Arena brought the Islanders within a point of the last playoff spot in the Patrick Division, currently occupied by the faltering Penguins, the defending Stanley Cup champions.


CHRONICLE
KITTY DUKAKIS, the wife of MICHAEL S. DUKAKIS, the former Massachusetts Governor who was the 1988 Democratic Presidential nominee, stood beside a defendant in a drug trial in West Palm Beach, Fla., on Wednesday and asked the judge to give the woman a second chance.
Mrs.
Dukakis, who has acknowledged her own struggles with alcoholism and pill addiction, made a special appearance in Palm Beach County Circuit Court before Judge RICHARD WENNET when JOYCE FRIES, 35 years old, pleaded guilty to drug charges.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.00
6.35
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.92
3.91
6.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.97
3.96
6.12
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.91
6.99
7.97
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.79
7.84
8.27
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.84
9.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.76
6.78
7.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Educators and Tests
To the Editor:
As you report in "Prominent Educators Oppose National Tests" (Education page, Jan. 29), I joined more than 50 other educators and testing experts in signing a statement advocating "dramatically higher educational standards," and opposing a single national test.
Unfortunately, you imply that the statement opposes the recommendations of the National Council on Education Standards and testing, which was chartered by Congress and on which I served.
The statement does not mention the council report, but is consistent with it.
As I testified before the House Subcommittee on Elementary and Secondary Education on Feb. 4, I strongly support the report.


They Live Undeterred By Turner's Syndrome
To the Editor:
"In Late Abortions Decisions Are Painful and Options Few" (front page, Jan. 5), regarding third-trimester abortions, contains inaccurate and misleading information about Turner's Syndrome.
This is a chromosomal condition that is found in approximately 1 of every 2,500 live female births.


Marion F. Schappel, A Bank Executive, 67
Marion F. Schappel, a retired vice president at Citibank and one of the first women there to reach that rank, died on Wednesday at her home in Somers, N.Y.
She was 67 years old.
She died of complications of cancer, her family said.


Connecticut Police Get First Black Leader
Lieut.
Col.
Joseph A. Perry Jr., a black career officer who rose through the ranks of the still nearly all-white Connecticut State Police, was named the department's commander today, the first minority officer ever to hold the top job.
He takes over at one of the most difficult times in the department's history.
The 991-member force lost about 8 percent of its sworn officers today -- about 80 of the most senior people -- through an early retirement program intended to save the state money.
Colonel Perry, who is 49 years old, is himself replacing an early retiree, Col.
Ray Ouellette, who is 45.


A New Bike Harnesses The Best of All Possible Wheels
Inventors have toyed with two-wheel-drive bicycles in the past, burdening them with extra chains or convoluted gears that hampered motion.
Now an inventor in Illinois has created a surprisingly simple two-wheel-drive bike, which he says is far superior to its rear-wheel-driven predecessors.
A steel cable connects the back wheel to a small gear on the hub of the front wheel, spreading some of the pedal power.
John Kukoda, road test editor at Bicycling Magazine, said this gives greater front-wheel stability on slippery surfaces and easier hill climbing.


In Wine, a Fledgling Venture by Mail
Huib Geerlings, a Dutch accountant working in Boston, decided there had to be a more satisfying way to make a living than figuring corporate taxes.
So in 1987, he fused his dual passions, wine and computers, into a business that is popular in Europe but not big in the United States: selling wine by mail.


Son of Deposed Charity Head Wants to Keep His Own Job
Before the president of United Way of America resigned under pressure on Thursday, he had been criticized for creating a network of profit-making affiliate companies and installing associates, including his son, in top positions in them.
Today, the president's son defended the practice and said he wanted to keep his job running one of those companies.
Robert Aramony, the son of the deposed president, said he does not want to give up running a catalogue sales operation that was created in 1990 under United Way's auspices.


Congress Has Long Poked Its Nose in the Arts; No-Confidence Vote
To the Editor:
I am surprised that Eric Bogosian, who begins "Un-American Activities" (Op-Ed, Feb. 10) by complaining that the experimental arts center Franklin Furnace had its National Endowment for the Arts grant canceled because some of Franklin Furnace's work is sexually explicit, ends by objecting to a denial of funds even on the ground that the performance in the grant application was judged by the endowment to be "lousy" and "not art."


Corrections
A music review on Feb. 17 about a concert by the Kronos Quartet at Alice Tully Hall on Feb. 15 misidentified the composer of "Roll Over Beethoven." The song is by Chuck Berry, not the Beatles.


No Headline
METRO DIGEST  EXPERIMENTS IN HOPE


Carpentras Journal; Counterfeit Truffles Scandalize Southern France
In the towns and villages of medieval Provence, the ancient battle between good and evil has taken on the form of a fungus that for centuries has been uprooted by pigs and eaten by noblemen.
At issue is the reputation of the black truffle, an underground mushroom known for its penetrating scent, its role in fine cooking and its exorbitant prices.
In the south of France, truffles are serious business.


Patents; New Test for Risk Of Heart Problems
American Biogenetic Sciences Inc., a fledgling biotechnology company in Notre Dame, Ind., has patented a new test to determine a person's risk of suffering strokes and heart attacks.
The test employs a customized antibody that attaches to a protein called fibrinogen in blood plasma and allows it to be measured.
Fibrinogen is believed to play a role in forming blood clots, which cause strokes and heart attacks when they break loose from the side of a blood vessel and then obstruct a key artery.


Justice Dept. Clears Merger Of 2 Big West Coast Banks
The BankAmerica Corporation, by promising to increase the number of branches and amount of deposits it will divest itself of, has obtained the Justice Department's approval for its pending acquisition of the Security Pacific Corporation.
BankAmerica also reached a separate agreement today with the Attorney General of the State of Washington, and together the pacts sweep away two of the biggest obstacles remaining to the merger.
The deal has raised antitrust concerns because it would create a banking behemoth that would dwarf its competitors in the Western states.
The merger is still subject to the approval of the Federal Reserve Board.


Patents; For Haters Of Jangling Pocket Cash
ALTHOUGH futurists have predicted for decades that a cashless society was at hand, the fact remains that stray coins still weigh down pockets and collect in jars, drawers and at the bottom of purses.
For most people this is not a problem, but it has been weighing for a long time on the mind of Michael Rossides, an inventor in Washington.


Corrections
A listing of cultural events in Weekend yesterday misstated the location for a chamber concert by members of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra.
The concert, at 4 P.M. tomorrow, will be at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church at 73d Street.


China Gives Light Sentences To Advocates of Democracy
China said today that it had handed down relatively short sentences for 11 protesters tried recently in connection with the Tiananmen Square demonstrations of 1989 and subsequent democracy protests.
These are believed to be among the last cases of people who have been held without trial for more than two years after the military crackdown on June 4, 1989.
The sentences, reported in Ta Kung Pao, a Hong Kong newspaper controlled by Beijing, ranged from immediate release to five years in prison.
Sketchy details on some of the convictions were provided earlier this week in Beijing by people familiar with some of the defendants' families.


Donald P. Ruddy, 38, A Furniture Designer
Donald P. Ruddy, a designer of furniture and accessories and the publisher of a portfolio of art by people with AIDS, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 38 years old.
Mr.
Ruddy died of complications from AIDS, including Kaposi's sarcoma, said his companion, Edgardo Heydra.


Your Money; An Alternative To Chasing Yields
BECAUSE of the plunge in interest rates in the last year, many Americans are searching for investments with higher yields than the 4 or 5 percent that now typifies certificates of deposit, money market funds and similar conservative holdings.
But in doing so, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants says, many are overlooking a more useful financial strategy: pay down consumer debt.
"Lower interest rates should compel most consumers to pay off consumer debt that is accumulating at double-digit rates, as opposed to collecting 5 percent on savings," said Howard Safer, managing partner of Kraft Brothers, Esstman, Patton &amp; Harrel of Nashville, who has earned the institute's accreditation as a personal financial specialist.


G.M. Agrees to Build Opel Cars in Poland
General Motors Europe agreed today to a $75 million joint venture in Poland, a long-awaited move that Polish officials hope will accelerate the lagging pace of Western investment there.
The deal, one of the largest investments in Poland since the fall of Communism, calls for General Motors to create a separate company in partnership with FSO, a heavily indebted state-owned concern in Warsaw.
FSO, Poland's main maker of midsized cars, has been seeking an injection of foreign cash and expertise since the 1980's.


South America Is Attached to Democracy
To the Editor:
Allow me to amplify on "Warning Shots From Caracas" (editorial, Feb. 5), which refers to Brazil in the course of congratulating the embattled Venezuelan Government of President Carlos Andres Perez for having barely survived a coup attempt.
Whom are you warning?
The enemies of democracy or democratically elected governments?


Cleaning Service Does More Than Windows
Dr. Ruth Aaron came into this world more than 91 years ago, and left it on Feb. 4.
She left behind a rather frayed mink coat, three dozen pairs of slippers given to her on Swiss Air flights, piles of well-thumbed books in five languages and a fascinating little silver contraption to slice sugar cubes to exactly the dimensions one prefers for one's tea.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Browning-Ferris Industries, Houston, a solid and chemical waste company, received a $210 million contract from the City of Philadelphia to dispose of its municipal solid waste. *
Mid Am Inc., Bowling Green, Ohio, a financial services holding company, and Ultra Bancorp, Xenia, Ohio, a savings holding company, entered a preliminary merger agreement under which Ultra will be merged into a newly formed subsidiary of Mid Am.


Keep Only the Globes
To the Editor:
I partly agree with Christopher McLaughlin (letter, Feb. 8) about leaving the Pan Am signs on the building to memorialize Pan Am's role in American aviation.
But I suggest retaining the east and west globe logos and removing the Pan Am signs from the north and south facades.
These, in my opinion, detract from the backdrop the structure provides for the illuminated Helmsley Building and the floodlighted Grand Central Terminal.
ERIC L. PLOEN Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., Feb. 10, 1992


Gotti Witness Says His View Was Brief
A prosecution witness who testified that he saw an associate of John Gotti at the scene of the murder of Paul Castellano conceded under cross-examination yesterday that he saw the man's face for only a split second.
The witness was Angel Rodriguez, a 36-year-old messenger who testified on Thursday that he saw the shooting on Dec. 16, 1985, when Mr.
Castellano and a close aide were slain on East 46th Street in Manhattan.
At Mr.
Gotti's racketeering-murder trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, Mr.
Rodriguez said he saw the face of one of the men as they walked past him.


Dinkins Rebuts Criticism on Civil Rights
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday defended his handling of a black-led boycott of a Korean market in 1990 after the release of a Federal report that repeated the criticism, raised often in the past, that he did not respond quickly enough to the crisis.
The critique of the Mayor came in a five-page section of a 234-page report by the United States Civil Rights Commission on discrimination against Asian-Americans across the nation.
The report was released yesterday in New York City.


An 'Unknown Quantity' Heads the Welsh Opera
Nearly every major British opera company has had a new chief administrator appointed in the last year.
But no appointment caused greater comment than that of Matthew Epstein in August as general director of the Welsh National Opera.
This is partly because the Welsh National is the most prestigious and accomplished of Britain's regional companies.
It's partly because Mr.
Epstein is a famous person in international opera.
But it's also because within the clubby world of British opera, Mr.
Epstein is an outsider: an American, a New Yorker and a homosexual who tested HIV positive six years ago.


INSIDE
Economy a Bit Stronger
The economy grew faster in the last quarter than previously reported, but growth was still sluggish.
Page 37.
Acting Chief for United Way
A vice president took control of the United Way of America, but questions about management lingered.
Page 6.
More Tiananmen Sentences
China gave 11 pro-democracy demonstrators punishment viewed as mild for the hard-line Government.
Page 3.
London Rail Station Bombed
An explosion at the peak of the morning rush hour wounded 28 people.
The I.R.A. was blamed.
Page 3.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about an Irish Supreme Court ruling that struck down a Government order preventing a girl who wanted an abortion from leaving Ireland referred incorrectly to the case's effect on the new Prime Minister, Albert Reynolds.
He is widely credited with having handled the affair skillfully.
There is no indication that he was "embarrassed."


A Quadrennial Leap


U.N. Votes to Send 22,000 To Back Peace in Cambodia
The United Nations Security Council voted today to send one of the biggest peacekeeping forces it has ever deployed to Cambodia at a cost of almost $2 billion to help the Southeast Asian nation resolve its civil war at the ballot box.
The 15-member Council unanimously adopted a resolution dispatching a force of about 22,000 soldiers, police officers and civilian administrators.
It called on Cambodia's four warring factions to demobilize their armed forces and cooperate with the United Nations in organizing free and fair elections to choose a new government.


Corrections
Listings on Wednesday and Thursday showing the winners at the 34th annual Grammy Awards ceremony on Tuesday at Radio City Music Hall rendered the name of a producer of "The Civil War" soundtrack recording incorrectly.
He is John Colby.


U.S. Study Says Asian-Americans Face Widespread Discrimination
Asian-Americans, who make up the fastest-growing minority in the nation, face widespread discrimination in the workplace and are often victims of racially motivated harassment and violence, the United States Commission on Civil Rights said in a report made public yesterday.
The commission concluded that Asian-Americans, who doubled in number over the last decade to about 7.3 million people, are hobbled by less blatant but more pervasive barriers of language and culture.
And, the commission concluded, immigrants who speak little or no English are frequently denied equal access to a decent education and the voting booth and are treated unfairly by the police and the courts.


Magadan and Pecota Put On the Gloves
The gloves are piled into Bill Pecota's locker, varying in size and degree of wear.
There is a stack, too, across the clubhouse in Dave Magadan's locker, all but the first baseman's mitt hard to the touch.
The Mets, of course, are in search of only one glove for their infield.
It's for third base, and the spring training process of elimination has begun.


Review/Dance; An Apollo Noble Yet Eager, With Other Earthly Traits
New casts in familiar works marked the New York City Ballet's weekend performances, with the most impressive featuring Peter Boal in the title role of George Balanchine's "Apollo" on Sunday afternoon.
Mr.
Boal's Apollo was obviously a noble god, but his eagerness suggested that he was young and inquisitive as well and loved to explore the world around him through his movements.
A courteous partner to the muses who visited him, he was also their playful companion until a summons from heaven commanded him to assume divine responsibilities.
There was such a sense of well-being about this Apollo that he seemed the perfect embodiment of that ancient Greek ideal, harmony of body and mind.


Upbeat Nets Are Shooting for April in the Playoffs
Just before the end of his classic big band version of "April in Paris," Count Basie can be heard calling for a repeat of the rousing finish by saying: "One more once."
That's exactly what the Nets are hoping to do against the Pistons in Detroit tonight on the heels of their 98-96 upset of the Portland Trail Blazers Thursday night in Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


U.N. Council Assails Iraq Over Its Refusal To Destroy Weapons
The Security Council clashed again with President Saddam Hussein today over Iraq's continuing refusal to go along with plans for eliminating Iraqi weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles under the terms the Council set last year for ending the Persian Gulf war.
The Council issued another strongly worded statement condemning Iraq's failure to cooperate with the special commission set up by the United Nations to oversee the destruction of the Baghdad Government's most dangerous weapons.
The statement asks Iraq to send a delegation to New York to explain its position "without further delay." Council Demands Iraqi Reply
The statement warns Iraq again of "the serious consequences" of its failure to obey the Council's orders.
It tells Iraq to "communicate directly to the Council without further delay an authoritative and unconditional acknowledgement of its agreement to accept and implement" those orders.


Fiscal and Spiritual Rifts Shake Christian Scientists
Deeply divided over the financing of a global media network that is losing millions of dollars a month, the Christian Science church is facing a crisis that threatens the financial stability and the spiritual direction of its governing church in Boston.
To finance a new magazine and ambitious investments in television and radio broadcasting, the First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston has been drawing millions of dollars from two funds: the church pension fund and an endowment that supports the church's newspaper, The Christian Science Monitor.


Review/Film; Creatures With a Taste for the Offensive
Collectively, the 18 short films that have been stitched together for the "All Sick and Twisted Festival of Animation" are the cartoon film world's answer to anthologies like "Truly Tasteless Jokes." Here one can find everything from fornicating plastic dolls, including one of Elvis Presley (in Pierre Ayotte and Danielle Jovanovic's "Plastic Sex"), to teen-age boys in Metallica and AC/ DC T-shirts gleefully playing baseball with a live frog (Mike Judge's "Frog Baseball").
Beyond a willingness to offend, one thread that runs through the midnight cult-favorite program, which moved to regular hours yesterday at the Cinema Village Third Avenue, is a tone of exuberantly defiant nihilism.
That mood infuses John Magnuson's 1968 short, "Thank You Mask Man," a 10-minute cartoon created around a Lenny Bruce routine that imagines a goody-goody Lone Ranger naively confessing to homosexual and bestial impulses only to be jeered out of town.


Teachers Strive to Rise Above the Grip of Despair
These are days of profound disillusionment for the teachers of Thomas Jefferson High School.
Once they were able to lock their classroom doors against the commotion outside -- standard procedure at Jefferson -- and be in a world where they felt some sense of control.
They were able to teach math or social studies or English in relative peace.


Investigation of Bergen Jail Prompted by Inmate Suicide
A 20-year-old murder suspect found dead in his cell bunk this week in the Bergen County Jail, his shoes laces knotted around his neck, was formally classified today as a suicide, the authorities said.
It was the fourth death of a county inmate attributed to suicide since April.
The Bergen County Prosecutor, John J. Fahy, said an autopsy found that the man, Robert Irving, of Passaic, died early Wednesday of strangulation, by tying the laces of his sneakers together and then tying them tightly around his neck.


Review/Theater; A Loved Wife, Her Illness, And Her 'Last Gift,' a Tear
Early in his wrenching confessional monologue, "Time Flies When You're Alive," Paul Linke describes the moment nearly six years ago when his wife died of breast cancer.
Recalling how a single tear formed in her left eye and fell down her cheek, he says, "I took that last tear and wiped it on my finger and put it in my mouth to savor her last gift to me."
The 90-minute performance, presented by the New York Theater Workshop at the Perry Street Theater, is dotted with such moments, in which Mr.
Linke reveals the most sacred personal details of his 10-year marriage to Francesca Draper, a singer and organic gardener whom he loved deeply.
That union produced three children, the last born when his wife was gravely ill.
His recollections of her dying moments are balanced by equally detailed memories of the home birth of their first child, his cutting of the umbilical cord and his embrace of his newborn son.


U.S. Aid to Russians: Thanks and Touch of Shame
"And this?" said Rosa V. Nikolotova, extracting a can of hot chili with beans from a box that landed this afternoon at her son's school on a wave of good will, sent "To Russia With Love" by schoolchildren in northern California.
"What might this be?"
As Mrs.
Nikolotova pondered over other contents of the good-will parcel, other parents at School No. 9 were lining up for theirs.
In all, 182 boxes were delivered today, in a ceremony tinged with emotion, gratitude and on the part of some Russian families, just a touch of shame to find themselves on the receiving end of charity.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Challenger; As Acid-Tongued Buchanan Lashes Out, Ambiguity Is the Last Unpardonable Sin
Angered, piqued and stung by the Bush campaign's concentrated new effort to paint him as an unqualified, unelectable, upstart Presidential challenger, Patrick J. Buchanan is responding in kind -- and then some.
Old boxer and tart-tongued columnist that he is, he is counterpunching with rhetorical blows and political advertisements that have sharply escalated the verbal bashing leading up to Georgia's crucial primary on Tuesday.


Canada Frees Retirement Funds for Home Buyers
Acting on a tax proposal similar to one now before Congress, the Canadian Government this week decided to allow all Canadians to tap their individual retirement accounts to buy a home.
The move, which became effective with the Government's new budget late Tuesday, is intended to be a short-term stimulus for home construction and job creation.


With Little Trouble, Morceli Wins Mile
Noureddine Morceli, the bold middle-distance runner from Algiers, won the mile run last night from an outstanding international field at the Mobil Indoor championships in Madison Square Garden.
His time of 3 minutes 59.42 seconds was good, if not special.
But his command of the event was impressive.


Correction
Because of a typographical error a Feb. 18 letter about China by Bruce L. Reynolds gave the year of Taiwan's Feb. 28 massacre incorrectly.
It was 1947, not 1974.


Health Dept. Studies Reports of Abuse at Nursing Home
A state nursing home for veterans that has been open less than five months is under investigation for reportedly abusing and neglecting patients, several of whom died under questionable circumstances, state health officials said today.
"It's not unusual for a facility to have problems, but this is a little out of the ordinary," said Nate Lipsen, who is heading the investigation for the State Department of Health.


Threats Against Czudaj
HARALD CZUDAJ, the key member of Germany's four-man team, said yesterday in Berchtesgaden, Germany, that he was considering leaving that country because of threatening mail he had received after his confession just before the 1992 Winter Olympics that he had worked as an informer for the Stasi, the East German secret police agency, from 1988-90.
In an interview with a Bavarian radio station, Czudaj said, "If things continue like this, I'll leave Germany for a certain time."


When the Check Is Not in the Mail
The mail is missing.
You were expecting a Social Security check, say, or a credit card or driver's license.
Has it been lost or stolen?
Government, bank and other officials say more than four million checks of all kinds disappear each year.
How do you deal with missing or stolen mail?


News Summary
International 2-5 U.N. AND IRAQ CLASH
The United Nations Security Council deplored Iraq's failure to cooperate in the destruction of Baghdad's most dangerous weapons.
The Council asked Iraq to send a delegation to New York to explain its position "without further delay." 1


Classical Music in Review
Arditti String Quartet Merkin Concert Hall


Quotation of the Day
"It's like an extra shopping day before Christmas, a day I don't have to pay rent for." -- ED ROTH of Queens, on Feb. 29.  [ 27.4. ]


Corrections
An article yesterday about the background and influence of the president of the United Way who was forced to retire misidentified him in some copies.
He is William Aramony.


Report Finds Agent Aided Restaurateur
A senior aide to Mayor David N. Dinkins improperly intervened to reopen a well-known restaurant on the Upper West Side after it was closed by the Health Department in 1990, an investigation by the city has found.
The report said the aide, who resigned in March, told the Health Department the restaurant was a mayoral favorite and was owned by a campaign contributor.


New York City Delays Billing Non-City Cabs
With tensions building in the fiscal border war between New York City and its suburbs, the city has temporarily backed away from one plan to raise revenues from nonresidents to help balance its budget.
Under the plan, out-of-town taxis that pick up passengers in the city would have had to pay the same licensing fees as city-based cabs.
The move angered suburbanites, particularly in the wake of Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposal to increase the income tax on the 724,000 nonresidents who work in the city.


A Day for Leaping, Loafing or Looking for a Mate
Years of intricate planning bear fruit today as people live out grand designs for the precious extra 24 hours granted them by leap year day.
"Yeah, right!" said Herb Grodin, a 52-year-old accountant from Jericho, L.I., staring at the stacks of tax returns that propagate on his desk this time of year.
"I plan for this day for four years. I can hardly wait."


Pan Am Doesn't Deserve Any Sort of Memorial
To the Editor:
In "Keep Pan Am Sign as Memorial to Air Pioneer" (letter, Feb. 8), Christopher McLaughlin states that the signs on the old Pan Am Building should be retained as "an appropriate way to honor one of this country's great exploring endeavors."


Foes Are Softening Stands Against Phone-TV Links
The Bush Administration and the top Federal communications regulator today softened several of their key objections to a controversial bill that would let telephone companies own cable television networks.
In testimony before a Senate Commerce subcommittee, two officials strongly suggested that the Administration and the Federal Communications Commission were eager to strike a bargain in the bitter political battle over letting telephone companies provide television and other information services.


Bridge
A useful inference is available when a player makes a pre-emptive opening and then leads his own suit.
He is likely to have a singleton, and he is not trying for a ruff, so his singleton is likely to be . . .
If South had followed this thought to its logical conclusion he would have brought home a crucial game contract on the diagramed deal.
It was played in the 1991 Cap Gemini Pandata tournament in the Netherlands, which has a good claim to be considered the strongest event ever played: Many of the players have won recent major world championships, and all were of comparable quality.


The Roulette of Russian Banking
A new system of commercial banks has emerged in Russia to feed loans to thousands of companies that are no longer financed by the state.
But the free-wheeling lending practices of the new Russian banks could sink many of them in a flood of bad debt.
The transition to capitalism gave birth to the banks, although rules are still lacking to govern their behavior.
In such a world, bank investors often lend to themselves -- sometimes at cut rates -- ignoring the conflict of interest so frowned on in the West.


Russia to Fight Private Sell-Offs By Ex-Officials
The Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin vowed today to crack down on the newest crime against the state, "privatization by nomenklatura," amid reports about a group of former Communist insiders scheming to sell off large-scale military assets for private profits.
A dozen such officials of the nomenklatura, the old government's elite and privileged class, have become the focus of press reports saying they sought to become capitalist moguls by profiteering in airport and space satellite properties.


Land Dispute and Mystery Flights Raise Tension in Salvador
A month after peace came to El Salvador, tension is rising over rebel-inspired land occupations, mysterious overflights of rebel zones and delays in creating secure camps to house the former guerrillas.
"People are so tired of war that they don't react to provocations from the other side, but the time will come when they will react," said a former senior Government official who has closely followed the peace process and who insisted on not being identified.
Threats to Shoot Down Aircraft
"I find it almost miraculous that no one has died for political reasons in February."


Robert R. Slaughter, Lawyer, 67
Robert R. Slaughter, a lawyer, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 67 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Tests for Chamberlain
WILT CHAMBERLAIN will remain hospitalized for the next few days to undergo tests to find the cause of an irregular heartbeat, his doctor said yesterday.


Guidepost; Re-Examining Portfolios
Individual investors should review personal portfolios regularly.
Wall Street professionals say that a recovering economy often calls for a shift in the allocation of assets.
Some strategists now favor bonds with long maturities because they believe the recovery will be very weak and require lower interest rates to keep it moving.
Stocks are still the premier investment, with stocks of large industrial companies likely to benefit from a turn in the economy.
Here are the allocations of personal assets that are being recommended by four brokerage firms.
Brokerage House
Stocks
Bonds
Cash
Dean Witter
65%
35%
0%
Gruntal
55%
40%
5%
Merrill Lynch
60%
35%
5%
Paine Webber
59%
40%
1%


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Becker vs. McEnroe


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Senate Democrats will aim their middle-class tax break more narrowly than the House did, with a program of $300 tax credits for children that will be denied to families with incomes over $70,000 and to people too poor to pay income taxes.  [ Page 1. ]
The economy grew at a faster rate in the fourth quarter than was previously reported, the Government said, but the pace of growth was still sluggish.
The Commerce Department revised the annual rate of growth upward to 0.8 percent, from an estimate of 0.3 percent made a month earlier.  [ 37. ]


Senate Democrats' Tax Proposal Is Less Generous Than House Bill
When they take up tax legislation next week, Senate Democrats will try to aim their version of a "middle class" tax break more narrowly than the House did, with a program of $300 tax credits for children that will be denied to families with incomes over $70,000 and to people too poor to pay income taxes.
The other big difference from the plan voted Thursday in the House is that the Senate Democrats want to make their credits permanent.
The cornerstone of the House Democrats' bill is a temporary, two-year program of tax credits of up to $400 for a working couple.


Treasury Note and Bond Prices Rise
Prices of Treasury securities rose and interest rates fell in moderately active trading yesterday, as dealers reacted positively to a number of reports that suggest the economy remains quite weak.
Although the Government raised its estimate of how much the economy expanded during the fourth quarter, bond market participants, who dote on signs of weakness as deterrents to inflation, were encouraged by the report because most of the upward revision was related to higher inventories.


Kerrey-Clinton Role Reversal
In a switch of campaign personas, Gov.
Bill Clinton has looked grumpy and uncertain, and Senator Bob Kerrey has been having fun.
Page 9.


Suspect in Subway Car Killing Surrenders
The police yesterday charged a 28-year-old clerk with murdering his estranged girlfriend and critically wounding a subway conductor aboard a B train on the Upper West Side of Manhattan at midday Thursday.
The clerk, Thaddius Davis, of West 144th Street, walked into a police station house early yesterday morning accompanied by a lawyer, and said he had heard that detectives were looking for him, the police said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Candidates Learn That Attacks Attract Attention
If there was one clear lesson to emerge from this week of political uncertainty it was this: Slamming your opponents is still the best way to get on the news.
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, it seems, learned this lesson the hard way.
For weeks leading up to the New Hampshire primary, he talked about national health care and fretted that no one was listening.
On Wednesday, he arrived here in Georgia and started talking about the draft record of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.


Review/Theater; Looking At Life As a Play (A Comedy)
Using the theater as a metaphor for life is hardly a literary innovation, but no contemporary playwright has applied it to the slings and arrows, not to mention absurdities, of modern existence with such penetrating humor as David Mamet in his gem of a play, "A Life in the Theater," which is being given a fond revival at the Jewish Repertory Theater.
Performed, as is life, without intermission, Mr.
Mamet's play surveys the whole spectrum of human experience -- its joys and sorrows, its pettifogging vanities and backbiting jealousies -- from the backstage perspective of two actors as they trek from their shared dressing room to the stage and back again, night after night, acting out parodies of the entire history of the theater.


Review/Film; A Streetwise Message On Power and Humility
Far and away the most accomplished of the works showcased in "Young Black Cinema," a program of five short movies by black film makers that opened yesterday at the Public Theater, is Michael Mayson's "Billy Turner's Secret." The story of Rufus (Mr. Mayson), an ultra-macho ladies' man who discovers that his best friend, Billy, is gay, it offers a streetwise prescription for coping with intolerance.
Rufus spews contempt and disgust at this revelation until Billy loses his temper and beats him up, and a subsequent physical attack by Billy's lover reduces Rufus to respectful contrition.
That tolerance can be enforced through physical intimidation may not be the most positive message for a film to send about human relations.
But because the performances in the 25-minute vignette seem more lived than acted, Rufus's lesson in humility seems entirely believable.
Mr.
Mayson's streetwise dialogue and the camera's unobtrusive way of dropping in on the action enhance a brash, slice-of-life ambiance that recalls the playful Spike Lee of "She's Gotta Have It."


Sixth-Graders in California Research a Forgotten Chinese Cemetery


Mary Childs Black, 69, Is Dead; Art Historian and Museum Head
Mary Childs Black, an art historian, folk art expert, former museum director and writer, died yesterday at her home in Germantown, N.Y.
She was 69 years old.
She died of cancer, said M. J. Gladstone, a friend.


Dodgers Give Strawberry a Try at First
In a continuing effort to find a first baseman to replace Eddie Murray, the Los Angeles Dodgers tried six players at the position yesterday, including Kal Daniels, Todd Benzinger and Darryl Strawberry.
That's right, Strawberry, the right fielder who sometimes has trouble picking up balls rolling in the outfield.
Strawberry said he wants to play first base in some exhibition games and Tommy Lasorda, the Los Angeles manager, has been considering it.


BOMBING IN LONDON LEAVES 28 INJURED
A homemade antipersonnel bomb exploded today at the peak of the morning rush hour inside the busy London Bridge rail station, spraying a crowded platform with flying glass and metal debris.
Twenty-eight people were wounded, four of them seriously.
Scotland Yard blamed the bombing on the Irish Republican Army, the outlawed paramilitary organization that has fought for years against British control of Northern Ireland with campaigns of violence.
As of nightfall, however, neither the I.R.A. nor any other organization had taken responsibility for the bombing.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; WHITE HOUSE SAYS BUCHANAN IS LIKELY TO REMAIN IN RACE
The White House said today there was a prospect that Patrick J. Buchanan could carry his challenge to President Bush through the California primary.
The President's spokesman said a quarter or more of Republicans seem inclined to vote against Mr.
Bush to symbolize their unhappiness over the economy.
The spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said results of the first three primary elections suggested a level of voter discontent that was unlikely to fade until the the recession itself did.


Esprit de Corps Names A New Chief Executive
Esprit de Corps, a leading sportswear company based in San Francisco, said yesterday that Fritz Ammann had been named president and chief executive, effective April 1.
Mr.
Ammann has most recently been chief executive of Charles Jourdan and its affiliated companies in Paris, and was previously chief executive of Swatch.
Mr.
Ammann, who is 48 years old, succeeds Isaac Stein, who has been acting chief executive since April, when Corrado Federico resigned.
Mr.
Stein will continue as chairman.
An investor group led by Mr.
Stein and Susie Tompkins, Esprit's co-founder and creative director, purchased the company from her ex-husband and co-founder, Doug Tompkins, in June 1990.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; Republican Duel: A Party Wounded
Patrick J. Buchanan's challenge to President Bush is threatening to turn an orderly, behind-the-scenes struggle over the future of the Republican Party into an open civil war, Administration officials and senior Republican strategists say.
Mr.
Buchanan's television commercials linking Mr.
Bush to erotic art films involving homosexuals, and today's counterattack from the White House, seemed to guarantee that the bloodletting between the men would last all spring.


Briggs Was Once a Reluctant Fighter
Shannon Briggs was 16 years old then, living in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn.
He and his pal Ryan Lindsay would fool around mock-boxing one another with open hands.
"Strictly for laughs," recalled Briggs, who will meet Javier Alvarez Saturday in the finals of the heavyweight class of United States Boxing Championships, a step on the road to the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.


