Arts Funds To Bypass Challenge By Panel
In a move that effectively outmaneuvers its sharpest liberal critics, the National Endowment for the Arts plans to shift $750,000 earmarked for fellowships in sculpture to regional arts councils around the country.
The transfer, announced here today at the quarterly meeting of the endowment's advisory council, comes in response to the refusal by the peer panel charged with evaluating the endowment's sculpture fellowships to complete its work last May.
At that time, the sculpture panel said it was holding back its recommendations for grants to protest the decision by the endowment's Acting Chairwoman, Anne-Imelda Radice, to veto grants for two sexually explicit art shows.


Review/Theater; Cosmic Meaning, Eyelashes and Zero
Much ado about nothing occupied the stage at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday night.
Not Shakespeare's comedy but a world premiere in Lincoln Center's Serious Fun festival titled "My Mathematics."
In the context of the festival, the occasion was more serious than fun.


Americans Finish 1-2 in Shot Only to Field Heavy Questions
For a while not long ago, shot-putting was fast becoming the most disreputable event in track and field in the United States.
Within a year, three of its leading practitioners were suspended for using performance-enhancing drugs, leaving a sizable vacuum in an event Americans once dominated.
Randy Barnes, the world record holder, was the unluckiest of the lot.
He had the misfortune of drawing a two-year suspension encompassing the Barcelona Olympics, in which the track and field competition began today.


CHRONICLE
What do you do with a Keith Haring sculpture of a boy and a dog that weighs 7,800 pounds?
That was the problem that confronted the Keith Haring Foundation when the New York City Parks Department asked it to move the steel work from Dante Park in front of Lincoln Center in February.
It had been displayed there on loan for a year.
Tomorrow, the solution will be obvious to everyone.
Or at least everyone in Kutztown, Pa., where Mr.
Haring, who died of AIDS in 1990 at the age of 31, grew up and where his parents and other relatives still live.


One Day Late, Relieved Passengers Arrive Safely
Their faces flush with relief, about 100 passengers of Trans World Airlines Flight 843 were reunited here with family and friends at 3:20 P.M. today, after flying in from New York on a flight specially chartered for them by T.W.A.
On Thursday, their original flight was abruptly aborted when it suddenly touched down moments after takeoff and veered from a runway in flames.
All 292 people on the flight were safely evacuated.


BARCELONA
OUT OF THE POOL . . .
The swimming competition ended with successes for Americans and Hungarians. . . .
ONTO THE TRACK The first gold medal in track and field went to Mike Stulce, an American shot-putter.
INDEPENDENCE DAY The Unified Team beat Lithuania, 92-80, in a basketball showdown of former teammates.


Nothing in the Works and Nothing Works
If being unable to acquire Jim Abbott from the California Angels was not disturbing enough for the Yankees tonight, they also had to place Danny Tartabull on the 15-day disabled list.
Then they had to try competing with the first-place Blue Jays and their anemic effort probably bothered Manager Buck Showalter more than the two off the field setbacks.
Sure, the Yankees could use a superb pitcher like Abbott and a power hitter like Tartabull, but they looked like a raggedy bunch that needed much more than one strong arm and one strong bat tonight against Toronto.
Tighter defense, any semblance of offense and pitching, any decent pitching, might have prevented the Blue Jays from coasting so smoothly to a 13-2 victory at the Skydome.
But the Yankees received none of the above.
Ugly, Ugly, Ugly
Instead of receiving anything, the Yankees gave tonight.
They helped give the Blue Jays a miserable four-run inning with two infield misplays.
They helped Toronto smile on its way to two home runs, two bases-loaded walks and 13 hits by choosing Shawn Hillegas to start and following that with Tim Leary and Greg Cadaret.
Their lethargic effort helped Toronto ease to its seventh straight victory over the Yankees.


Corrections
An article on July 9 about the dismissal of Dr.
Bertrand M. Bell as director of ambulatory care at Bronx Municipal Hospital referred incorrectly to findings in the death of Libby Zion at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in 1984.
While the New York State Board of Regents censured two doctors for gross negligence in treating Miss Zion, a state appeals court last year overturned that finding and cleared the doctors.


New Strategy For Triplecast
Originators of the Triplecast, in search of ways to attract buyers to the pay-per-view cablecast of the 1992 Summer Games, have drastically cut newspaper advertising in favor of an increased radio presence.
"Radio is more effective for us than print," Jim Dolan, the executive in charge of the joint venture by NBC and Cablevision, said yesterday.
"It looks like radio produced more orders."


Olympics Ratings Continue to Rise
Thanks in large part to the women's all-around gymnastics finals, NBC attained its highest Nielsen marks of the 1992 Summer Olympics on Thursday night with a 22.3 rating and a 40 share.


If the Grass Looks Greener, Maybe It's Painted
Ronald Cooper, an automobile dealer in Portland, Ore., knows that his wife loves a green lawn.
So when the family's front yard was blistered to a depressing yellow by drought this summer, Mr.
Cooper had the grass painted green.
"It looks like dead, perfect grass," Mr.
Cooper said.
"It is not crunchy. It looks like an absolutely perfect lawn."


A Happening of Hopkinses; Where a Name Is a Ticket, One Man Will Seek Family
Gordon Clark Ramsey grew up thinking he was descended from a stiff-necked Rhode Island Quaker in a hat who in all the Revolutionary War paintings of John Trumbull stands alone, looking as though he's about to bolt from the room rather than sign the Declaration of Independence.
Then in the early 1970's, an art-history professor discovered that the key to who was whom in Mr.
Trumbull's pictures had been mixed up, and all the old Ramsey family preconceptions were shattered.


Suspect in 3 Bronx Killings Denied Wrongdoing in Tape
In tape recordings played before a jury yesterday, the former girlfriend of a livery-cab driver charged with three murders angrily questioned him about a pair of pink jogging pants that were found on one of the victims and that the girlfriend believed were hers.
As the jury heard the voice of the driver, Alejandro Henriquez, for the first time as it boomed from the tapes, the bespectacled defendant sat motionless in the Bronx courtroom.
He heard the surprise in his voice when his former girlfriend, Andrea Rosario, told him that the police had shown her a picture of Lisa Ann Rodriguez's body, whom he is accused of killing, and that she was wearing what appeared to be pants taken from Ms.
Rosario's closet.
The shirt on the girl's body appeared to be one of his, Mrs.
Rosario said on the tape.


To Pick a Sofa, Lift It, Squeeze It and Don't Forget to Sit on It
Full of complicated secrets, difficult to keep out of sight and extremely long lived, the wrong sofa can cause as much frustration and as many tears as a neurotic relative who moves in and refuses to leave.
Buying the right sofa, with a solid frame, top-quality cushions and a durable, good-looking fabric can involve intensive research, something not many consumers seem willing to undertake.
"People just sit on our sofas and say to themselves: 'Is it comfortable? Do I like the fabric? How much is it? I'll take it,' " said Mark Heidorn, the manager of the Door Store at Lexington Avenue and 53d Street.
Consumers Are Getting Wiser
Only since the recession has the tide of swift sofa decisions shown real signs of receding.
Comfort, style and price are still of great importance, but "people are starting to ask more technical questions than ever before," said Jeanie Viars, who works in fabric development and merchandising at Thomasville Furniture Industries, which has its headquarters in Thomasville, N.C.
"There are so many things out there that are overpriced. You can put the most dynamite cover on something that just won't last."


City Prepares Closer Watch On a Bridge
Two days after the Manhattan Bridge was closed to subway trains for the repair of a dangerously weakened support beam, New York City Department of Transportation officials moved to make routine inspections of the bridge more thorough.
Commissioner Lucius J. Riccio said yesterday that he had asked the state authorities responsible for biennial inspections of the bridge to evaluate the trouble spots that on last inspection had the same rating as that of the beam repaired this week, and to provide a list of those that need earliest re-inspection.
He said that city inspection teams would expand their review to include them.


U.S. Women Hang Tough As Men Challenge Ruling
Those two current symbols of American volleyball, the protest and the cliffhanger, were trotted out again today.
And while one burned on into the night, the other ended emphatically in a flash of red fingernails and clenched fists.
First, the easy part: The American women's team pulled itself together in the fifth set after all but vanishing in the fourth to defeat the Unified Team, 9-15, 17-15, 15-12, 4-15, 15-11.
It was the women's second straight five-set match and their first victory, a triumph that came flying out of the spikes and blocks of Caren Kemner, who left no doubt why she was named the most valuable volleyball player in the world in 1991.


Town Embraces More Than Its Swimmer's Race
The cheers began when Ron Karnaugh dived into the swimming pool and continued after his race finished.
About 150 residents of this small New Jersey town gathered in front of a big-screen television at the Maplewood Community Center today to watch their hometown hero compete in the 200-meter individual medley at the Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Pole for Mario Andretti
Mario Andretti outperformed his son Michael in a record-setting duel yesterday at Michigan International Speedway, taking the pole position for tomorrow's Marlboro 500 with a lap of 230.150 miles an hour.
Michael was timed in 230.056 on the track, located in Brooklyn, Mich.
The elder Andretti's fast lap gave him the 65th pole of his career -- extending his own series record -- but his first since Miami in 1987.
It also made the 52-year-old Andretti the oldest man ever to win an Indy-car pole.
The only official laps faster than the one by Andretti yesterday came in May during the Indianapolis 500 qualifying, when Roberto Guerrero had four laps faster than 232 miles an hour. (AP) GOLF  Morgan Chips to Lead
Gil Morgan, after a three-hour rain delay, used a 20-foot chip-in to resurrect his game and took the lead yesterday midway through the rain-shortened second round of the Canon Greater Hartford Open in Cromwell, Conn.
Morgan was struggling but birdied two of his final four holes to move to six-under-par 64, 2-under for the day.
Kenny Knox, the first-round leader, and Billy Ray Brown, the defending champion, were tied with Morgan at 6-under and will resume second-round play this morning.
Knox had finished four holes and Brown six when play was suspended for good with 80 players still on the course. (AP)


CHRONICLE
They've been together for 15 years and have three children, but now the marriage vows taken 20 months ago on the island of Bali by MICK JAGGER and JERRY HALL are apparently coming asunder.
The Daily Mail in London printed an interview yesterday with Ms.
Hall, in which she was quoted as saying: "I can confirm that Mick and I are separated and I suppose we'll get a divorce. I'm in too much pain for this to go on any longer." She is a model and is the Rolling Stone's second wife.


Hambletonian's No. 1 Trainer From '91 Has 4 Chances Now
Per Eriksson of Sweden was the trainer of last year's Hambletonian winner.
This year, he is the trainer of four entries, including one of the favorites, in harness racing's most prestigious event.
But Eriksson refuses to express much confidence in his achieving consecutive triumphs.
"There are a lot of horses with a chance in this race," Eriksson said about the record field of 27 entries in Saturday's 67th running of the second leg of the triple crown for trotters, "but of all my horses in the race, I think King Conch has the best chance. He's trained nice and strong this week."


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about how Californians are coping with crises misidentified the town in which Kelly Dodson, a homeless woman, lives.
It is Santa Cruz.


No Headline
It's easy to run away, to go somewhere bigger, like everyone else.
But some of us have decided to stay.
This is our way of life.
And it's worth a fight. -- JANET LARREAU of Custer County, Neb.  [ 1:4. ]


Review/Music; The Line Between Fun And Self-Indulgence
In the program book for the Festival of Contemporary Music at Tanglewood, the composer John Harbison wrote that "an influential criterion in many of these programs" was whether the music at hand might "be fun to play." As reasons to play new music go, having fun is decidedly more appealing than the frequently heard admonitions about duty.
It does raise a few subsidiary questions, though, since music that is fun to play is not necessarily fun to hear.
How do composers and musicians draw the line between fun and self-indulgence?
The short answer is, they don't always.
Mr.
Harbison tested his concept vigorously on Tuesday evening and Wednesday night in programs that also explored two other items on his agenda: works that flirt with rock-and-roll, and music by West Coast composers.
The California E.A.R.
Unit, an eight-player ensemble from Los Angeles, took up the cause on Tuesday evening.


Price Tag: Home-Grown Fruits and Vegetables
Here is a selection of fruirs and vegetables from an imaginary home garden. home production costs are computed by dividing the purchase price of seeds or plants by one season's estimated yield, under suitable climate and soil conditions.
Typical supermarket prices are given for comparison; these will likely vary by region.
One-time purchases, like small tools, may range from $25 to $75.
Other supplies like compost and manure, are widely available at no cost.
Time spent cultivating plants is presumed to be pleasant, so labor is not included in production costs.


20 Years After the Massacre, Israel Rejoices Over a Medal
After 2,000 years," the headline in the newspaper Yediot Ahronot blared today, the type huge and shaded in the national colors of blue and white.
What could possibly have happened?
An attempt to rebuild the destroyed Jewish temple?
New rumblings of the Messiah's imminent arrival?


Olympic Bug Bites Chang But Sampras Advances
The feelings were mixed and so was the success for Michael Chang and Pete Sampras of the United States in Olympic tennis today.
Chang was eliminated; Sampras advanced.
"It's difficult to say if there is or isn't some kind of Olympic factor," said Chang, the No. 6-ranked player in the world, after losing to Jaime Oncins of Brazil, 6-2, 3-6, 7-6, 6-3.
"When you see upsets and the kind of trouble guys like Boris Becker are getting into with unknown players, it reminds you a little of Davis Cup. But so far we've only had tennis in two Olympics, so it's hard to say for sure."


A Dream Team Rout, But a Heartbreaker For the Lithuanians
Lithuania was only reaching for the moon, not the stars, but today came a great fall to earth.
This recently reborn nation of 3.6 million was not asking the impossible, to steal the men's Olympic basketball goal medal from the big, bad United States.
It was only looking for silver and to share the stage a week from Saturday night in what appears will be the Dream Team's official coronation.


Review/Pop; Making Do Without The Drums
"Where's Gary?" said S. M., Pavement's lead singer and guitarist, about two-thirds of the way through the band's set at Maxwell's on Tuesday night, the first of two sold-out evenings.
He looked around rather distractedly.
Gary, the drummer, was nowhere to be seen.
No one in the band seemed to know where he had gone or when he had left.
Only mildly daunted, S. M. nosed around the stage for a minute or two, and the band attempted to go into an acoustic song.
They had trouble getting it off the ground -- someone kept messing up, and S. M. was starting to laugh -- but eventually they shuffled through.
The bassist, perhaps bored, sat down on the drum stool and watched.
Half rock-and-roll, half circus of the absurd and all attitude, Pavement's show set a new standard for lackadaisical cool on the underground rock scene (their unorthodox nomenclature is part of the mystique).
The band's music draws on a conventional set of pre- and post-punk influences: Sonic Youth's calculated guitar noise and half-spoken vocals, the Velvet Underground's thudding rhythms, Dinosaur Jr.'s way of strangling a pop hook.
When Pavement put a little effort into its performance, its ingenuity was easily apparent.
S.
M. would push his voice into a derelict falsetto, singing along with Spiral Stairs's primitive guitar lead and rolling his eyes; a second drummer flailed away on a heavy tom, hitting slightly behind the beat and giving the rhythms a jagged, 3-D quality.


Training Camp Report
Detroit Lions
Quarterback Rodney Peete and the Lions resolved their contract differences.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed, but the Lions said the contract was dependent upon Peete's passing his physical.
A starter since his rookie season in 1989, Peete, a sixth-round draft choice from the University of Southern California, missed the last half of the 1991 season and the playoffs after tearing his Achilles' tendon.
Seattle Seahawks
The Seahawks reeled in the big one, coming to terms on a four-year deal with their 300-pound first-round draft choice, Ray Roberts, an offensive tackle from Virginia.
Roberts (No. 10 over all in the 1992 draft) is expected to sign today, leaving only one missing rookie, wide receiver Michael Bates, a sixth-round (No. 151) pick from Arizona.
Bates has been excused from camp.
He is on the United States Olympic track team as a 200-meter man.
Denver Broncos
It's not that quarterback John Elway won't have any friends to throw to, but after bidding adios to Ricky Nattiel (traded to Tampa Bay) and Vance Johnson (out for three months with a shoulder tear) the Broncos' Three Amigos are down to one, Mark Jackson.


Mets Back Off Making That Blockbuster Deal
Al Harazin emerged from the executive suites at Shea Stadium late yesterday afternoon, walked out onto the field and into the dugout.
Players tracked his movement, other front office personnel moved to his side and reporters descended.
"I'm here," said Harazin, the general manager of the Mets who had spent the afternoon talking trade with half a dozen clubs, "to give my great nonspeech."


1 Killed, 4 Hurt in Holdup Attempt Outside a Brooklyn Bank
An employee of a wholesale tobacco company was killed and a suspected holdup man critically wounded yesterday in a shootout that erupted when several men tried to rob two employees of the company outside a Brooklyn bank, the police said.
Three bystanders were wounded when the bullets began flying on the street outside a branch of the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company at Fourth Avenue and 51st Street in Sunset Park.
Their injuries were not life threatening,


Friends Defend Widowed and Injured Bus Driver
These were supposed to be the golden years for Robert Campbell, a chance to spend lazy afternoons with his wife, pursue his passion for gospel music and develop the bus company he had started as a hobby and a community service into a successful business.
It was supposed to be a time when Mr.
Campbell would show that hard work and Christian values could allow someone to rise above the filth and crime that had crept into his neighborhood, Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, over the last 10 years.


Ex-Police Officer Held Without Bail
Michael Dowd, the former New York City police officer at the center of a wide investigation into police corruption and drug trafficking, was ordered held without bail yesterday at a preliminary hearing in Federal District Court in Manhattan on charges of receiving weekly cash payments from drug dealers.
Mr.
Dowd's lawyer, Marvin Hirsch, said he would enter a plea of not guilty when Mr.
Dowd is arraigned next week.


For Water-Skiers, No More Tangles
Water-skiers know how annoying -- and possibly dangerous -- it can be when they let go of the tow rope and it wraps around the propeller of the boat or tangles around their legs.
Now there is a device that is designed to prevent such mishaps.
The Ski-Ease winds the ski line back into the boat either electrically or by a hand crank.
Neil Covert, the president of Sehl Manufacturing Inc. of Tampa, Fla., which makes the Ski-Ease, said the retractor eliminates pulling in the ski rope by hand or getting it twisted.


Nagle's First Test? A Hall of Fame Debut
The Browning Nagle watch officially begins today, when the Jets play the Eagles in their first preseason game, the Hall of Fame game at Canton, Ohio.
The Jets hope to launch the career of their young quarterback at the place most football players dream they will wind up in after their playing career.
Nagle is scheduled to play the first half.
Coach Bruce Coslet has not determined how he will rotate the quarterbacks in the second half.
Jeff Blake, a rookie, is expected to play, but Nagle could return in the second half.


Review/Dance; Ah, the Good Old Days: Were They?
The good old days proved to be intriguing but a little disappointing on Wednesday night, when the Serious Fun festival presented its annual Megadance program at Alice Tully Hall.
The program, dedicated to the memory of the dance editor and critic Burt Supree, was the brainchild of Jed Wheeler, producer of the summer festival.
What would a typical Megadance marathon have looked like a dance generation or two ago?
Mr.
Wheeler chose Sally Banes, a knowledgeable and passionate dance historian, as curator.
And Ms.
Banes came up with a program that included historic works like Paul Taylor's 1957 "Epic" and Yvonne Rainer's 1966 "Trio A," the embodiment of an important postmodernist manifesto Ms.
Rainer had written a year earlier.


Corrections
An article yesterday about relief efforts for Somalia referred incorrectly in some copies to Lawrence S. Eagleburger.
He is Deputy Secretary of State, not Under Secretary.


New Jersey Hit Hard By Powerful Storms


Blue Cross Strives to Regain Fiscal Health
With Blue Cross plans all over the country in financial trouble, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey is fighting to regain the financial health it enjoyed until the 1980's, when changes in the state's system of paying for health care, combined with an explosion in expensive medical technology, threatened to bankrupt the insurer.
New Jersey Blue Cross officials said they are concentrating on new strategies.
They said they are devising programs to steer their policyholders to hospitals offering the best rates as well as the best care, and they said they also will campaign to force commercial insurance companies to help underwrite the cost of insuring people with the poorest health.


Traffic Alert
Madison Avenue between 42d and 57th Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. tomorrow for the International Immigrants' Street Fair.


Connecticut Food-Stamp Numbers Soar
In yet another sign of Connecticut's economic fall from grace, the nation's wealthiest state has seen the number of its residents receiving food stamps nearly double in the last three years.
The increase in food stamp recipients in Connecticut, which has been considerably steeper than that of either the nation as a whole or New York and New Jersey, is largely a function of the sharp reversal in the fortunes of a state whose economy was booming in the 1980's, experts say.


Dinkins Aide May Leave To Take Post With Clinton
Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch Jr., Mayor David N. Dinkins's chief political strategist and trouble-shooter, acknowledged yesterday that he was considering temporarily leaving City Hall to take a top position with the State Democratic Committee, where he would focus on the Presidential campaign of Bill Clinton and other Democratic candidates.
Mr.
Lynch, who is credited as the driving force behind Mr.
Dinkins's successful 1989 mayoral bid, said that he has had preliminary discussions with the state Democratic chairman, John A. Marino, on what role he might play in the campaign but that no position had been offered yet.


Treading Water and Juggling Jobs
Oh, the problems coaches face.
John Tanner, an assistant with the United States water polo team, is just glad to have his players in the athletes' village, where he can get them to focus on important things like water polo and not on things they usually worry about: such as making a living.
"We went into full-time training in March, and that has helped, but they've been distracted with their careers on the side," Tanner said today.
"I think they tend to be more consistent, more focused, here."


Riggins and Davis Are Namath Favorites
JOE NAMATH, the Jets' Hall of Fame quarterback, can't think of two more deserving candidates for the Pro Football Hall of Fame than running back JOHN RIGGINS and AL DAVIS, owner of the Los Angeles Raiders.
Riggins and Davis, along with tight end JOHN MACKEY and cornerback LEM BARNEY, will be inducted into the Hall of Fame today at Canton, Ohio.
Namath was inducted in 1985.
Riggins was the Jets' first-round draft selection in 1971 and played with the team until 1975.
He went to the Washington Redskins as a free agent in 1976.


Sports of The Times; For a Son, 'The Salt Of the Earth'
RON KARNAUGH began another phase of his healing process last night.
At 7:30 P.M., the 26-year-old swimmer from Maplewood, N.J., made his first public comments since last Saturday's opening ceremonies, when his father, Peter, collapsed and died of a heart attack not long after snapping his son's picture.


Brooks Hires Farrish as Devils Assistant
HERB BROOKS made his first major decision as the new coach of the Devils.
He hired DAVE FARRISH to be his assistant, replacing ROBBIE FTOREK, who was assigned to Utica to take the place of Brooks as coach of the Devils' top affiliate in the minor leagues.
Like Ftorek and DOUG SULLIMAN, who will remain as assistant to Brooks, Farrish has had plenty of National Hockey League experience as a player.
And like Ftorek and Sulliman, Farrish played three years for the Rangers.
He also spent three years with Toronto.


When the Old Ball Game Is Something Brand New
FROM far below, from the field of dreams, came the cadence of summer, the pop of ball smacking catcher's mitt, the crack of wood against horsehide.
It was one of those rare New York events, a day game at Yankee Stadium, and the charm was divine.
There was the pungent smell of hot dogs, the bark of a peanut salesman, the sea-lion roar of fans letting loose all the emotion they have struggled to hold in elsewhere.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY CITY OFFERS INCENTIVES TO BANK
The Dinkins administration has offered a range of tax abatements and other financial incentives to the First Chicago Trust Company, a company with close ties to the city's top economic development official, in an effort to keep it from moving its headquarters and 1,000 jobs to New Jersey.
Page 27.
DINKINS AIDE TO WORK FOR CLINTON?
Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch Jr., Mayor David N. Dinkins's chief political strategist and trouble-shooter, acknowledged yesterday that he was considering temporarily leaving City Hall to take a top position with the State Democratic Committee, where he would focus on the Presidential campaign of Bill Clinton and other Democratic candidates.
Page 27.
STEPPING UP BRIDGE INSPECTIONS
Two days after the Manhattan Bridge was closed to subway trains for the emergency repair of a dangerously weakened support beam beneath the subway tracks, New York City Department of Transportation officials moved to make routine inspections of the bridge more thorough.
Page 27.
MAN SLAIN IN SHOOTOUT NEAR BANK
An employee of a wholesale tobacco company was killed and a suspected holdup man critically wounded in a shootout that erupted when several men tried to rob two employees of the company outside a Brooklyn bank.
Page 27.
Bronx jury hears tape of a murder suspect being questioned by a former girlfriend.
Page 27.
REGION
HARD TIMES IN CONNECTICUT
In yet another sign of Connecticut's economic fall from grace, the nation's wealthiest state has seen the number of its residents receiving food stamps nearly double in the last three years.
The increase has been considerably steeper than that of either the nation as a whole or of New York and New Jersey.
Experts say it is largely a function of the sharp reversal in the fortunes of a state whose economy was booming in the 1980's.
Page 28.
SEARCHING FOR KIN
Gordon Clark Ramsey, a 51-year-old professor at the University of Hartford, fears he may be among the last descendants of Stephen Hopkins, a signer of the Declaration of Independence.
But he may find out otherwise on a beach in Warwick, R.I., next month when at least 500 people from around the country are expected to gather for a one-day party.
Anyone who was ever related to a Hopkins, however remotely, is invited.
Mr.
Ramsey will attend, searching not so much for roots, he said, as for relatives.
Page 28.
PROFILE OF THE METROPOLITAN REGION
If metropolitan New York seems foreign to the rest of America, that's because it is.
Nearly one in five residents was born abroad.
Nearly one in three residents speaks a language other than English -- and almost half of those acknowledge that they don't speak English very well.
Page 7.
RESTORING AN INSURER'S HEALTH
With Blue Cross plans all over the country in financial trouble, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey is fighting to regain the financial health it enjoyed until the 1980's, when changes in the state's system of paying for health care, combined with an explosion in expensive medical technology, threatened to bankrupt the insurer.
Page 28.
About New York by Douglas Martin Page 26


Review/Film; Neglected Monsters In Funworld
"Bebe's Kids" is calling itself "animation with an attitude," which is a half-smart idea.
Attitude is what gives this movie its appeal, but the animation was a desperate afterthought.
The original idea was to build a story around the actor and comedian Robin Harris and characters he created in his stand-up act: mischievous kids he describes as "up at 4 in the morning drinking coffee and taking No Doz." After Mr.
Harris died of a heart attack, the executive producers of "Bebe's Kids," Reginald and Warrington Hudlin, turned to animation.


Patric Farrell, Devotee of Ireland And Irish Culture, Is Dead at 85
Patric Farrell, who served as director of the Irish Theater and the Museum of Irish Art in New York in the 1920's and 30's, died on Thursday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old.
He died of pneumonia and heart failure, said his brother, John.


In This Corner, Cuba; In That Corner, Hope
By the (good or bad?) luck of the Olympic blind draw, heavyweight Danell Nicholson and superheavyweight Larry Donald of the United States team advanced today to quarterfinal showdowns with two of Cuba's best boxers that may well determine the gold medalist in each division.
Nicholson, a smooth 6-foot-3-inch, 201-pound slugger from Chicago, will oppose Felix Savon, who has dominated amateur boxing for nine years, on Monday after having outpointed Zeljko Mavrovic of Croatia, 9-6.


Incentives Offered to First Chicago Trust
The Dinkins administration has offered a range of tax abatements and other financial incentives to the First Chicago Trust Company of New York, in an effort to keep it from moving its headquarters and 1,000 jobs to New Jersey.
City and bank officials said no agreements had been made yet.
A First Chicago spokeswoman, Lisabeth Weiner, said the company was actively negotiating with the city, and was investigating alternatives to its headquarters now located in lower Manhattan.


Richard Crowley, 62, an Architect Who Preserved Historic Buildings
Richard Crowley, an architect who specialized in the renovation and preservation of historic structures in the Hudson Valley, died on Wednesday at his home in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
He was 62 years old.
Mr. Crowley died of cancer, said a daughter, Anne.


Bridge
Two dark-horse squads and six groups of experienced stars contested the quarterfinal stage of the Spingold Knockout Team Championship here today at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
The team headed by Glenn Eisenstein of Manhattan began the tournament as the 50th seed.
Last night Thursday they won by 12 imps against Larry Mori of Ballston Lake, N.Y.
The Mori team had ousted Jim Cayne's second-seeded group a day earlier.
Today Eisenstein trailed by 17 after 16 deals against Jeff Schuett of Riverwood, Ill. and his team, originally seeded 71st.
The previous night the Schuett team, which includes Nick Hartung of Manhattan, came from behind to win by 18 against George Rapee of Manhattan and his team.


Bikini Battle; Cry to Cover Up Vendors
Are the bikini-clad hot dog vendors who have appeared under pink umbrellas here (a) a disgrace, (b) summertime fun or (c) a safety hazard?
The answer depends greatly on who is talking.
And this summer, it has often seemed, almost every one of this Westchester city's 188,092 residents has had his or her own response.


Bus Driver Is Charged in Deaths of 6 Passengers
The driver of the bus that crashed on a treacherous Sussex County road Sunday knew the brakes were faulty before he began the trip, officials said today as they charged him with six counts of aggravated manslaughter in the deaths of six passengers.
The driver, Robert Campbell, 60 years old, of Brooklyn, pulled his bus out of a garage in Jersey City two days before the trip, even though the garage owner warned him that the bus's brakes were so faulty that it should not be driven, said the Sussex County prosecutor, Dennis O'Leary.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an article on July 6 about Ecuador's presidential election referred incorrectly to the winner, Sixto Duran Be llen.
The writer called him an Andean leader, not Indian.


Review/Pop; A Band of Bahamanians From Brooklyn
In 1971 a group called the Beginning of the End had its only hit with "Funky Nassau," a mixture of funk and Bahamian junkanoo, the drum-driven music of street parades.
Two decades later, the Baha Men, Bahamians from Brooklyn, have revived both the song and the idea.
The album the group plans to release in September is called "Junkanoo" (Atlantic), but the music the Baha Men played on Thursday night at S.O.B.'s might better have been called "funkanoo."
On the stage was the Baha Men's funk band half -- guitars, keyboard, bass, drums -- while other band members, playing junkanoo drums (with Sterno torches inside) and shaking cowbells, strutted on the dance floor; the band members wore bright tropical colors and fancifully decorated straw hats.
But while funk and junkanoo share a heavy downbeat, the band's hybrid songs leaned toward funk, with Nehemiah Hield's lead vocals sliding in Stevie Wonder style and the band switching between major-key junkanoo vamps and modal funk.
The Baha Men's lyrics are tourist fare, full of beaches and coconut drinks, but the words are mostly pretexts for danceable rhythms.


Three Backups for Giants Take the Hint and Sign
Two days ago, Coach Ray Handley of the Giants pointedly suggested that Bob Kratch, Lewis Tillman and Bobby Abrams -- all backups, all unsigned and all absent -- should get to training camp quickly or risk losing their jobs.
Today, 11 days after camp began here, all signed two-year contracts and took part in practice.
Meanwhile, William Roberts, the 29-year-old, ninth-year offensive guard, remained in Morristown Memorial Hospital with atrial fibrillation, an irregular heartbeat.
He was taken there Thursday afternoon, and Handley said Roberts would probably stay there until his heartbeat returned to normal, by itself or through electronic stimulation.


Critic's Notebook; The Olympic Decision: Watch Live or on Tape
My friend Ronnie is a Boston Red Sox fan.
When a Red Sox game conflicts with one of our periodic poker meetings, he asks the rest of us at the table, at least one of whom checks the scores during the evening for reasons of his own, to please not tell him how the game is going.
Back at his apartment, the VCR is on "record," and he looks forward to rooting for his team after midnight, real time.
The contest may be over, but his excitement will be current.
Marcel Proust would have envied him.
Ronnie's purposeful suspension of knowledge is brought to mind by the television treatment of the Olympics, which offers a choice: if you are willing to pay for the kick of immediacy, you can watch the games on cable as they happen, or you can watch selections later on NBC.
Sales have disappointed the promoters; the big audience has been settling for the recapitulations and elaborations, from 7:30 P.M. to midnight every night.
Most people evidently do not think it is a bargain to pay to see Mike Barrowman breaking his own world record at the second he does it when they can see the feat free a few hours later.


Ex-Soviets Show Pride Has No Boundaries
It was sports, politics and theater and altogether moving:
In an extraordinary scene, three gymnasts from three republics of the former Soviet Union stood on the Olympic platform tonight.
Each watched as his republic's flag was raised, and each listened as his republic's anthem was played.


Review/Opera; Janacek at Salzburg: Sign of Changing Times
Even if there had been no other signs of major change at the Salzburg Festival, the new production of Janacek's "From the House of the Dead" on Thursday night at the Grosses Festspielhaus would have been evidence enough.
This was the first Janacek opera at this previously conservative festival.
"Dead" is also a relatively brief work, lasting some 90 minutes, without a main plot and with only vaguely connected characters.
Compared with the expensive and epic productions of the basic repertory customary in Salzburg in Herbert von Karajan's regime, this Czechoslovak opera was a modernist miniature.
Its portentous title and year of composition (1928) must have frightened off even some of those who bought tickets; there were a fair number of empty seats at this premiere.
But by the performance's end, a great number of listeners were stamping their feet in acclaim; the curtain calls continued even after the house lights had come up.
This was partly an affirmation of confidence in Gerard A. Mortier, the new director of the festival, who has inspired divided opinion in this town more used to routine stargazing.
The acclaim was also, however, for the work's gradually accumulating impact.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 HEAVY SHELLING IN BOSNIA
Bosnian troops tried to break through Serbian lines in Sarajevo in a day of some of the heaviest shelling in weeks.
Among the wounded were five Ukrainian soldiers serving with United Nations troops.  1  EUROPE OUTRAGED OVER REFUGEES
Western European governments are facing increasing criticism of their muted response to Serbian aggression and to the refugees made homeless by the Serbian policy of "ethnic cleansing." But officials are reluctant to take a more active role.  5  REGRESSION IN PERU
The dark ages have returned to Lima.
The city is sheathed in an armor of plywood against the bombs of the Shining Path guerrillas, electricity is spotty, tourists are few and fear is everpresent.  1  THE LATIN DEBT PICTURE
The Latin America debt crisis is over, according to prominent officials in the region.
But some analysts maintain that the current optimism is premature and nation by nation there are a number of complications in the rosy picture.  1  SOUTH AFRICA'S NEW DISPOSSESSED
As South Africa redistributes land, it is the white Afrikaners who will have to give up their property this time, and they are fighting back with lawyers and faxes.  3  100 DIE IN CHINA PLANE CRASH
At least 100 people were killed when a Soviet-built Chinese airliner en route to Xiamen crashed on takeoff at Nanjing.  2  113 FEARED DEAD IN NEPAL CRASH
There was little hope that any of the tourists aboard a Thai Airways jetliner carrying 113 people, including 11 Americans, survived a crash in the Himalayas in Nepal.  2  U.S. troops are going to Kuwait earlier than planned for exercises.  3  NAMES, BUT LITTLE ELSE
The mystery of American civilians imprisoned by the Soviet Union during World War II deepened with the latest clue -- the release in Russia of a perplexing list of names of prisoners who may still be alive.  4  Port-au-Prince Journal: Independence Day without the fireworks.  4  National 6-9  NEW ALARM OVER TUBERCULOSIS
Outbreaks of particularly dangerous strains of tuberculosis have been traced to infectious contacts at seven hospitals in New York and other cities.
The findings have prompted urgent calls for costly new measures to control the disease.  1  REILLY CRITICIZES ADMINISTRATION
In a memo to E.P.A. employees, President Bush's top environmental adviser was sharply critical of the Administration's handling of the recent Earth Summit.
The memo is likely to provide new ammunition to the Democratic ticket, already pressing an environmental attack against the President.  1  Stumping in California, Bush promoted welfare reform.  8  Clinton's day: Speeches, handshakes and smile, smile, smile.  8  The Democratic chairman accused the Bush camp of "sleaze." 8  'THIS IS OUR WAY OF LIFE'
Like so many communities in rural America, Custer County, Neb., could have already died off.
Instead, its residents are pulling together in a rare kind of cooperative effort that has become the subject of scholarly research.  1  RISE OF THE MEGALOPOLIS
New data from the 1990 census show that metropolitan areas, those unwieldy mixtures of city, suburb and sprawl, are now home to 193 million people, more than three-quarters of the American population.  7  New York is a mecca for foreigners, the data confirm.  7  A SENIOR OFFICER'S DOWNFALL
An admiral's efforts to instill a new set of ethics in the Navy, and the sudden disintegration of his 37-year career, offer a vivid picture of a service that is in transition and turmoil.  6  FIERS ADMITS SKIRTING CONGRESS
The chief prosecution witness in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George acknowledged under intense cross-examination that he had helped run a covert program in Nicaragua after Congress had barred it.  6  SHUTTLE DEPARTS ON BIG MISSION
In a thunderous overture to one of the most complex missions ever attempted, the space shuttle Atlantis rocketed into orbit from Cape Canaveral, Fla.  6  NEW CLUE ON SEXUAL PREFERENCE
Researchers said a cord of nerve fibers allowing the two halves of the brain to communicate with each other is larger in homosexual men than in either heterosexual men or women.
The researchers believe that the finding supports the idea that the brains of homosexuals differ from those of heterosexuals and that sexual orientation has a profound biological basis.  7  Metro Digest 25  Business Digest 39  Sports 30-38  ISRAEL'S FIRST MEDAL
That greener grass may be painted.
Price tag: home-grown produce.
Arts/Entertainment 13-18, 51  Arts Endowment outmaneuvers its liberal critics.  13  Theater: Rose English.  18  Music: Janacek at Salzburg.  13  Dance: A look into the past.  13  Critic's Notebook 51  Obituaries 11  G. Harrold Carswell; was rejected for Supreme Court.
William S. Cook; led expansion of Union Pacific.
Patric Farrell, Irish theater and museum director.
Richard Crowley, an architect.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  A world court for drug lords.
America's nightmare team.
Making excuses for Myanmar.
John P. MacKenzie: Litmus test.
Letters  Russell Baker: The boys of August.
Dudley Clendinen: The gay vote -- music to my ears.
Jay G. Baris: Inner-city banking's Catch-22.
Whitney N. Seymour Jr.: Congress's threat to cockatoos.
Flora Lewis: A globo-cop no longer.


Rain and Wind Do Damage in New Jersey
A line of midsummer thunderstorms that stretched across New Jersey from its coast to the Delaware River drenched the state with rain and buffeted it with tornadolike high winds today, tearing roofs off some buildings and knocking down power lines but causing no injuries.
The town of South Amboy, N.J., and nearby communities bore the brunt of the storm, according to meteorologists with the National Weather Service and police officials in the communities, who said their switchboards were inundated with calls from people who reported seeing a tornado.


Transactions
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Rick Dempsey, catcher, on waivers for the purpose of granting his unconditional release and announced he will resume his duties as instructor for the team.
Purchased the contract of Mark Parent, catcher, from Rochester of the International League.
Recalled Richie Lewis, pitcher, from Rochester.
NEW YORK METS -- Sent Pat Howell, outfielder, to Tidewater of the International League.
Recalled Chris Donnels, infielder, from Tidewater.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Grayer, guard-forward, on a three-year contract.
Signed Keith Jennings and Dell Demps, guards, to one-year contracts.
Replaced Rod Higgins, forward, on their roster.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Named Julie Fie media relations director, effective Sept. 1.
Football  National Football League  DETROIT LIONS -- Agreed to terms with Rodney Peete, quarterback.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Bob Kratch, guard, to a two-year contract.
NEW YORK JETS -- Waived Donnie Gardner, defensive end.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Agreed to terms with Ray Roberts, offensive tackle, on four one-year contracts.
Hockey  National Hockey League  EDMONTON OILERS -- Signed Craig Simpson, center, to a one-year contract.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Named Dave Farrish assistant coach.
Reassigned Robbie Ftorek, assistant coach, to coach of Utica of the American Hockey League.


Census Reveals Changes as It Paints a Picture of Metropolitan America
Some three decades after the word "megalopolis" started competing with its predecessor, "metropolis," for a place in the American consciousness, these unweildy mixtures of city, suburb and sprawl have become home to more than three-quarters of the American population, or 193 million people.
While most people know a metropolitan area when they see it, the Census Bureau must apply legal criteria to decide where they begin and end.
The legal definition requires at least two urban centers, specified rates of population growth and density, and specified commuting patterns.
For laymen, it is enough to think of them as economically linked regions sharing traffic jams, sports teams, television stations and supermarket chains.


T.W.A. Pilot Says He Aborted Doomed Flight After Warning
The pilot of a Trans World Airlines jet told investigators yesterday that he aborted the flight that burst into flame on takeoff at Kennedy International Airport on Thursday because a warning system indicated the aircraft might stall and because the plane did not "feel" normal.
The pilot said he did not even know about the fire until moments after his decision to abort.
Federal investigators focused yesterday on an aging tail engine as a prime suspect in the fire, which gutted the jet moments after it came to a halt and all 292 people aboard escaped down emergency chutes.


In Final Race, Sanders Wins Her Test of Nerves
The Olympics are more a nap than a dream.
They are a few minutes for waving to family from the top of the medal stand and catching melted Snickers bars from the crowd.
For five days Summer Sanders had been waiting for these signs of victory, but they had not come.
She had one lap left tonight in the 200-meter butterfly before her last individual event in the Olympics would be over.
Behind again by half a body-length on the sixth and final night of the swim competition, it was time for the mean face.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in the Company News column of Business Day on Thursday about Kiwi International Airlines misidentified the agency from which Kiwi needs approval to operate in the United States.
It is the Federal Aviation Administration.


Corrections
A report in Styles of The Times last Sunday about the engagement of Kathleen Patricia Healy to Dr.
Woodson Charles Merrell misstated her alma mater.
She is a graduate of Colgate University.


National Governors' Association Meeting Opens


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Anti-Quayle Rumbling Hasn't Ended
Although Vice President Dan Quayle insists that the issue is closed, the question of whether he should stay on the 1992 Republican ticket remains a major topic at the top levels of the party.
With President Bush having also said repeatedly last week that there would be no change, few senior Republicans are willing to discuss the matter publicly.
But promise them anonymity, and a substantial minority of state officials, leaders on Capitol Hill and even Cabinet members readily express their antagonism and especially their wish that Mr.
Quayle would take himself out of the running.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Cos Cob, Conn. 340,000
2 Dandy Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old split level; c/ a and vacuum, slate patio, sprinkler system, 0.75 acre; taxes $2,803.
Stratford, Conn. 135,000
205 Rockland Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 80-year-old colonial; skylights, vaulted ceilings, 2-car detached garage, 50- by 100-foot lot; taxes $1,711.
Shelton, Conn. 125,000
44 Nichols Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old ranch; handyman special, 2-car attached garage, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,356.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 450,000
575 Bedford Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, family room, 1 acre; taxes $8,292.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 410,000
142 Old Church Lane  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 51-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, dining room, solarium, loft, Jacuzzi, 5 acres; taxes $6,070.
South Salem, N.Y. 108,000
52 Bittersweet  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 9-year-old town house; fireplace, dining room, eat-in kitchen, living room, terrace; taxes $2,850.
OTHER AREAS Albertson, L.I. 170,000
26 Hampton Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 1-car detached garage, 40- by 100-foot lot; taxes $2,800.
Edison, N.J. 190,000
488 Grove Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; fireplace, hardwood floors, deck; taxes $3,879.
Howell, N.J. 145,000
13 Cattail Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; fenced yard, c/a, 2-car garage; $2,432.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 2, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war, and a floundering President may not be able to cope.
2
16
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
3
27
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
4
5
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
5
4
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
6
2
THE DUCHESS, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) An American woman, in Scotland to marry a duke, finds a mysterious stranger more attractive.
7
6
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $5.99.) Attending a family funeral, a woman lawyer finds new understanding and love.
8
7
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
9
27
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
10
5
THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman insurance investigator probes the murder of a millionaire.
11
4
THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $5.99.) Sam McCready recalls his years in the British secret service.
12
11
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
13
37
PATRIOT GAMES, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan battles terrorists.
14
9
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
15 *
1
THE PIRANHAS, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket, $5.99.) A young man discovers the ways of Hollywood, Wall Street and organized crime.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
15
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
55
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
4
63
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
5 *
6
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
6
11
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
7 *
11
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series, as recollected by the actor who played Greg.
8
456
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
9
17
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by an Academy Award-winning producer.
10
26
ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $5.99.) The rescue of two Americans from an Iranian prison.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
51
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
80
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
99
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
15
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
5
19
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Miss McMahon, Jeffrey Bochman
Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene F. McMahon of Wayland, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathleen Ellen McMahon to Jeffrey Bruce Bochman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruce A. Bochman of Reading, Mass.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss McMahon, 26 years old, is a senior consultant with Andersen Consulting in Boston.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is the national director of banking for the accounting firm of Ernst &amp; Young in New York.


Honecker Expected to Face an Unusual Trial
Now that Erich Honecker, the former East German leader, is finally in a German jail after more than 16 months under protection in Moscow, politicians and commentators are wondering what kind of trial he will face.
Mr.
Honecker is charged with 49 counts of manslaughter in connection with deaths at the Berlin wall, and prosecutors insist that he will have a normal criminal trial.
But because he was such an important figure in Germany's postwar history and because he presumably knows secrets that could embarrass prominent Germans, many people doubt that his trial will be at all normal.


Electronic Imaging Takes a Step Forward
ON July 15, 11 minutes after Gov.
Bill Clinton appeared on the podium as the Democratic nominee for President, an Associated Press picture of that moment was being laid out for the front pages of the next day's newspapers across the country.
This speed was possible because there was no film to develop: the photographer had made his picture with the Kodak DCS 100 digital camera and transmitted it via a computer modem, saving as much as 20 minutes in processing and transmission.
Tom Stathis, the A.P.'s senior photo editor for North America, called this effort the most successful use of digital still photography since the agency began using it.
Twelve DCS 100 cameras are being used by news organizations at the Olympics in Barcelona.


For Retirees, No Place Like Home
WHEN Samuel and Germania Boyd of Pine Brook, N.J., made their retirement plans in the mid-80's, they briefly considered moving to one of the many South Florida adult communities to which, for decades, legions of retirees have migrated.
Instead of moving to the Sunbelt, though, the Boyds decided to stay put; they bought a new home only 70 miles away, in the Greenbriar Woodlands adult community in Toms River, N.J.
"I am a native of New Jersey, and I have come to like the seasons in New Jersey," said Mr.
Boyd, who is 69 years old.
He and his wife moved to Greenbriar Woodlands after he retired from an executive position at Westinghouse in Newark five years ago.


Susan M. King, Jay M. Felser
Mr. and Mrs.
George R. King of Winter Haven, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Michele King, to Jay Michael Felser, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Felser of Baltimore.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
King, 26 years old, is an advertising copywriter for the Prodigy Services Company in White Plains.
She graduated summa cum laude from Ohio University.
Her father is an orange-juice futures trader for Procter &amp; Gamble in Frostproof, Fla.
Her mother, Mary Jane King, is a fifth-grade teacher at Lake Shipp Elementary School in Winter Haven.


From the Hill to the Hall
"Honey, where'd you hide the baseballs?" Tom Seaver called to his wife, Nancy, from his small office in his home.
"I want to put them back up on the shelves."
"The baseballs?" she called from another part of the house.
"They're in the shopping bags. In the hallway."


An Enigma, Most Unlike Elgar
Provocateurs and eccentrics have always been both tolerated and plentiful on the British classical-music scene, but the latest trend -- young musicians influenced in equal measure by punk style and Bachian or Stravinskian structural detail -- has led to open warfare.
The American counterpart of that battle is the one that separated Serialists and Minimalists a decade ago.
Steve Martland, an eclectic 32-year-old English composer with a tough, crew-cut, punk image and a penchant for bare-chested photos and bellicose declarations ("symphony orchestras are dead institutions, and the people who play in them don't even like classical music"), has made his presence felt in avant-garde circles on both sides of the Atlantic in recent years.
His two latest CD's, "Crossing the Border" (Factory FACD 366) and "Wolfgang" (Factory FACD 406), include some interesting work, and show how many cookie jars he has his hand in. (He also conducts here.) But even with his influences clarified, he remains an enigma.


JULY 26 -- Aug. 1; 292 Passengers Survive Burning Jetliner


Lord Cheshire, World War II Hero Who Founded Homes for Sick, 74
G.
Leonard Cheshire, who was Britain's most decorated pilot in World War II but whose distress over the destruction of war moved him to found an international network of homes for sick people, died Friday in London.
He was 74 years old.
He died of motoneuron disease, a family spokeswoman said.


The End of Books?
To the Editor:
It is interesting that Robert Coover refers to 12-tone music in his essay.
Dodecaphonic music, too, was developed to replace an "outdated" art form, and this new type of music was going to liberate both listener and composer by freeing notes from the tyranny of the tonal system.
As most people except diehard academicians will agree, dodecaphony was a dismal failure, limiting instead of liberating, producing few works of lasting value; meanwhile, tonal music is still flourishing.


Jean Janson and Davis Fulkerson
Jean Ellen Janson, a daughter of Ellen G. Janson and Dr.
Richard H. Janson, both of Shelburne, Vt., was married yesterday to Davis Rand Fulkerson, a son of Allan and Judith Fulkerson of Center Sandwich, N.H.
The Rev.
Dr.
Marshall Davis Jr. performed the ceremony at the Methodist Meeting House in Center Sandwich.
Ms.
Janson, who is 26 years old and keeping her name, graduated from Williams College, as did her husband.
In September, she will be a third-year student in the joint master's degree program in historic preservation and city planning at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a professor of art history at the University of Vermont in Burlington.


C.I.A. Chief Says Legislator Disclosed Secrets
Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, has accused the chairman of the House Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of disclosing sensitive intelligence information and has ordered an inquiry to determine whether sources and intelligence-gathering methods have been jeopardized.
In a letter dated July 24 and made public on Thursday, Mr.
Gates criticized Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, a Texas Democrat and one of the most severe critics of the Administration's policy toward Iraq before the invasion of Kuwait, for including information from "a top-secret, compartmented and particularly sensitive document" dated Sept. 4, 1989.
Report on Arms Purchases
The document, a one-page report that discussed Iraq's weapons purchases, concluded that Baghdad's procurement network was essential to Iraq's development of nuclear weapons, according to a United States official familiar with the report.
Mr.
Gonzalez's staff had access to the document.


Taking Advantage of Season's Tomatoes
REAL tomatoes are back.
For the next couple of months we don't even have to consider commercial tomatoes that have been picked "green-mature," washed in chlorine, coated with parafin oil, ethylene-gassed to make them turn pink and, as a final indignity, refrigerated.
At local markets and farm stands, tomatoes will now be available in their full vine-ripened glory, and chefs everywhere are taking advantage of the fact.
At the Odeon, a bistro in TriBeCa, Stephen Lyle, the chef, blends red tomatoes with fresh corn, roasted red peppers and chilies.
The result is a remarkable deep red soup packed with flavor.
At the Southwestern-style restaurant Mesa Grill, Bobby Flay smokes tomatoes over aromatic woodchips and makes an unusual salsa with them, which he serves with chicken, fish or hamburgers (it is particularly good with grilled salmon).
At Alo Alo, an Italian restaurant on the Upper East Side, Matthew Kenney, the chef, serves an unusual form of gazpacho, making separate purees of yellow beefsteak and red tomatoes, which he seasons with cayenne pepper, red wine vinegar and cumin.
He pours the yellow and red purees into each soup bowl at the same time, creating a two-tone effect, and garnishes the soup with basil leaves and croutons.


Airport Clubs
To the Editor: I am writing in reference to Betsy Wade's article "Waiting It Out at Airport Clubs" (May 31).
Before purchasing a club membership, check to see what limitations are placed on that membership.
As a case in point, Delta Airlines' overseas facilities are limited to first-class and business-class passengers only!


This Vaudeville Baby Keeps On Working
I've got a cow, Her name is Sue. She'll do anything that I ask her to.


The End of Books?
To the Editor:
I'm one of the diehards who think that the print medium will be with us forever.
It possesses many advantages.
For one thing, a book is portable.
I can read it in the subway or the park.
For another, I don't have to keep retraining (I learned to read at age 6, and things have been pretty much the same since) or upgrading expensive computers (well, there is the occasional new pair of reading glasses, but that's it).
And I don't have to hire somebody to recode some old publications into the new technology.


It's a Tattered And Stray Dog's Life, But All's Not Lost
NAME: Paige Powell.
IDENTITY: Advertising and promotion director, Interview magazine.


Anne Joyce and Clifton Johnson
Anne Joyce and Clifton McClure Johnson, both lawyers in the Office of the Legal Adviser at the State Department in Washington, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Hilary Thimmesh performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Hand Chapel of Mount Vernon College in Washington.
Ms.
Joyce, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received her law degree from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Thomas and Patricia Joyce of Collegeville, Minn., and London.
Her father is the managing director in London for the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.


A Prime Place to Strut
Giorgio Armani showed his Le Collezioni styles at the Guggenheim Museum on July 30.


Bosnian Troops Fail to Break Serbs' Tight Siege of Sarajevo
After a military offensive that failed to break the Serbian siege lines around Sarajevo, Bosnian Government troops fell back today to a city plunged in gloom over the heavy costs of the attempt and the narrowing options that it appears to have left to the city's defenders.
After 36 hours of intense fighting on the hills to the north of the city, the battle subsided today, with the Serbian nationalist forces still hemming the Bosnians in as they have since the siege began nearly four months ago.


Corrections
A "What's Doing" article on July 12 about Chicago located Oak Park, Ill., incorrectly.
It is west of the Loop.


Hollywood Redeems a Savings and Loan
Hollywood has uncovered a silver lining in the savings and loan crisis.
The Pico Boulevard branch of the failed Far West Savings and Loan in Los Angeles has been taken over by nonprofit groups operated by the Pro Bono Foundation, which provides aid to charities.
The new tenants include Show Coalition, a nonpartisan celebrity group founded by Patricia Duff Medavoy, wife of the head of Tristar Pictures, and the Children's Action Network, a group founded by Steven Spielberg, among others, that focuses on children's issues.


Susan Passarella, John E. Donovan
Susan Passarella, a daughter of John and Ann Passarella of New York and Ridgefield, Conn., was married yesterday to John Edward Donovan, a son of Robert and Kathleen Donovan of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
William Bergen performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Donovan, 26 years old, is a third-grade teacher at Public School 208 in Manhattan.
She graduated from Dartmouth College, as did her husband, and she is studying for a master's degree in education at Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in the accounting firm of Price Waterhouse in New York.


Talking: Metal Roofs; A Concept Making a Comeback
A CENTURY AGO, metal roofs were all the rage.
At the time, metal was one of the most practical and affordable materials for the home.
But like so many other ideas that have captivated the public and just as rapidly disappeared, its heyday was soon over.
Today most people consider metal roofs the exception rather than the rule.
Moreover, the image these roofs conjure up is too often one of extremes: rusted sheets of corrugated metal that spawned the term "tin shack," or the copper sheeting that is normally used only on luxurious residences.
Actually, metal roofing is a whole lot more.
And in the last few years it has begun to regain popularity, according to the National Roofing Contractors Association, based in Rosemont, Ill.


Stocks Surge, And Wall Street Is Surprised
The American stock market is high but unhappy.
There are a million worries out there, and a lot of confident bears.
By contrast, the bond market is high and quite pleased with itself.
Last week gave a rude shock to the stock market bears, even as it stunned the bond market bulls by abruptly halting the rise in bond prices just as all the news seemed to be pointing ever upward.
Consumer confidence might have plunged, but the stock market soared, with the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 reaching a record level and the Dow Jones industrial average coming close.
For a few minutes, the 30-year Treasury bond yield was at a 1992 low of less than 7.4 percent.
But it edged back up by the end of the week.


Jews in Budapest
To the Editor: My husband and I have just returned from Budapest, where we took the tour mentioned in "Budapest's Historic Ghetto" (May 31). (We took "The Chosen Tours" run by Kultours Jewish Cultural Tours.) As American Jews not of Hungarian descent, we were nevertheless deeply moved by this experience.
The guide was excellent, the bus very luxurious and the places we visited fascinating.
We were taken to the Buda side of the city, where we saw hidden synagogues, one dating back to Roman times, as well as the moving memorial to Raoul Wallenburg and the newer Jewish neighborhoods of the city.
The Jewish Museum, by the way, has a moving exhibit on the fate of the Jews under Nazi control.
JUDITH GURIAN River Edge, N.J.


10 U.S. Students Get Churchill Scholarships
Ten American college students have been awarded this year's Winston Churchill Scholarships for graduate work in engineering, mathematics and the sciences at Cambridge University in England.
The students, who were chosen for their academic and extracurricular achievements, will receive about $20,000 toward tuition, travel and living expenses to attend Cambridge's Winston Churchill College in the next academic year.


Seeing the Fjords From Above
NORWAY's fjords -- those long, narrow arms of the sea formed by glacial erosion -- are among the world's natural wonders.
Most travelers are content to see the fjords from the decks of the cruise ships that ply the waters north of Bergen.
But, as inveterate hikers, my wife and I decided last summer that we wanted to explore the fjord country on foot.
Our destination was Aurland, a secluded mountain village northeast of Bergen in the heart of the fjords.
We chose Aurland because it is easy to reach by boat or train, has a population of only 1,800 and is relatively undiscovered by tourists.


Whitney de Hosson, Michael Marriott
Whitney Gail de Hosson, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard S. de Hosson of Chatham Township, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Arthur Marriott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent J. Marriott Jr. of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Edward Gammons Jr. performed the ceremony at All Saints' Episcopal Church in Bay Head, N.J.
Mrs.
Marriott, 27 years old, is a vice president at County Nat West Securities, a brokerage division of the National Westminster Bank in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Both she and her husband received M.B.A.'s from the New York University.
Her father is a retired dentist in Chatham Township.


A Fly Ball Drops In, and the Yankees Drop Lower
A fly ball that probably should have been caught by left fielder Mel Hall turned into a game-winning double as the Blue Jays continued their mastery over the Yankees with a 3-1 victory today at the Skydome.
Because Joe Carter's towering fly ball dropped untouched off the base of the wall, the Blue Jays defeated the Yankees for the eighth straight time and sent them to their lowest position of the season.
The Yankees are seven games below .500 for the first time all year; they are a season-worst 14 games out of first place and have lost six of their last seven games.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
"THE GOOD OLD DAYS"  The Holocaust as Seen by Its Perpetrators and Bystanders.
Edited by Ernst Klee, Willi Dressen  and Volker Riess.
Free Press, $22.95.


GIVE THIS DOG A JOB
Urban dogs of medium to large size have an occupational opportunity that Donald McCaig failed to mention: running companion.
In my Philadelphia neighborhood, the accompanied runner is invariably female and the canine companion is typically a golden retriever, a Labrador retriever or, my own choice, a standard poodle.
Poodles look bigger than they really are; they are quick to respond and actually look as if they enjoy running.
GAIL W. HEARN
Philadelpha


The Answers
1. Mammals, (b); ungulates, (c); invertebrates, (a).
2.
The blue whale is the largest animal; it can grow to a length of about 100 feet and weigh 150 tons.
The smallest animal is the single-cell amoeba.


Time Off for Ballesteros
SEVE BALLESTEROS will be taking a break from competition after missing his third cut in his last six tournaments.
"I have no feeling for the game," Ballesteros said Friday after a round of even-par 72 left him nine strokes behind his countryman JOSE MARIA OLAZABAL in the Scandinavian Masters in Barseback, Sweden.
"I will go home and have a long, long break. I have to feel for golf in order to play well."


Susan Schnabel, Edward Plummer
Annemarie Schnabel of Richmond Hill, Queens, has announced the engagement of her daughter Susan C. Schnabel to Edward L. Plummer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Plummer of Chelmsford, Mass.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Schnabel, 30 years old, is a vice president in the investment banking department at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University, as did her fiance.
Her father, the late Richard A. Schnabel, was an insurance agent and a real-estate broker in New York.
Her mother, now retired, was a mechanical engineer at Arkwin Industries, an engineering consulting company in Westbury, L.I.


GIVE THIS DOG A JOB
Could someone please give Donald McCaig some more sheep ("Give This Dog a Job," July 5)?
He obviously has too little to do on his farm if he has time to come to New York and watch us walk our dogs.
MELISSA WHITE
New York, N.Y.


The Executive Computer; The Database Marketplace Heats Up
A fierce contest is imminent in the software category of databases for Windows.
The Microsoft Corporation is putting the finishing trim on a program called Access, the company's first home-grown database product.
And Borland International Inc., which has shown enormous gusto for taking on Microsoft, is fine-tuning Paradox for Windows.
Access and Paradox for Windows are likely to emerge as the new standards for advanced business database software, although neither will be available until later this year.


A Friendlier Kind of Mailbag:
INDULGE me.
For a change, the letters we have here are kinder.
Gentler than usual.
Nobody is accusing me of being on the take from the Japanese.
No one is saying I am a dunderhead.
But the letters are thoughtful, too.
And, now and then, I need the reassurance.
Dear Sir:
Really enjoyed your column about the new Dodge Viper.
Triggered many fond memories.
Back in 1960, I fell in love with the Ford Thunderbird and bought one.
Would still have it if some louse hadn't stolen it from the apartment house garage in 1975.


Katherine Furman, Timothy S. Pasik
Katherine Drew Furman, a daughter of Richard and Rosemary Furman of Coconut Grove, Fla., was married in Aspen, Colo. yesterday to Timothy Steven Pasik, a son of Donald and Gloria Pasik of Venice, Fla.
Judge Brooke Peterson of the Aspen Municipal Court officiated at the summer home of the bride's parents.


NFL TRAINING CAMP REPORT
San Francisco 49ers
After three dozen short practices confirmed that his elbow was still sore, Joe Montana was officially scratched from tomorrow's game against Denver and Steve Young was chosen as the starting quarterback.
After throwing for the first time since Monday, Montana, who missed last season with a torn elbow tendon, was not surprised that the pain and the fatigue were still there.
"I kind of figured it would be the same." he said.
"They just wanted me to test it."


Small Orchestras Facing Unharmonious Slow Passages
The Hartford Symphony has not played a note in more than a year, and the fall season may be canceled this week if musicians reject a contract that would drastically reduce their earnings.
Although the dispute has been particularly bitter, the troubles in Hartford are but one expression of the financial difficulties affecting orchestras in medium-sized communities throughout the Northeast.


Technology; Lots More Music Per Square Inch
Recent breakthroughs have raised hopes that engineers will have a device to triple the amount of music stored on a compact disk by the end of the decade.
The new device is a semiconductor laser that emits blue light.
Current semiconductor lasers, which read the music off compact disks, emit only red light.
Because blue light has a shorter wavelength than red, it can be focused on a tinier spot.
That means that each bit of musical information could be stored as a tinier spot on the disk, so that total disk capacity could be raised to three and a half hours of music, from about 70 minutes now.
Realizing this, scientists have been trying to develop blue semiconductor lasers for more than two decades, without any success.


Update;
More than 100 of the country's largest companies and public entities have agreed to pay $30.4 million to settle a civil suit charging that millions of gallons of their toxic waste was illegally dumped at five New York City landfills.
The settlement, which was announced by Mayor David N. Dinkins last week, was the fourth reached by the city in a civil suit filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan in 1985.


Lilian Shackelford and Michael Buhl
Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred C. Shackelford Jr. of Woodberry Forest, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lilian M. Shackelford to Michael A. Buhl, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank C. Buhl of Wilmington, Del.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Shackelford, 33 years old, is a senior vice president of investment banking at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of Virginia, and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University, as did her fiance.
Her father is an administrator at Woodberry Forest School, a private boarding school, where her mother, Mary A. L. Shackelford, is an administrative assistant.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE SWEET HEREAFTER, by Russell Banks. (Harper Perennial, $10.) When a school bus accident in a small town kills 14 children, the local citizens do something as natural as grieving: they assign blame.
But this novel shows that some events cannot be explained and that the unforeseen can bring grace as well as tragedy.
"Mr. Banks is too able a writer to state such things outright," Roger Rosenblatt said here last year, praising the author's "cold and merciful eye."
THE BOOKMAKER'S DAUGHTER: A Memory Unbound, by Shirley Abbott. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $10.95.) Shirley Abbott, author of "Womenfolks: Growing Up Down South," turns again to her childhood in Hot Springs, Ark., this time to remember her father.
An avid reader and promising scholar, Alfred (Hat) Abbott turned to bootlegging and taking bets after a series of misfortunes made him abandon his dreams.
Last year our reviewer, Valerie Sayers, noted that "Hat Abbott choked on his own rage, but his daughter was able to break free. 'The Bookmaker's Daughter' is a moving attempt to understand . . . how a bitter failure of a man was also the father of a real maker of books."


Bridging a Gap
IT'S MIDSUMMER, the season when untold numbers of students quietly decide to take an extended, and often permanent, leave of education.
Having graduated from middle school in June, they simply do not show up for high school next month.
No educator can reliably predict which students in the spring will become the dropouts of summer, since these youngsters disappear without a whimper and with no warning.
And no agency or research group has their measure, since most dropout statistics deal with the high school years.
But many middle-school administrators -- especially in low-income areas -- know the reality and have the anecdotes and the data to prove it.


TODAY'S SECTIONS  Special Today: Education Life/Section 4A A special report on school dropouts. Other articles include: * Incompetence in the class. * The war over Chicano studies. * Jewish women enter an all-male scholarly preserve. Employment Advertising/Section 11*


What Other Countries Think of the U.S. Elections: South Africa; Rodney King and Riots Made Bigger Impressions
For the first time in many years, South Africans have the luxury of watching an American Presidential race with relative indifference.
It has generated far less public interest here than the Rodney King video, which many South African blacks found powerfully disillusioning, and the ensuing riots, which many whites gloated over as evidence that moralistic Americans have race problems of their own.
The traditional sympathies are more or less intact.
The white Government still feels more at ease with President Bush, the heir to "constructive engagement" and an opponent of economic sanctions.
Blacks tend to view the Democrats as better friends for their years of wishful belief that America could somehow force democracy down the throats of the apartheid regime.


Momentum On Affordable Housing
FOUR months after County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke announced plans to build 500 to 600 units of affordable housing on 20 county-owned sites across Westchester, most communities are watching closely while their neighbors move toward building some version of that housing.
In Harrison, New Rochelle, Rye, Eastchester, Yorktown, Peekskill, Mamaroneck and Dobbs Ferry, affordable-housing projects are being studied, planned and, in the case of Dobbs Ferry, readied for occupancy.


Fresh Air Fund Helps Some Girls to Lose Their City Cool
Being a Brooklyn girl, Jeanne Ward cherished her reputation for being undaunted, unfazed, street-smart and ready on the mark.
But what finally undid the 9-year-old had nothing to do with the streets.
It was a moody Holstein on a farm in upstate New York.
As Jeanne and an awe-struck group of little girls gathered around the grazing black and white cow they jumped at her every move.
They ignored invitations by camp counselsors to come closer and giggled over the cow's demeanor and odor.


Bank Charges Embarrass the Saudis
Early last month, as top officials of the Federal Reserve were about to publicly accuse Saudi Arabia's biggest bank and its manager of violating United States banking laws in connection with a multibillion-dollar fraud, the kingdom's top regulators and their lawyers rushed to contact Fed officials, hoping to settle the matter quietly.
If the Federal Reserve publicly announced its charges, the Saudi Government, the United States' most important ally in the Persian Gulf, would be linked to the growing scandals involving the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, and King Fahd would be personally embarrassed.


Where a Player Can Strike Out and Stay at the Plate
IT'S been a rough year for seers.
First there was going to be a hot race between Bill Clinton and Mario Cuomo.
Next there was going to be a brokered Democratic convention.
And then Ross Perot was supposed to choose Jeane Kirkpatrick for his running mate and throw the election into the House of Representatives.


The Executive Life; A Hollywood Ritual of Musical Chairs
It's Friday evening, and Hollywood's elite are decked out for an annual courting ritual, the American Cinematheque Moving Picture Ball.
At the center table in the Beverly Hilton ballroom is the man of honor, Sean Connery, whose international stature and star appeal set the tone for an evening where Hollywood players position themselves to see and be seen, to stroke and be stroked.
Every effort to gain an edge matters, so where a studio exec or top agent is seated is more than a matter of simple elbow room.


Betty Yassa Tannin and Paul Michael Dicker
Phyllis R. Tannin of Chappaqua, N.Y., has announced the engagement of her daughter Betty Yassa Tannin to Dr.
Paul Michael Dicker, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Dicker of Roseland, N.J.
A March wedding is planned.


When Movies Spoke Yiddish
BRIDGE OF LIGHT
Yiddish Film Between Two Worlds.
By J. Hoberman.
Illustrated. 401 pp.
New York: The Museum of Modern Art/ Schocken Books. $40.


Let's Play By Same Rules
To the Sports Editor:  Commissioner Fay Vincent's disputed ruling to realign the National League suggests another change that should also be made in the best interests of baseball.
The designated hitter has produced a different set of rules for each league.
This duality has, in my opinion, adversely affected the quality of the game.


Sound For Scholars
Summer's lease, according to Shakespeare, hath all too short a date, and many young listeners are already thinking about stereo gear to take back to school.
To suit the peripatetic life of the college crowd, wouldn't the ubiquitous boom box be best?
Granted, there is something to be said for a complete sound system that can be picked up by a handle.
But boom boxes, notwithstanding convenience, are unlikely to please a discerning ear.
Most portable sound equipment is extremely lightweight, with flimsy speakers.
Moreover, to prolong battery life, power is usually so skimpy that fully scored orchestral passages are marred by ear-grating distortion -- a drawback compounded by sound that is often tailored to the more edgy aspects of popular music and decidedly unflattering to traditional instrumental timbres.


In the U.S., Silenzio on the Set
If "A Fistful of Dollars" and those other Italian shoot-'em-ups were spaghetti westerns, what is "Lucky Luke"?
This 10-episode comedy western series, made for Italian television, is based on a popular French-language comic book, used American writers and a mostly American cast (including guest stars like Julie Hagerty, Madeline Kahn and John Saxon), and was produced and directed by the Italian actor Terence Hill, who also stars.
But unlike those old Clint Eastwood movies, which were filmed in Italy, "Lucky Luke" was shot in English just outside Santa Fe, N.M.


Update; Day-Care Center Dropped After Neighbors Protest
At 45th Avenue and Auburndale Lane in Flushing, Queens, a two-and-a-half-story house is for sale, signaling the defeat of a plan to build a day-care center amid a dispute with ethnic overtones.
In 1990, Fu-Ching Lo, principal of the New York Best Chinese School, located a mile away in Flushing, bought the house with plans to enlarge it and open a day-care center for 50 to 60 children.
The center, he said, was sorely needed by working parents in the community.
But people in the vicinity of the house objected, holding that the center would create traffic problems, ruin the neighborhood's suburban-like tranquillity and violate zoning laws.


A Researcher Charts an Airborne Assault of Lyme Disease
THEY sing, they fly, and what would the dawn be without them?
Yet threatened as they already are by pesticides and the loss of habitat, birds now bear another burden, hidden in their feathers.
Some species, mostly the ground-feeding or ground-nesting ones, are spreading the tick that causes Lyme disease.
It is unclear how large a part birds play in fostering the disease, but scientists like Gertrude R. Battaly of White Plains are trying to find out.
Ms.
Battaly teaches biology at the Academy of Mount St.
Ursula in the Bronx and has Federal and state permits to catch birds for research.
For eight years, she has documented the relationship between birds and Ixodes dammini, the deer tick, by studying bird populations in a variety of habitats.


From Writing Policies To Regulating Them
When Gov.
Jim Florio appointed an insurance executive, Samuel F. Fortunato, in 1990 to be the state's insurance commissioner and to oversee a massive overhaul of the state's huge and tempestuous insurance industry, it raised an eyebrow or two, as if the elephant had been appointed to guard the peanut stand.
Mr.
Fortunato, who had been president, chief executive and chairman of Metropolitan Property and Casualty Company, itself a huge casualty insurer, concedes the shift to public work was a major one.


Cushioning Resistance To Man's Vices
On needlework pillows, the subject is usually roses, not barrel-chested dogs with protruberant lower jaws.
This scrappy bulldog, its jaws set as firmly as Churchill's ever were, stands in triumph over symbols of masculine vice, Victorian style: playing cards, a pair of dice, tobacco, a pipe and a cigar burning in an ashtray.
The picture is a reproduction of a period illustration.


Don't Fix the Electoral College. Scrap It.
To the Editor:
"The Electoral Vote, Splintered" (editorial, July 11), on the way the Electoral College votes, cites some alleged benefits of a system in which each Congressional district in a state casts one vote, and the statewide winner gets the other two votes (each state having as many electors as it has representatives and senators).
The idea has serious drawbacks.


Young People Need To Know About AIDS
As a parent I would like to thank you for "H.I.V. Infecting More in High School"  [ July 12 ] .
The points brought forth are of extreme importance.
Parents and teachers and all who contribute to the upbringing and education of our young owe them accurate information about AIDS.
As parents we must learn the facts and talk to our kids; we are the ones who love them most.
Teachers as authority figures can make deep impressions on students.
Many of us who are parents of adolescents arrived at adulthood on the wave of the "sexual revolution," propelled by the birth-control pill.
Although abstinence and long-term H.I.V.-free monogamy are the safest routes to take, considering the environment of our own early adulthood and that of our adolescents, abstinence and monogamy are not at present realistic for all.
Kids must learn about "safer sex." They deserve open communication lines, frank age-appropriate answers to scary questions and a lot of compassion.
It should start when they are young.
A kindergartener needs to be reassured he/she won't catch AIDS from a drinking fountain.
A high school student must realize that one unprotected sexual experience could prove fatal.


Slow Reflexes of Judges Blamed for Griffin's Loss
After a promising start, the United States boxing team suffered its most severe setbacks today as three straight fighters lost decisions in the second round of Olympic competition.
The most devastating blow was a stunning upset of Eric Griffin, the reigning world light flyweight champion, who dropped a controversial 6-5 decision to Rafael Lozano of Spain.


An Evening In Arthampton
July 25 at the Parrish Art Museum: it seemed the whole town was there.


Shorter Contracts Are Better
To the Sports Editor:
I think the time has come to bring back the one-year contract, or possibly the two-year contract, for baseball players.
In the old days before free agency, the player was offered a salary on what he accomplished the previous season and not based on future potential.
Giving a long-term contract, from three to five years, is ridiculous.


THE WORLD: Conversations; How to Take Over the Store: Secrets of a Russian Workaholic
AMONG Russia's new proprietors, Natalya Maloletneva is trying to distance herself from the old ways of Russian shopkeepers as if they were quicksand.
She is a workaholic in a country just beginning to frown on clock-watchers.
She prides herself on her decisiveness.
And her tailored, brightly colored suits and silk blouses advertise her new managerial status, making her stand out like a flashing billboard from her sales clerks in their gray smocks.
After commuting from her apartment in what she describes as "one of Moscow's ecologically good districts," Mrs.
Maloletneva devotes the first 90 minutes of most days to "chats" with her employees at Lyudmila, a department store that caters to women.
"They are private conversations," she said.
"Sometimes I praise and sometimes I criticize and often it is family talk, because we are all women and they ask me for personal advice. The people who work here have trust in me."


Fatal Charter-Bus Crash Reveals How Easily Rules Can Be Evaded
Many of the thousands of chartered buses that give children and adults the chance to spend a precious day or two away from New York City's hard summer streets pose serious safety risks because they are neither registered nor inspected by the state, transportation officials said.
While the law requires that all such buses be registered with the state and display diamond-shaped stickers on the windshields that indicate that they have passed rigorous inspections twice a year, many smaller charter companies simply ignore the rules, operating furtive fleets in the city and the region, the officials said.


Creepy Crawlers That Multiply in the Moisture
THE abundant rainfall has been glorious for gardens.
Annuals are blooming.
Trees are gorgeous with leaves.
Vegetables are thriving.
So are the slugs.
This has been the kind of growing season that appeals to slugs: plenty of moisture, abundant leafy growth and well-mulched gardens.
All of the factors that favor plants seem to favor slugs.
When favorite garden plants are seen to have mysterious holes or, worse, are completely devoid of leaves and only the stem is left, then suspect slugs.
No plant in particular appeals to slugs; they like them all although they do have a few special favorites, like hostas and marigolds.


DANIEL DAY-LEWIS
Daniel Day-Lewis need not have felt a sense of shame about his work in "Ever Smile, New Jersey" ("The Intensely Imagined Life of Daniel Day-Lewis," by Richard B. Woodward, July 5).
I caught the film in Madrid and found it a nice change from the usual commercial stuff that hits the big screen.


An Art Lover Says The Emperor Is Naked
Andy Warhol must be laughing up his celestial sleeves (and his heirs, at their improved acidic assets) to have read Phyllis Braff's poor review of his "Oxidation Paintings"  [ "A Penetrating Look at Warhol," July 5 ] .
When she seriously sees a "spring landscape," "clouds" and "flower clusters" from (his?) "pale greenish drippings" of urine on metal -- then I, for one, a life-long lover of all art -- must rebel.
After this, art can no longer be defined as anything produced by an artist.
That would still permit an adoring critic to find beauty in the "soft ambiguities" of his (?) fecal output on metal!


U.S. Women Run Past Chinese to Win by 93-67
In Tokyo, where Medina Dixon has been a popular professional basketball player for the past seven years, she must practice three hours a day, an endless but typically Japanese routine she could do without.
Still, as the imported American star, she gets off easy.
"Everyone else has to practice six hours, three in the morning and three in the afternoon," she said.


New Zealand By Land and Sea
For travelers interested in the flora and fauna of New Zealand, Southern Heritage Tours is offering land tours that explore the two main islands of the archipelago, and cruises to the smaller, sub-Antarctic islands to the south.
Naturalists and guest lecturers accompany tour groups.
The land tours, which are limited to 15 people, are 5 days long and can be taken separately or combined into a 10- or 15-day package.
The sights on the Southern Splendors tour on South Island, for example, include the alpine scenery of Arthur Pass National Park, glaciers and forests along the west coast and wading bird and penguins near the southeast city of Dunedin.


Luncheon Clubs: A Tradition Fades
GONE are the days when men gathered in smoke-filled libraries to scan the newspapers a half-hour before lunch.
Gone are the days when power brokers washed down three-course midday meals with too many martinis.
And gone are Newark's private luncheon clubs.
In late March, the last remaining and oldest of the luncheon clubs -- the 116-year-old Essex Club at 52 Park Place -- closed its doors.
The nearby 744 Club on Broad Street closed last year, and the Downtown Club folded a few years earlier.


Holly Golightly Grow Up
THE night before, Liza Minnelli had sat on the same red leather banquette, reserved by the Russian Tea Room for the sour creme de la creme of celebrities.
And now here, up front, is Carol Matthau, best known -- until her current splash -- as the wife of the actor Walter Matthau; before that, the wife (twice) of the writer William Saroyan.
She gets the V.I.P. treatment from the Tea Room staff and a hearty hello from the owner herself, Faith Stewart-Gordon.
What a difference writing a well-publicized, much-talked-about book can make, especially if it's a juicy, name-dropping, bed-bouncing, no-beach-blanket-should-be-without-it memoir like Mrs.
Matthau's "Among the Porcupines" (Turtle Bay Books, $23).


Tours to Russia, Israel and China
Olga Abramova, an experienced English-speaking tour guide in Russia, will escort a two-week tour of Russia and Central Asia starting Sept. 24 for a California tour company.
Ms.
Abramova, a St.
Petersburg resident, was an Intourist guide for nearly 20 years and, according to the tour company, East-West International Tours, has excellent English and an outstanding knowledge of Russian art and architecture.
Emphasizing, art, history and architecture, the tour begins in St.
Petersburg and continues in Tashkent, Samarkand and Bukhara, ending in Moscow.
Meetings with politicians, journalists and economists are also planned.
The price of $3,295 a person, double occupancy, includes air fare from New York, hotels, all meals, three theater performances and the Moscow Circus.
Information: East-West International Tours, 909 East Yorba Linda Boulevard, Placentia, Calif. 92670; (800) 359-6719.


Clare T. Hotte, G. T. Bournigal
Clare Thaddean Hotte, a daughter of Roger and Mary Hotte of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Guillermo Tabere Bournigal, the son of Guillermo F. Bournigal and Vanessa Cruz-Ayala, both of Santo Domingo, the Dominican Republic.
The Rev.
John Duffell performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Augustine's Church.
Mrs.
Bournigal, 25 years old, graduated from American University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father is a vice president and an owner in Software Dynamics Inc. in New York.
Her mother is the executive director of the Community Planning Council of Yonkers.


English Manor
To the Editor: I recently returned from a trip to England that I think would be of interest to your readers.
I spent three days in London and then joined a tour that I booked at home through Land of the Lakes Tours at (800) 441-2558.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
PHILHARMONIC OUTDOORS
For the 12th year, the New York Philharmonic is treating Westchester residents to a free al fresco concert.
The gates at Westchester Community College in Valhalla will open at 5 P.M. on Wednesday for picnicking, and Kurt Masur, the orchestra's music director, will lift his baton at 8.


A Wall Street Parable With No Heroes
Anyone trying to understand the flaws in the way American corporations are governed should take a long look at the Cooper Companies.
Less than a decade ago, Cooper was a prosperous maker of contact lenses and medical products with $1.3 billion in assets and more than $600 million in sales.
Today, it is a shrunken, unprofitable company at risk of indictment for insider trading violations.
What happened?
The glib explanation is that like many companies Cooper fell prey to the debt addiction of the 80's and was forced to go cold turkey when the credit tap ran dry.
But a closer look reveals more than that: a tale of selfish executives, compliant directors and inattentive investors that could serve as a warning to anyone who trusts boardroom democracy to protect shareholders and employees.


FIT FOR THE ROAD
I read Hal Rubenstein's article "Fit for the Road" (Fitness: July 12) and thought he couldn't be serious in saying that you need all of that equipment to get exercise while on vacation.
Try walking 15 minutes from the station to your hotel, luggage in hand, instead of lifting weights.
Jogging can be a pleasant form of sightseeing, and as for the portable steps (at $340, no less), most hotels have excellent and usually empty stairwells.
Exercise is one thing no one has to buy.
CAROLYN SEYDEL
New York, N.Y.
ILS&gt;Photo of a woman exercising (Photograph by Karen Kuehn/Matrix)


All About/Ice Cream; In the Cut-Throat World of Ice Cream, Flavormania!
Summer is bringing something even dearer to the hearts of ice cream aficionados than hot fudge.
More.
As in more flavors, more exotic -- if not downright strange -- concoctions and more kinds of frozen treats to pick over.
Despite a barely perceptible growth in overall ice cream sales, and cut-throat competition for freezer space, regional and national companies have so far this year turned out more than 200 new ice cream and other frozen dessert products.
Industry experts and financial analysts say companies are trying to lift sales by offering chunkier, jazzier or just wackier ice cream to set the product apart from the rest.


Deborah L. Abramson and Michael A. Levine
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley I. Abramson of New City, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Deborah Lynn Abramson, to Dr.
Michael Alan Levine, the son of Carole Levine of Hewlett, N.Y., and Harvey Levine of Brooklyn.
A December 1993 wedding is planned.


The End of Books?
To the Editor:
Your hypotext on hypertext  writ by Robert Coover  is hyperbole in hypolex,  though Coover's sure a groover.
What gurus of the new can't see  is how new fads betray us,  for when you hustle entropy  your progeny is chaos.
JACK MATTHEWS Athens, Ohio


This Actress Is Trying The Sympathy Method
Carolyn Warmus, who was found guilty in the Westchester Fatal Attraction case, may get more sympathy from ABC than she did from the jury.
Virginia Madsen, who will portray the murderess in ABC's television movie "Lovers of Defeat," believes Ms.
Warmus didn't do it.


The Scourging of Africa
Take pity on the untimely sorrows of Africa.
At a moment of undreamed-of political gains -- apartheid crumbling, wars ending and tyrannies tottering -- much of Africa is now beset by the worst drought in this century.
The rains never came in January.
Crop yields fell by 70 percent in normally bountiful South Africa and Zimbabwe.
And as sure as August heat, hunger or death threaten a third of the 100 million people living in affected countries of southern and eastern Africa.


Giuliani Seeks Money in Italy for Mayoral Campaign
New York City politicians have been making missions of mercy to Italy at least since Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia toured the devastation of World War II.
But now another Italian-American, who hopes to follow in La Guardia's footsteps, is preparing to ask for help from Americans in Italy.
Rudolph W. Giuliani, a frequent figure in the Italian press from his days as the Mafia-busting United States Attorney in Manhattan, is planning a fund-raising and absentee-ballot drive among New York expatriates to help in his rematch against Mayor David N. Dinkins next year.


Treasury Secretary Criticized for Using Term 'Japs'
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady ran into strong criticism this weekend from prominent Asian-Americans and the Japanese Embassy after he used the term "Japs" at an informal breakfast with reporters on Thursday.
"We have been told our workers are idle and ill-educated, our goods uncompetitive and our managers inefficient and we can't compete with the Japs or the Germans or for that matter anybody else in the world," Mr.
Brady said.
He later apologized.


3d Strike Has Pittsburgh Jittery About Its Image
As the management of the Pittsburgh Press Company sat down today for the fourth day of talks with striking drivers, there was optimism that the city's two-and-a-half-month newspaper strike might finally be ending.
But the optimism is tempered by longer-range worries: that despite years of effort, Pittsburgh is still far from shedding its reputation as a city where labor and management just cannot get along.


Corrections
The Networking column on July 19, about news organizations' technical arrangements for covering the Democratic National Convention, misidentified Reginald Stuart.
He is an assistant news editor in the Washington bureau of Knight-Ridder Newspapers, not Washington bureau chief.


Sunny Side Up
To the Editor:
Even though Charles Kuralt is four decades older than I am, I too am an admirer of his  [ "The Unlikely Heroizing of Charles Kuralt," July 5 ] .


2 Brothers, 2 and 4, Die in Brooklyn Blaze
Two brothers, 2 and 4 years old, were killed yesterday afternoon when a fire described as suspicious swept through their apartment in Brooklyn, fire officials said.
The boys' mother, Milidy DeJesus, was in the kitchen when the fire started about 1:20 P.M. in a bedroom where the boys were playing, and she escaped uninjured from the burning apartment at 364 Grand Street, near Marcy Avenue, in Williamsburg, a spokesman for the Fire Department, Jerry Sanford, said.


Chimney Cracks Need Repairs While Still Small
BRICK chimneys need periodic exterior maintenance to keep them from deteriorating.
If cracks, crumbling mortar, loose bricks or other problems go unrepaired, expensive professional rebuilding may be necessary or, in extreme cases, a storm can blow down a chimney.
Performing routine care is usually fairly easy, provided that the roof is not too steep.
Amateurs should avoid working on roofs that slope more than about four inches per foot of horizontal distance.
The slope can be measured with a ruler or framing square by holding either tool along the edge of the roof at a gable end.


Elizabeth Pounders, John Oehmler
Elizabeth Dariel Pounders, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis R. Pounders of Memphis, was married there yesterday to John Michael Oehmler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Oehmler of Dallas.
The Rev.
James S. Lowry performed the ceremony at the Idlewild Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Oehmler, 24 years old, was until recently a sales associate for news products at Reuters in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Mr.
Oehmler, 25, graduated from Harvard University and is a second-year law student at Washington and Lee University.


They Are Running Circles Around the Rings
Halfway through these Olympic Games, there are more hairy issues and bald heads than multimedal heroes.
Matters are unlikely to change this week in Barcelona, where drugs, commercialism and poor sportsmanship have found a comfortable roost on the medal stand.
Too often, the snapshots of grace and heartfelt accomplishment have been tainted by careless accusations, bullying, greed and provincial haggling.


In Heat of the Day, 26 Miles Boils Down to 8 Seconds
With the bright lights of the Olympic Stadium glimmering like the landing lights at an airport, Valentina Yegorova of the Unified Team went into final approach tonight and ran away from Yuko Arimori of Japan to win the women's marathon of the 1992 Summer Games in 2 hours 32 minutes 41 seconds.
Yegorova's margin of victory was eight seconds, making the race the closest marathon in Olympic history -- for men or women -- and one of the most closely contested major marathons ever.
In the 1988 Summer Games at Seoul, South Korea, Rosa Mota of Portugal outran Lisa Martin of Australia by 13 seconds.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison 190,000
488 Grove Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; fireplace, hardwood floors, deck; taxes $3,879.
Howell 145,000
13 Cattail Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; central air-conditioning, fenced yard, 2-car garage; $2,432.
Jackson 143,000
20 Red Cedar Run  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; deck, 2-car garage, central air-conditioning; taxes $3,849.
Point Pleasant 142,000
537 Barclay Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old custom built ranch; full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,668.
Randolph 185,000
25 John Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old bilevel; new enclosed patio, fireplace; taxes $4,408.
Rockaway 208,000
20 Monroe Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old colonial; large family room, dentil moldings, central vacuum; taxes $4,318.
OTHER AREAS Shelton, Conn. 125,000
44 Nichols Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old ranch; handyman special, 2-car attached garage, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,356.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 450,000
575 Bedford Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, family room, 1 acre; taxes $8,292.
Albertson, L.I. 170,000
26 Hampton Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 1-car detached garage, 40- by 100-foot lot; taxes $2,800.


Edith Bernhard, Martinus Van Breems
Mrs.
Harrison R. Valante and Arnold Van Hoven Bernhard, both of Westport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Edith Van Hoven Bernhard to Martinus van Harwegen den Breems, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arie van Harwegen den Breems of Westport.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Bernhard, 26, is the marketing vice president of Hummingbird Farms in Ridgely, Md.
She graduated from Colby College.
Her father is a director of Value Line Inc., the investment advisory publisher and mutual-fund management company in New York.
The prospective bride is a stepdaughter of Diane Bernhard of Westport and of Dr.
Harrison R. Valante, also of Westport.


Kidnapped or Converted?
Hiding behind Dumpsters and parked cars, Jacky Fhima has spent long nights waiting outside the tan-brick yeshiva in Brooklyn, hoping to catch a glimpse of his son, Shai.
Nearly four months ago, the 13-year-old boy disappeared amid a clash of religious and secular Jewish worlds -- a bitter dispute between his mother and stepfather and the Hasidic rabbi who runs the yeshiva in Borough Park.


Croatian Leader on Defensive in Fight for Re-Election
President Franjo Tudjman's face gazes benevolently from hundreds of billboards.
His slogan is "From victory to prosperity," but Mr.
Tudjman, running for a new five-year term in Sunday's elections, finds himself uncharacteristically on the defensive on both counts.
A far-right party whose members affect black shirts, fascist salutes and the insignia of Croatia's World War II years as a Nazi puppet state, is calling for the country to resume its war against neighboring Serbia.
Most of the other candidates opposing Mr.
Tudjman criticize both the United Nations peacekeeping plan accepted by Croatia this year to end the hostilities and the country's collapsing economy.
Loss of Territory
The landslide victory by Mr.
Tudjman's Croatian Democratic Union in elections two years ago set Yugoslavia on the road to dissolution.


New Haven Seeks League of Its Own
GEORGE BUSH played there.
So did Ted Williams, who in a pre-season game against the New York Yankees hit a titanic home run that old timers in the New Haven area still talk about.
Much later, former New York Mets pitching star Ron Darling performed there before going on to the big leagues.
Since it opened in 1927, Yale Field, the home of Yale's baseball team, has been one of the most beautiful ball parks in the country.
Yet, once the Bulldogs' season ends in late April or early May, it sits unused throughout most of the spring and all of the summer.


Suzanne Lund, Christopher Miller
Suzanne Denise Lund, the daughter of Jane and Charles Lund of Teaneck, N.J., was married in New York yesterday to Christopher Andrew Miller, the son of Brye Bonner of Dundee, Ill., and Leon Miller of Oak Park, Ill.
Rabbi Nathaniel Benjamin performed the ceremony at the Parker Meridien Hotel.
Mrs.
Miller, 24 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College and has a master's degree in economics from the University of Chicago, where she is a doctoral candidate in that subject.


Listen to Spain Try to Explain Its 20 Points 'Of Shame'
The Spanish press was covering itself with sackcloth yesterday, dissecting and critiquing the loss by its men's basketball team to Angola on Friday.
The Spanish were routed, 83-63, as Angola won only its fifth international game and eliminated the team representing the basketball-mad host country.


Jewish Women's Scholarly Gain
Imagine reading a book without any commas periods or other punctuation marks imagine reading without capitalization or vowels that is what reading the talmud is like but also imagine that you have mastered the keys to this complex library of jewish knowledge with its own set of rules
Suddenly, things make sense.
Suddenly you understand not only the words and the concepts but have joined an intellectual process that has shaped more than 2,000 years of Jewish spiritual life and religious law.
You are not merely a reader; you are a player.
This type of intellectual awakening -- a reflection of women's advances in secular education -- is occurring for a growing number of Jewish women for whom the Talmud was virtually a closed book.
For generations, rabbis and Jewish educators, with few exceptions, have discouraged women by telling them Talmud study was not for them or, more subtly, by denying them the language tools they needed.


Reporter Facing Jail Over Her Refusal to Testify
A Vermont newspaper reporter faces the likelihood of jail and fines on Tuesday if she persists in refusing to answer questions about three telephone interviews that she conducted with a prisoner.
The reporter, Susan Smallheer of The Rutland Daily Herald, must appear before Judge George F. Ellison of Vermont District Court in White River Junction, 40 miles east of here, for declining last Monday to give information in a deposition sought by both the prosecution and the defense in a case involving the prisoner's escape from jail last year.


JULY 26 - AUG. 1: Deja Vu; Another Mafia Murder Escalates Rome's Rhetoric, But Sicily Remains Cynical
Within days of the killing of yet another senior judge in Palermo, the Sicilian Mafia struck again last week, this time killing a high-ranking police officer in the city of Catania on the other side of the island.
If the mob's actions in eliminating adversaries seemed to fit a pattern, so too did the authorities' response.
Just the day before the police inspector, Giovanni Lizzio, died in Catania, authorities had dispatched 7,000 troops to the island in a demonstration of resolve after the earlier car-bombings of two senior anti-Mafia leaders , Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino.


STATE LEGISLATORS ARE LEAVING OFFICE IN RECORD NUMBERS
A third of the state legislators in the nation are giving up their seats this year in an exodus that experts say is the largest in more than 30 years.
The turnover, which experts say is sure to be swollen further by the defeat of some incumbents in November, parallels a high number of departures by members of Congress.


Clarification on Helping Compulsive Eaters
I am writing regarding the Westchester Q&amp;A on July 5 about my work with compulsive eaters.
The response to the article was wonderful, with many people calling about it, grateful to know that this kind of help exists in Westchester.
I think you have provided a valuable public service by making people aware of the existence of a program that offers a way out of the desperate struggle and obsession with food.
On the whole I was very pleased with the content of the article.
Excerpts from the interview reflected that interview quite accurately.
However, in the first and second paragraphs of the article thoughts are attributed to me that are not true and with which I disagree, and I would like the opportunity to correct that in the paper.


True 'Service' Can't Be Coerced
Youth service: two educational buzzwords for the 90's.
They describe a way to teach youngsters that, in a democracy, rights and responsibilities go hand in hand.
Now, Maryland has become the first state to require its high school students to perform 75 hours of service.
The idea of encouraging students to help those who may be old, disabled or homeless is admirable.
But states and school districts need to consider carefully whether mandated service is the best approach.


Bridging the Cultural Gap in Chappaqua
"IT'S not like I miss the bullets," said Tarolyn Molina, a 15-year-old from the Bronx who is a first-year student in the Chappaqua Summer Scholarship Program.
"But I mean, I got used to it. At home, my mother would say, 'Didn't you hear the shots last night?' and I'd say, 'No, I slept through it.' But now, where I'm staying, it's like there are 800 little birds chirping outside my window. And I'm like -- Hey, what's that noise?" she said.
Tarolyn is one of 16 visiting students experiencing the relative peace as well as the entirely new culture of the suburbs while she takes courses at Horace Greeley High School.


Streetscapes: Lower Manhattan; Rare Daguerrotype Raises Questions
IT is a frustrating puzzle for historians: The photographic process was introduced in New York City from France in 1839, but the earliest views of the city date from 1853.
Written accounts describe exhibitions of early daguerreotype views of New York, but none survive, whereas such views exist for Boston, Philadelphia and other cities.
Now a Connecticut collector, Joseph Buberger, has cracked the puzzle with a daguerreotype of Chatham Street.
But it is a crack that still wants widening, because research indicates the small, silvery image dates from no earlier than 1848.


Barcelona Breaks the Record for Inspired Urbanism
Even in the heat of a Spanish summer, a visitor entering the Barcelona Pavilion may feel a chill run down the spine.
The reason is partly the stunning beauty of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe's building, partly the uncompromising coolness of its design.
But mainly, it's the shock of seeing a ghost.
The original version of this modern milestone vanished years ago.
Designed for Barcelona's 1929 world's fair, the "German Pavilion" was never meant to last.
But its taut geometric forms, rendered in marble, steel, glass and water, lived on in photographs, and several generations of architects have called the building home.
The precise, asymmetric balance of sumptuous materials and simple forms introduced a new ideal of beauty.
It proclaimed that the 20th century could produce its own distinctive style.


'Ethnic Cleansing.' Europe's Old Horror, With New Victims
THE images of the dispossessed of Bosnia have a dreadful European familiarity.
"Ethnic cleansing" and the flight of innocents it has set off mark the reappearance of policies that for the span of two generations, since the defeat of the Nazis, seemed to have vanished from the continent.
The sufferings of Bosnia, stark and powerful in themselves, evoke unmistakable tragic memories as families are forced into desperate flight because of their names, their culture or their religion.
It has not happened for 47 years but it has all happened before: to Jews, rounded up and warehoused for death in ghettos and camps as regions were to be made "Judenfrei," to gypsies, to Armenians, to Slavs.


What Other Countries Think of the U.S. Elections: China; Bush Is an Old Friend, And Defends Open Trade
President Bush can always count on hundreds of millions of fans in China this fall.
People here regard him as an old friend and still talk about how he and his wife, Barbara, used to ride their bicycles around Beijing when they lived here in the early 1970's.
Friendship aside, the Government also has another reason to support the incumbent: President Bush will fight Congress to keep China's unconditional "most favored nation" trade status, despite human rights abuses.
Bill Clinton probably would not.
That makes this, from China's point of view, a one-issue race.


Pamela Rodman and Robert Friedman
Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Rodman of Riverdale, the Bronx, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela Beth Rodman, to Robert Howard Friedman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Friedman of Fort Lee, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Rodman, 27 years old, is the project manager in the strategic-programs department of the New York Blood Center.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother, Ellen Rodman, is a partner in LN Productions, a television program development and consulting firm in New York.


An Undaunted Mario Biaggi Returns to Politics


County Libraries Differ From New York City's
The Westchester Library System welcomes the comments of Milton Goldin, a professional fund raiser, as well as others interested in improving the financial viability of public libraries in Westchester.
I wish, however, to respond to some of the points made by Mr.
Goldin in his letter to the editor  [ "Libraries Can't Copy New York City Model," July 12 ] .
There is little parallel, if any, between the Westchester Library System and the New York Public Library.
The Westchester Library System is a state-financed, cooperative public library system chartered to serve its 38 member libraries in the county.
These public libraries are independent and autonomous and financed by the locality in which each library is located.


Creepy Crawlers That Multiply in the Moisture
THE abundant rainfall has been glorious for gardens.
Annuals are blooming.
Trees are gorgeous with leaves.
Vegetables are thriving.
So are the slugs.
This has been the kind of growing season that appeals to slugs: plenty of moisture, abundant leafy growth and well-mulched gardens.
All of the factors that favor plants seem to favor slugs.
When favorite garden plants are seen to have mysterious holes or, worse, are completely devoid of leaves and only the stem is left, then suspect slugs.
No plant in particular appeals to slugs; they like them all although they do have a few special favorites, like hostas and marigolds.


To Recover Its Health, Hospital Takes a Partner
WITH a budget deficit of $1.25 million last year and projected losses of $200,000 this year, the 50-bed Community Hospital here had two choices: cutting staff and services or forging an alliance with a larger and more profitable institution.
After several months of negotiations, an alliance became the obvious solution, and administrators at the Dobbs Ferry hospital and at the 215-bed Phelps Memorial Hospital Center in North Tarrytown announced this month that they would share staff, purchasing arrangements and some services.


Once Again, Traditional French Cuisine
THE pale pink, trellised and mirrored prettiness of the dining rooms and the classic French menu at Le Chambord in Westport make one think of the 1950's.
The menu in particular seems caught in a time warp, with offerings like escalope de veau Bercy, filet mignon with bearnaise, chateaubriand bouquetiere, coq au vin de bourgogne and cervelle de veau beurre noire.
We first reviewed Le Chambord in 1978.
In subsequent years food tastes have evolved from the simplicity of nouvelle cuisine to indigenous regional spinoffs like trendy Californian, Cajun and others.
Perhaps now, after a flurry of goat cheese, pesto and sun-dried Everythings, we are ready once again for the serenity of traditional French cuisine.


THE WORLD: Somalia; The Disaster Begins to Sink In
WHILE the breakup of Yugoslavia causes alarm in much of the Western world, some attention is shifting to the tragedy of Somalia, a war-terrorized country where men, women and children die every day for lack of food.
The town where these photographs were made -- Baidoa, 150 miles northwest of the capital, Mogadishu -- is one of the most desperate places; refugees fleeing fighting and drought arrive so weakened that they cannot manage to eat the rations provided by relief agencies.
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, jolted some nerves the week before last when he pointed to the contrast between the West's concern for the former Yugoslavia and its neglect of Somalia.
Yugoslavia, he said, was "the rich man's war."


Cape Ann
To the Editor: I very much enjoyed Ken Carlton's article concerning Cape Ann (June 7).
However, it excluded my hometown (Manchester-by-the-Sea), which is the first locale on the Cape as you arrive from Route 128.
If one enters Manchester, there is a sign clearly indicating "Entering Cape Ann."


What Other Countries Think of the U.S. Elections: Latin America; With Perot Out of the Race, Fascination Slips Away
For decades, as surely as immigrants and drugs flowed northward from Latin America to the United States, concerns about the possibility of political upheaval moved in the other direction.
But that has changed this year.
As Ross Perot shot up in the polls, Latin American technocrats shuddered, and a million satellite dishes swiveled to CNN.
But beleaguered Latin populists wondered if they hadn't found a soulmate, and compared him to Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori, South America's out-of-nowhere man.
When Mr.
Perot criticized the idea of free trade with Mexico, the Mexican stock exchange fell almost instantly; when he dropped out, the market leapt a joyous 5 percent.


Worse Times Are Seen for County's 6 Cities
AS officials in Westchester's six cities struggle to keep budgets in line and make projections for the coming fiscal year, there is little good news to report.
Taxes are up in most localities; many municipal services have been reduced, and one official, Mayor Ronald A. Blackwood of Mount Vernon, said, "Things are not only going to get worse before they get better, they're going to get much, much worse."
In Mount Vernon -- where there were no layoffs but the city did not fill 25 positions that were lost through attrition -- Mayor Blackwood also warned that his city "was standing on the brink of very serious trouble."


Unholy Antics Rev Up 'Nunsense'
THE premise of "Nunsense," the long-running Off Broadway musical now at the Gateway Playhouse, is that a few nuns from the convent of the Little Sisters of Hoboken have pooled their talents to produce a benefit.
They need to raise money to bury four colleagues who are being stored in their school cafeteria's freezer.
The unholy problems began one night when 19 sisters went off to play bingo.
On their return, they found the other 52 members of the convent lying face-down at the dinner table in their bowls of vichyssoise.
It seems that the cook, Sister Julia, child of God, had mistakenly served a double dose of botulism to the nuns.
As one nun explains the incident, "For 52, bon appetite was also bon voyage."


GIVE THIS DOG A JOB
Pet dogs do not need to be given a job because they already have one.
Their job is to love and help protect their masters.
In return, they receive their masters' love and protection.
Research suggests that pet ownership, and in particular dog ownership, yields many health and psychological benefits.
Dog ownership has been found to buffer stress and may even boost immunological resistance to disease.


Tech Notes; Food for Sick Cats and Dogs
A new prescription pet food has been developed to help feed dogs and cats that may otherwise starve to death following an accident or illness.
Trauma-induced anorexia is estimated to affect 1.5 million pet-hospital patients each year.
Produced by the Hill's division of the Colgate-Palmolive Company, best known for its Science Diet pet food, Prescription Diet a/d has a pudding-like texture.
It is given through the mouth by a syringe, either at the hospital or by the pet owner and is available only through veterinarians.


Time to Stop the Crazy Eddie Indignities
To the Editor:
Is Crazy Eddie, who stashed away a fortune selling electronics, truly
insane
? ("Crazy Eddie's Insane Odyssey," July 19.) To advocates for the mentally ill, labeling Eddie Antar insane is nothing more than a cheap stab at humor and a gratuitous source of confusion.
The article describes Mr.
Antar as a lawless thief who skipped the country.
There is not a hint of psychotic illness or thought disorder that would render Mr.
Antar unable to stand trial.
To even jokingly ascribe Mr.
Antar's actions to insanity, a condition that would legally remove him from civil or criminal responsibility, seems reckless.


Randi Eisenberg, Eric Sellinger
Randi Lynn Eisenberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren Eisenberg of Short Hills, N.J., was married in New York last evening to Eric Spencer Sellinger, a son of Leila Sellinger of West Orange, N.J., and the late Martin Sellinger.
Rabbi Charles Kroloff officiated at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Sellinger, 26 years old, graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is the chairman of Bed, Bath and Beyond in Springfield, N.J., a chain of home-furnishing stores.


In a First, Woods Wins Second U.S. Junior Title
Sixteen-year-old Eldrick (Tiger) Woods of Cypress, Calif., today became the first male golfer to win the United States Junior Amateur twice when he narrowly defeated Mark Wilson, 1 up, in the 18-hole championship final.
Woods, who last year became the youngest winner of the championship and the first black winner, again did what has not been done in this championship since it was first played in 1948.
Previously, the only players to have made the finals twice in the under-18 championship were Mason Rudolph in 1949 and 1950, Eddie Pearce in 1968 and 1969, Mike Brannan in 1971 and 1973, and Tim Straub in 1982 and 1983.
But each of those players was only able to win the championship once.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
TOP SEATS FOR THE LINKS
GOOD seats at a golf tournament used to mean bringing your own seat.
But at the Northville Long Island Golf Classic this weekend, Long Islanders are sitting in skyboxes.
Just like at the Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum.


High Court Says Haitians Can Be Sent Home
The Supreme Court today permitted the Bush Administration to continue to send Haitians picked up at sea back to their homeland while the Court decides whether to review the legality of President Bush's order to return them.
The Court granted a request by the Justice Department to stay a ruling on Wednesday by a Federal appeals court in New York that had effectively nullified the Administration policy.
The stay will remain in effect while the Justice Department and lawyers for the Haitians prepare their arguments on the merits of the case.


Will Gardiner And Beth Dulik
Ann Elizabeth Dulik, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Robert Dulik of Palo Alto, Calif., was married yesterday to D. D. Willard Gardiner, a son of Daniel W. Gardiner of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Eleanor C. Dwight of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Ernle W. D. Young, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of Elsie Floriani in Atherton, Calif.
Ms.
Dulik, who is 28 years old and known as Beth, is keeping her name.
She is an associate producer at CNBC, a financial news channel in Fort Lee, N.J.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father, now retired, was the owner of Hak-Mil Products, a restaurant design and contracting company in Redwood City, Calif.
Her mother, Barbara N. Dulik, is the director of the primary program at the Philips Brooks School in Menlo Park, Calif.


Jennifer Bancroft, Jeffrey Kelter
Jennifer Weston Bancroft, the daughter of Thomas M. Bancroft Jr. of Muttontown, L.I., and Melissa Weston Bancroft of Locust Valley, L.I., was married yesterday in Lattington, L.I., to Jeffrey Evan Kelter, the son of Jolie Kelter of New York.
The Rev.
Charles Newberry performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John of Lattington Church.
Mrs.
Kelter, 27 years old, graduated from Duke University.
Her father, a former chairman of the New York Racing Association, owns and operates Pen-Y-Bryn Farm in Muttontown in partnership with his brother, William W. Bancroft.


'What Do You Teach the Little Ones?'
EVENING CHATS IN BEIJING
Probing China's Predicament.
By Perry Link. 321 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $24.95.


GIVE THIS DOG A JOB
My dogs do not have a job, nor do I. I have been "let go" and live in a modest New York City walk-up with Teddy, a medium-white mutt, and Sally, a Scottish terrier.
We do not shear, breed or confine sheep.
Sally and Teddy are freeloaders.
They freely give affection and a sense of security where there is none.


Young People Need to Know About AIDS
We at Planned Parenthood applaud "H.I.V. Infecting More in High School"  [ July 12 ] .
It helped sound an alarm that must be heard throughout Long Island.
The crux of the problem about AIDS education was summed up quite well by the school superintendent who said: "There is no grasp of reality in terms of true risk. High school kids feel they are invincible."
At Planned Parenthood of Nassau County we have found that one of the best ways to overcome this "denial" among our youth is through programs presented by their peers.
In 1987 our Teen Advocate Project presented the first Teens and AIDS conference on Long Island.
In the past year our peer educators, averaging between eight and 12 salaried high school students each year, have presented AIDS programs at high schools in Plainview, Plainedge, Roosevelt and Freeport, among others.


ABOUT CARS: A Friendlier Kind of Mailbag; Why Don't They Notice? (Part II)
INDULGE me.
For a change, the letters we have here are kinder.
Gentler than usual.
Nobody is accusing me of being on the take from the Japanese.
No one is saying I am a dunderhead.
But the letters are thoughtful, too.
And, now and then, I need the reassurance.
Dear Sir:
I should begin by saying that I am not a car buff.
I am one of those rare people who basically drives them into the ground, and I have owned few cars that I didn't hold onto for less than 10 years.
My current ones are a '77 Chevy Caprice wagon and an '88 Oldsmobile Delta 88.


Marcie Rosenthal, Bradley J. Pickard
Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Rosenthal of Dix Hills, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Marcie Jill Rosenthal to Bradley Jon Pickard, the son of Drs.
Maurice and Sheila Pickard of Highland Park, Ill.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rosenthal is an associate in the taxation department of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, the New York law firm.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a lawyer in Brooklyn.


Corrections
A report in Styles of The Times last Sunday about the wedding of Roberta Pancoast Smith and Jerome David Saltz misstated his age.
He is 41.


The Mementos That Got Away
THERE is an exotic virus, unknown to science, that affects only tourists.
This little devil attacks almost from the moment of arrival in a foreign country.
It engenders a form of lunacy, and retreats only after one or more shopping expeditions during which numerous items of no use, practically or esthetically, are purchased.
When these articles or souvenirs are unpacked back home, there is usually a determined effort to love them, to confirm the wisdom of the purchase.
But the fact is that great quantities of them end up in a closet, consigned to oblivion or earmarked as a last-minute gift for an unfortunate soul.
Life being what it is, this virus is a contrarian, inert when it should be active.
Which is why thousands of travelers, many of whom couldn't wait to open their wallets for acres of junk, resisted items they now regret not having bought.
It's not that they brood about their passed-up opportunities but nevertheless, even now, sometimes decades later, they often think about them.
And when they do, they visualize the object as it would look in a particular room, for almost always these bypassed purchases are decorative items for the home.


Corrections
An article on June 7 about puffin-watching off Maine misstated the territorial status of Machias Seal Island.
A reader's letter dated June 20 asserted that the island was owned by the United States, not Canada, but further research has determined that both the United States and Canada claim ownership.
Difficulties in reaching officials about the conflicting claims delayed this correction.


On the Runway Where You Live
At the men's wear collections last week, the metamorphosis of the models from the street to the runway -- and back again -- was often hard to detect.
Designers spent much of the time imitating their models' everyday style of dress -- a casual look that highlighted and framed bodies sculpted like Michelangelo's "David."


Laura A. Murray, Eric Scott Dobbin
Laura Anne Murray, a daughter of Robert and Corell Murray of Weston, Conn., was married yesterday in Westport, Conn., to Eric Scott Dobbin, a son of Bennett and Barbara Dobbin of Caldwell, N.J.
Earl F. Capuano, the probate judge of Weston and Westport, Conn., officiated at the Inn at Longshore.
Mrs.
Dobbin, 32 years old, is a systems development vice president at Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of the Westport Bank and Trust Company.
Her mother is the advertising manager at Online Inc., a Wilton, Conn., publisher of trade magazines.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Abortion Issue; The 'Pro-Choice Caravan' Is Failing to Stir the G.O.P.
The Republican "pro-choice caravan" that rolled out of Washington five days ago with hoopla and high hopes for its six-state journey has stalled in the heartland.
Organizers predicted that the caravan would be met at every stop by enthusiastic crowds on its way to the Republican National Convention in Houston.
In fact, there have been no crowds at all.
And the caravan is not really a caravan.
It consists of one rented Ryder moving van with a banner that proclaims: "Moving Our Party Back to its Roots! Republicans for Choice."


Taking Advantage of Season's Tomatoes
REAL tomatoes are back.
For the next couple of months we don't even have to consider commercial tomatoes that have been picked "green-mature," washed in chlorine, coated with parafin oil, ethylene-gassed to make them turn pink and, as a final indignity, refrigerated.
At local markets and farm stands, tomatoes will now be available in their full vine-ripened glory, and chefs everywhere are taking advantage of the fact.
At the Odeon, a bistro in TriBeCa, Stephen Lyle, the chef, blends red tomatoes with fresh corn, roasted red peppers and chilies.
The result is a remarkable deep red soup packed with flavor.
At the Southwestern-style restaurant Mesa Grill, Bobby Flay smokes tomatoes over aromatic woodchips and makes an unusual salsa with them, which he serves with chicken, fish or hamburgers (it is particularly good with grilled salmon).
At Alo Alo, an Italian restaurant on the Upper East Side, Matthew Kenney, the chef, serves an unusual form of gazpacho, making separate purees of yellow beefsteak and red tomatoes, which he seasons with cayenne pepper, red wine vinegar and cumin.
He pours the yellow and red purees into each soup bowl at the same time, creating a two-tone effect, and garnishes the soup with basil leaves and croutons.


Trading in Opera


Altered Images at a Summer Block Party


Grand Central
To the Editor:
The story on May 3 headed "Grand Central Owner Seeks Broader Use of Air Rights" about the desire of the Penn Central Corporation to reallocate and replan the development of Grand Central Terminal once again highlighted the need for some driving, forceful planner of the style and substance of Robert Moses in the City and State of New York.


The Comeback Trail
IT WAS ALMOST by chance that Patty Galliardo returned to high school.
When she was 14 years old her Mexican-American family moved back to Los Angeles after a few years in Mexico, but she did not go back to school.
She had forgotten whatever English she had learned.
There were other obstacles, too.
Like most dropouts, Ms.
Galliardo had a vague notion that she ought to get her diploma.
But she had hated school -- the teachers did not care, she said -- and after so long an absence from the classroom she did not know where to turn.
Then a friend, also a dropout, told her about an out-of-school program that offered a flexible schedule, a close relationship with teachers and, most important, a clear path to earning her degree.


End of the Line
To the Editor: I have invented a way of sightseeing that may interest other readers.
One does this
after
seeing the main tourist sights, and only in cities where you can speak the language.
We get on any bus or subway and go to the end of the line, wherever that may be.
Here we get out and walk around, enjoying the ambiance of wherever it is.
We inquire where there is a different bus or subway terminus that will take us back into town, within a mile or two or three.
We then walk to it and return to town.


Trail of a Bank Scandal Leads On and On
THE criminal investigation that led to last week's indictment of Clark M. Clifford, a trusted adviser to five American Presidents, can be traced to an April morning in 1989 and the paper-strewn eighth-floor office of Michael Cherkasky, chief of investigations for the Manhattan District Attorney.
In walked Jack Blum, a Senate investigator, who had looked into international drug trafficking and kept running across the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
For the next 90 minutes, Mr.
Blum described not only B.C.C.I.'s role in laundering drug money, but also what he suspected were the shadowy private bank's many other crimes, including worldwide fraud and bribery and the secret ownership of American banks.


The End of Books?
To the Editor:
Advocates of hypertext claim the virtues of reader control over the narrative line.
But is that such a great thing?
Narrative structure is a fundamental element in an artist's engagement with his or her craft.
I already know where my own narratives have led me; I enter a novel to discover where other people's narratives lead them.
Besides, if I want that sense of random accumulation leading to a complex vision mediated partly by the writer and partly by me, I can reach for a book of poems and move through them any way I wish.
MALCOLM HAYWARD Indiana, Pa.


With Alou as the Guide, Expos Climb to the Top
Before a game with the Philadelphia Phillies the other night, the Montreal manager called the Montreal left fielder into his office for a serious chat.
"He had a couple of bad games in St. Louis and I called him in like I would call in anybody," Felipe Alou said, relating his conversation with his son, Moises.
"I told him I'm not happy with the way he was playing the outfield or swinging the bat. I told him he had to work hard to get back into what we think would be the ideal form for him."


Margaret Howard, A. R. Schechter
Margaret Bovee Howard, the daughter of Mary Dalton-Howard of Highland Park, N.J., and Dr.
Allen M. Howard of Piscataway, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Rhoads Schechter, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan Schechter of Wellesley, Mass.
Beebe Phallick, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the Lyman Estate in Waltham, Mass.
Ms.
Howard, who is 25 years old and keeping her name, teaches at the Hamilton Children's Center in Allston, Mass.
She graduated from Clark University, as did her husband.
Her father is a professor of African history at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.
Her mother is an English teacher at Elizabeth (N.J.) High School.
The bride is also the stepdaughter of Peggy Friedman of Piscataway.


Elderly Woman Is Slain in Far Rockaway
An 87-year-old woman was apparently beaten to death in her oceanside apartment on Friday night, the police said yesterday.
The killing was the third death this week in Far Rockaway, an unusual toll for this relatively quiet section of Queens.
On Monday, two civic leaders were found bound, bludgeoned and stabbed to death in a house in the well-to-do Bayswater section, about two miles away from the site of the slaying on Friday.


U.S. Women's Success Is Part of Soviet Legacy
FOURTEEN years ago in the Buenos Aires Olympiad, Tigran Petrosian was asked, "How did the Russian team do today?" and the former world champion replied, "Which Russian team?"
That was a joke, pointing up the sprinkling of Soviet emigres on other teams.
Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, there would be no wit involved.
For example, the entire United States women's team at the Manila Olympiad, June 7-25, came from the former Soviet Union.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Starts
1,205
983
+22.6%
Completions
1,187
1,072
+10.7%
Sales
501
511
- 2.0%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.27
8.34
9.71
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.53
5.58
7.29
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.14
8.18
9.55
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.35
5.34
7.19
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.15
8.19
9.61
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.27
5.26
7.14
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.28
8.41
9.83
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.01
6.06
7.66
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.53
3.53
6.29
*4*National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.04
8.20
9.12
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


Star Jasper, Chris Seefried
Leonard Jasper of New York has announced the engagement of his daughter, Star Jasper, to Chris Seefried, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alex Seefried of Dix Hills, L.I.
A May 1993 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Jasper, 27 years old, is an actress.
She graduated from C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University, as did her fiance.
Her father is a photographer in New York.
Her mother, Marion Ellner, is an electrologist in Barryville, N.Y.


Low-Tech Renewal
WHEN Apple Computer Inc. unveiled its next-generation Newton computer earlier this summer, many analysts were dazzled by the promise that it held for education.
Newton, scheduled for delivery next year, is a hand-held information device that looks like the flip-top communicator used by Captain Kirk on "Star Trek." It uses a pen for data entry instead of a keyboard.
Imagine this, Apple engineers said: The teacher draws and writes on an electronic presentation board at the front of the classroom, and the images are beamed instantly via infrared signal to each child's Newton display screen or to a laser printer that spits out paper copies for each student.


Susan Sontag Finds Romance
As soon as Susan Sontag delivered the last section of her new novel, "The Volcano Lover," to the offices of her publisher, she felt bereft.
"It was like taking a beloved person to the airport and returning to an empty house," she says softly, intensely, during a recent interview in her New York apartment.
"I miss the people. I miss the world."
The principal characters -- although there are many others -- are Sir William Hamilton, the 18th-century English minister to the Court of Naples; his wife, Emma, and Horatio Lord Nelson, England's most revered naval hero, whose love affair with Emma became as famous as his impressive victories over Napoleon.
Under the title (which refers to Hamilton's obsession with Mount Vesuvius), Sontag has appended the words, "A Romance."


More Huck Finn Adventures, to Buffalo Via Hollywood
After a century's delay, the two halves of Mark Twain's original manuscript of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" are together again at a Buffalo library.
The reunification, following the settlement of an ownership dispute, fulfills Twain's wish and James Fraser Gluck's dream.
It was Gluck, a Buffalo rare-book collector, who persuaded the author to donate the manuscript to the library in 1885.
Since then, only the second half of "Huck Finn" has been in the collection of what is now the Buffalo and Erie County Public Library.
The first half -- valued in court papers at $1.5 million -- ended up in one of Gluck's trunks in the Los Angeles attic of his granddaughter Barbara Testa Gluck.
Both halves, along with the trunk, go permanently on view tomorrow at the library.


U.N. Plans a New Inspection for Iraq Arms
Rolf Ekeus, the senior United Nations official in charge of dismantling Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, says that his commission has received fresh intelligence on an arms-related project in Iraq and that a new inspection will begin perhaps as early as next week.
"We have some good information," Mr.
Ekeus said today.
"We will act as quickly as possible."


The End of Books?
To the Editor:
I suppose it is natural that the champions of hyperspace and hypertext resort to hyperbole when extolling the virtues of bit-mapped, binary fiction.


Ms. Hockstader, Robert Holliday
Kalen Sydney Hockstader, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard A. Hockstader 2d of New York, was married there yesterday to Robert Winslow Holliday Jr., a son of Josephine W. Holliday of Washington and Robert W. Holliday of Brussels.
The Rev.
Dr.
Stephen M. Clement 3d, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Mark Hotel.
Mrs.
Holliday, 27 years old, is the director of sales and marketing for Cairo Today magazine in Cairo.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
Her father is a retired investment banker for L. F. Rothschild &amp; Company in New York.


Corrections
A front-page contents listing in the Travel section today carries an incorrect page number in some copies for an article about Seneca Falls, N.Y.
It appears on page 21.


American Wins Women's 100-Meter Race


Mutual Funds What If the Bulls Suddenly Flee?
Even as the stock market hovers near its all-time highs, bears are leaving footprints on Wall Street, worrying investors about what to do next.
Of course, those seeking to avoid all risk of a down market can put their money under the mattress or into a savings account.
But forsaking the stock market entirely could be a mistake.
The stock market has always risen over time, often in unexpected surges that leave investors who fled to cash far behind.


Mutual Fund Industry Gets Another Dent In Its Clean Image
IT is an article of faith that the mutual fund industry is "squeaky clean" -- an impression that owes less to the record than to this booming industry's talent for public relations.
Last week a glint of less-flattering reality broke through as a Federal jury in Manhattan brought in a guilty verdict against Patricia Ostrander, a former portfolio manager at Fidelity Investments, the largest mutual fund family in the country, at which hundreds of thousands of Americans have accounts.


Problem Delays Satellite's Deployment
Communications problems today forced the astronauts aboard the space shuttle Atlantis to postpone for 24 hours the deployment of a 10,000-pound European science satellite.
Mission officials said they were confident that after further trouble-shooting the astronauts would be cleared to release the satellite into its own orbit on Sunday morning.
They said the malfunction seemed to occur only when the satellite communicated through the shuttle, not when it transmitted data directly to ground stations.


Tiffany Nelson, Jeffrey Begoon
Mr. and Mrs.
Walter R. Nelson of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Tiffany Anne Nelson to Jeffrey A. Begoon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jackson W. Begoon of Vero Beach, Fla.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Nelson, 28 years old, is a vice president and an account supervisor with Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Indiana University.
Her father is the founder and president of Nelson Publications, a financial information publishing company in Port Chester, N.Y.


Pakistanis Fear Chaos as Graft and Violence Rise
As Pakistan approaches its 45th anniversary as a nation, its political and social fabric is so rent by crime and a staggering level of corruption that a wide spectrum of Pakistanis, both in and out of Government, are increasingly concerned about their country's future.
Government officials, the police and politicians are accused of systematic corruption and even terrorism.
The army has assumed control of the southern state of Sind, and in the capital, Islamabad, there are rumblings of an even greater role for the military in the country's future.


L.A.: a Script for Book Buying
TACKED to the wall in one of my favorite Los Angeles bookstores is a sign that warns: "You can't tell a book by its movie." You can't tell a city by its movies either.
As it turns out, some of my favorite bookstores are in L.A.
Heritage Book Shop
The Heritage Book Shop, in West Los Angeles, the best rare-book store I've ever been in, is run by three brothers who never graduated from college.
Louis, Ben and Jerry Weinstein, the sons of a Brooklyn pawnbroker, started out as junk dealers.
They opened a store in Compton, Calif., in the early 60's, that bought and sold refrigerators, stoves -- and one day a glass case with some old books in it.


The Guts to Reform Health Care
Liberal Congressman Ron Wyden of Oregon is for it.
The Conservative Democratic Forum is for it.
So too is President Bush and, according to some advisers, Bill Clinton.
It
is "managed competition," the best plan to reform health insurance and the only one with a chance to become law.
Yet it's way too early to rejoice.
Politicians say they're for managed competition, but most -- including the candidates -- have yet to face up to harsh realities.
Patients will find their choice of physicians restricted; taxpayers will have to make do with smaller health care deductions.


Lisa R. Ianuzi, Charles Samkoff
Maria Nicoletti and James B. Ianuzi, both of Syracuse, have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Renee Ianuzi to Charles B. Samkoff, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Max D. Samkoff of Chappaqua, N.Y.
A June 1993 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ianuzi, 25 years old, is the associate graphics director for men's design at Polo/Ralph Lauren Corporation in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from the University of Denver.
Her father is a numismatist in Syracuse.
Her mother teaches Spanish and English at Seymour Elementary School in Syracuse.
Her stepfather, Anthony Nicoletti, is the founding partner of Nicoletti Kitchens, a cabinetmaking company there.


Brooklyn Gothic
If William Jay Bolton is less well known than Louis Comfort Tiffany, it may be because his career as an American glass maker was a short one.
Bolton (1816-84) was an early enthusiast of the Gothic revival.
A more modest series of windows, for the Church of the Holy Apostles in Manhattan, was completed at about the same time.
Willene B. Clark, a professor of art history at Marlboro College, gives an account of Bolton's life and work that is never less than exemplary.
Leland A. Cook's photographs, most of them in black and white, are both useful and poignant, since they provide a record of the Holy Apostles windows that were destroyed in a fire in 1990.


Kathleen M. Gaffney And Frank Thometz 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph N. Gaffney of Mendham, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kathleen Mary Gaffney, to Frank Peter Thometz 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thometz Jr. of Elm Grove, Wis.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Gaffney, 29 years old, is a reinsurance claims examiner at the English and American Insurance Corporation in Chatham, N.J.
She graduated from Manhattanville College.
Mr.
Thometz, 32, is a product manager at M &amp; M Mars Inc., in Hackettstown, N.J.
He graduated from Boston College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.


In the American Grain
THE STORY OF CORN
By Betty Fussell. Illustrated. 368 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


Frankly Mozart


The 1992 Campaign: Candidates' Record; Social Programs Grow, but Largely by Neglect
The Bush Administration has been kinder and gentler toward the poor and the disabled, just as George Bush promised four years ago.
Still, the President rarely boasts of his record in this area, partly because he knows he could never satisfy his liberal critics, partly because he does not want to offend conservatives who still revere former President Ronald Reagan.


Melissa McGlynn, Kirk Williamson
Melissa Cleaves McGlynn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. McGlynn of Jersey City, was married yesterday to Kirk Price Williamson, a son of Peter Williamson of Houston and Sandra Williamson of Hagerstown, Md.
The Rev.
Marc Pendleton performed the Episcopalian ceremony at Christ Church in Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Williamson, 25 years old, is the assistant manager of the J. Crew outlet store in Queenstown, Md.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby &amp; MacRae in Newark.
Her mother, Victoria McGlynn, is the vice president of Travelong Inc., a travel agency in Summit, N.J.


JULY 26 - AUG. 1: Nowhere Else to Turn; Rebuffed by Chile, Honecker Returns to Germany for Trial
One of the longest-running dramas of the post-Cold War era ended last week when Erich Honecker, who ruled Communist East Germany from 1971 to 1989, returned to Germany to face trial.
Mr.
Honecker, who is charged with manslaughter and corruption, slipped out of Germany in March 1991, flying to Moscow aboard a Soviet military plane to escape arrest.
Since December he had been been under diplomatic protection at the Chilean embassy in Moscow.


Correction
A report in the Postings column last Sunday about an oceanfront development in Diamond Beach, N.J., misstated the toll-free telephone number of the Seapointe Village Realty Company.
It is (800) 937-6468.


Army Women Face Bias on Macho Base
For Specialist Trenee Maddox, it was sexist innuendo from leering sergeants about her appearance.
For Capt.
Priscilla Mondt, it was sexually suggestive lyrics in soldiers' marching cadences.
For former Specialist Pamela Metras, it meant an assault in her barracks.
At Fort Bragg, one of the Army's largest bases, women encounter the same kinds of sexual harassment that many women have complained are common in the Navy.


Four Decades in Style
On July 28, GQ honored its fashion director.


A Missing Note
To the Editor:
I seldom miss "Sunday Morning," so I was surprised that no mention was made of the wonderful music segments, both classical and jazz (the latter introduced by Dr. Billy Taylor), that are an integral part of the program.
MARIAN MCPARTLAND Port Washington, N. Y.


POSTING: Rehabilitation in West Harlem; A New Church for Haitians
Starting with a wreck of a one-story store and a loading dock, a Manhattan congregation of Haitian Baptists is building La Chapelle Baptiste, a new church on 313 West 141st Street in West Harlem.
The architects of the rehabilitation project are Donald D. Fisher and Allan Thaler of Manhattan.
They plan to erect a stucco-front, angular facade dominated by a glass- block cross set into the front of a 50-foot wall.


'Free Trade' Means No Jobs and High Prices; Major New Market
To the Editor:
"A Breakthrough on Mexican Trade" (editorial, July 17) is a very timely reminder of the powerful impact a successful North American free trade agreement could have on the United States economy.
Reducing trade barriers with Mexico, as the United States has done with Canada, offers exceptional opportunities to increase United States exports to Mexico, the fastest-growing economy on the continent.
I must take strong exception, however, to your characterization of the United States auto industry as one that will lose jobs if the United States enters into a free trade agreement with Mexico.


Jillian Marie Schwedler, Joel Allan Sherman
V.
Diana Schwedler of New York has announced November wedding plans for her daughter Jillian Marie Schwedler and Joel Allan Sherman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murry Sherman of Brooklyn.
Ms.
Schwedler, 26 years old, is also the daughter of the late Marvin C. Schwedler of Detroit.
She is the Middle East project assistant at the International Peace Academy in New York.
She received bachelor's and master's degrees in Middle Eastern studies from New York University.


For Czech Athletes, the Door to Future Games May Have 2 Entrances
Sitting under a red canopy, wearing a brightly colored dress, the head of the Czechoslovak Olympic Committee, Vera Caslavska, seemed unperturbed.
But this former gold-medal gymnast who once denounced the Soviet invasion of her country and found herself a forgotten person is troubled again.
For Caslavska (pronounced Chas-LUV-skuh) conceded that she may be presiding over the breakup of her country's Olympic movement.


Devers and Christie Get to Dazzle in the Dash
It was only 100 meters Gail Devers traversed this afternoon at the Barcelona Olympics, faster than seven others to win a remarkable race and a gold medal for the United States.
But only she knows the considerably longer distance she traveled to reach the pinnacle of her career.
She becomes an Olympic champion barely 18 months after her feet were nearly amputated as a result of radiation treatment for Graves' disease.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Albertson 170,000
26 Hampton Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 1-car detached garage, 40- by 100-foot lot; taxes $2,800.
Bellerose Village 235,000
57 Ontario Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old Dutch colonial; dining room, den, living room fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,000.
East Islip 110,050
14 William Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 90-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $3,600.
North Woodmere 286,000
717 Turf Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 9-year-old high ranch; dining room, den, laundry room, 2-car attached garage; taxes $7,200.
Valley Stream 160,000
58 Camdike Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,600.
Williston Park 183,500
147 Stratford Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.
OTHER AREAS Shelton, Conn. 125,000
44 Nichols Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old ranch; handyman special, 2-car attached garage, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,356.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 450,000
575 Bedford Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, family room, 1 acre; taxes $8,292.
Edison, N.J. 190,000
488 Grove Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; fireplace, h/w floors, deck; taxes $3,879.


Alissa Aaronson, Eric Horvitz
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Aaronson of Huntington Station, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alissa Dawn Aaronson, to Eric Franklin Horvitz, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Victor S. Horvitz of Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Aaronson, 26 years old, is an associate in the Washington law firm of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius.
She graduated from Cornell University.
She and her husband received law degrees from George Washington University.
Her father is the manager of commercial leasing with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Her mother, Susan Aaronson, is an elementary-school teacher in Flushing, Queens.


The End of Books?
To the Editor:
As the author of a number of brilliant political manifestoes, as well as being the dedicated leader of several underpublicized people's movements, I feel it is my duty as a patriot and native son to raise my voice against this hypertext nonsense.
In short, Robert Coover and all others who predict hypertext's eventual outdoing of linear forms of written communication should be loaded onto a rocket and shot to the moon with limited supplies of oxygen and Tang.
J.
E.
EDWARDS Bayonne, N.J.


FIT FOR THE ROAD
'Fit for the Road" had me fit to be tied. In it, Steven Lischin of the World Gym cautions, "Interrupt your workout several times a month and you'll never see the changes you long for."


Making a Difference; Splitting Off With the Data
John Purser's plan for cutting information management and processing costs at the Libbey-Owens-Ford Company, the Toledo, Ohio, glassmaker, was unorthodox to say the least.
Mr.
Purser, who had become the company's chief information officer in May 1990, was soon confronted with a mandate to cut costs by 20 percent.
Within months, he had convinced his bosses that the best way to do that was to make his operation a private business -- with Mr.
Purser in charge.
In the 19 months since Computer Technology Management Inc. was born from that proposal, Mr.
Purser has helped Libbey-Owens-Ford cut its information systems payroll from 80 people to 5 and saved the company more than $3 million.
The 39-year-old Mr.
Purser, who is chief executive of the new company and its sole owner, has also picked up Gantos, a women's clothing retailer based in Grand Rapids, Mich., as a second client and increased his new work force to 53, from 35.
Computer Technology, which Mr.
Purser financed on his own, is also based in Toledo.


I Pledge Allegiance To the Flag Apparel
Like it or not, the Dream Team is not going away, not next week, next year or next Olympics.
It's too good a team and too good a concept.
"The N.B.A. is in the Olympics to stay," David Stern, the National Basketball Association's commissioner, said the other night.


Chimney Cracks Need Repairs While Still Small
BRICK chimneys need periodic exterior maintenance to keep them from deteriorating.
If cracks, crumbling mortar, loose bricks or other problems go unrepaired, expensive professional rebuilding may be necessary or, in extreme cases, a storm can blow down a chimney.
Performing routine care is usually fairly easy, provided that the roof is not too steep.
Amateurs should avoid working on roofs that slope more than about four inches per foot of horizontal distance.
The slope can be measured with a ruler or framing square by holding either tool along the edge of the roof at a gable end.


Maccabee Swept Out Syrian-Greek Armies
"Mobilizing American Athletes for the Maccabiah Games"  [ July 12 ]  contains one historical error.
Judah Maccabee swept out the Syrian-Greek armies of Antiochus IV Epiphanes in 167 B.C.
The Romans did not enter Judea until 63 B.C., when the Roman General, Pompey, captured Jerusalem, thus ending a century of Jewish independence.
RABBI GILBERT S. ROSENTHAL Executive Vice President New York Board of Rabbis Manhattan


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended July 18  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 342,500
575 Sixth Avenue (16th St.)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, dining area, terrace, 10-ft. ceilings, 3 exposures; maintenance $850, 48% tax-deductible (Brokers: Kingman Associates - Debra Kameros Co.)  Greenwich Village 775,000
311 West Fourth Street  5-bedroom, 5-bath, Greek Revival town house built in 1836 being converted into a one-family residence; 7 fireplaces, double parlor, rear garden, landmark district, 20- by 75-ft. lot; taxes $9,600 (Brokers: Eychner Associates - William B. May)  Greenwich Village 550,000
18 East 12th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. duplex, penthouse condo in a loft building; 24-hr. doorman, c/a, terrace, common roof; common charge $981, taxes $5,340 (Brokers: Silverman Group/Bellmarc Realty)  SoHo 980,000
451 Broome Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 3,200-sq.-ft. loft-penthouse co-op; private elevator, arched windows, dining area, 11-ft. ceilings, private roof deck, 3 exposures; maintenance $831, 30% tax-deductible (Brokers: Bascom &amp; Sears - Halstead Property Co.)  Upper East Side 1.3 million
555 Park Avenue (61st St.)  2-bedroom, 5-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 2 maids' rooms, dining room, library, fireplace, 2 exposures; maintenance $3,500, 47% tax-deductible (Brokers: Sotheby's International Realty/Corcoran Group)  West Village 570,000
650 Hudson Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 3,200-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, dining area, sitting room, 12-ft. ceilings, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,358, 60% tax-deductible (Brokers: Joffee LaSalle- Richard Cantor Real Estate)  BRONX  Baychester 215,000
3923 Monticello Avenue  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath in each; 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  Melrose 22,500
1561 Sheridan Avenue  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 770-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; elevator, dining area, 2 exposures; maintenance $315, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates) BROOKLYN Bay Ridge 145,000
101-16 Fourth Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining area, skylights, c/a, 2 terraces; maintenance $850, 87% tax-deductible (Broker: Velsor Realty)  Park Slope 420,000
380 Third Street  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms 1 1/2 baths in other; dining area in each, 22.2- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $1,560 (Broker: William B. May)  QUEENS  College Point 196,000
9-18 120th Street  (College Estates)  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, Cape Cod; dining room, full basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Forest Hills 283,000
67-62 Burns Street  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining area in each unit; 1-car garage, 56- by 69-ft. lot; taxes $2,700 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  STATEN ISLAND  Great Kills 164,600
175 Abingdon Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, fireplace, renovated bath, 1-car garage, 101- by 85-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Realty)  St.
George 52,000
500 Fort Place  (Fort Place Towers)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,068-ft. postwar co-op; dining ell, remodeled kitchen, private garden plot, 2 exposures; maintenance $566, 43% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty Corp.)


Gina Azzinaro, Bart Breakstone
Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Azzinaro of Westerly, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Gina Azzinaro to Bart Laurence Breakstone, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Breakstone of Stamford, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Azzinaro is an account executive at Ogan/Dallal Associates, a New York public relations firm.
Her father is a business manager of Neles-Jamesbury Inc., a valve manufacturing company in Worcester, Mass.
Her mother, Judith O. Azzinaro, is the assistant to the executive director of the Eastern Connecticut Symphony Orchestra in New London, Conn.


Adam And Ease
THE look for next spring is wrap skirts, hair pulled back in brightly colored scarfs or snoods, sheer blouses under man-tailored jackets and lots of sexy decolletage.
Trouble is, we're talking about men.


A New Formula: Into the 'Bin.' Out Comes a Hit.
The album "Blood Sugar Sex Magik" by the Red Hot Chili Peppers, the Los Angeles-based rock group, had only modest success after its release last year.
Then the Peppers' "Give It Away" video was picked up by MTV for its "Buzz Bin," a music segment that tries to pick -- some would say create -- new hits.
Album sales rose and MTV moved "Under the Bridge," another Peppers single, to the "Buzz Bin." The album catapulted into the top five on the Billboard chart and stayed there for months.
Temple of the Dog, a Seattle-based group made up of members of Pearl Jam and Soundgarden, released its self-named album in April 1991.
In 14 months, the record sold only 105,000 copies.
Recently, the video of the band's single "Hunger Strike" was added to "Buzz Bin." Within three weeks, "Temple of the Dog" had sold an additional 315,000 copies and had risen to No. 25 on the pop charts.
"That record's success is 100 percent attributable to MTV," says Jim Guerinot, senior vice president of marketing at A&amp;M Records.


It Didn't Only Seem Worse
Call it the incredible shrinking economy.
For months, Government statisticians said that the recession that began in the second half of 1990 had lasted two quarters and that output had fallen 1.6 percent during that period.
But, presto, on Thursday a Government report announced that the recession had actually lasted three quarters, not two.


Despite the Grumbles, the Glory Came Through


Networking; No Mac to Call? Now There's Lanrover/L
The release late last year of the Powerbook, Apple Computer's long-awaited entry in the notebook derby, gave Macintosh devotees a machine they could take on the road.
Software called Appletalk Remote Access lets any modem-equipped Powerbook connect to either another Macintosh or an Appletalk network of Macs.
Both types of connections allow the remote user to use any files, programs and peripherals, such as a printer.
To provide that access on a network, however, involved dedicating an entire Mac to serve as the connection to the network.
And most network managers can't, or won't, spare a Mac to do nothing but sit and wait for a telephone call.


U.S. Responds to Samuelson Battle Cry
Down by 4 points in the second set to overmatched France tonight at the Sports Palace, the United States Olympic volleyball players felt the need to scream at someone.
They chose their teammate Bob Samuelson, the man who loves to be hated.
"Bob Ctvrtlik told me not to take it personal, it just helps the team to yell," Samuelson said.
"I'm the young guy. I'm the guy they yell at."


Anja-Britt Hanson, Derek Pierce
Anja-Britt Hanson and Derek Scott Pierce were married at the Meeting House in New Marlboro, Mass., yesterday.
The Rev.
Joseph Bishop conducted the Presbyterian ceremony.
Ms.
Hanson, who is keeping her name, and her husband are 26 years old and magna cum laude graduates of Brown University, where they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
The couple are to attend Harvard University, where they will be master's degree candidates in education.
She is a daughter of Andrea Hanson of New York and Andrew Hanson of Aspen, Colo.
The bride is also a stepdaughter of Linton Baldwin of New York.
Her mother is a physical therapist in New York.
The bride's father is a ski instructor in Aspen.
Her stepfather is a freelance sportswriter in New York.


Ex-Gov. Nils Boe of S. Dakota, 78; Also Served as U.S. Customs Judge
Former Gov.
Nils A. Boe of South Dakota, whom President Richard M. Nixon appointed as a White House aide and later as chief judge of the United States Customs Court, died on Thursday at Sioux Valley Hospital in Sioux Falls, S.D.
He was 78 years old and lived in Sioux Falls.
His family said the cause of death was cancer.


Elizabeth Toepfer, Daniel Hendey
Elizabeth Anne Toepfer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth H. Toepfer of Leonia, N.J., and Cairo, was married yesterday to Daniel Francis Hendey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Hendey of Granville, Ohio.
The Rev.
Curt Garrett performed the Methodist ceremony at the Greenbrook Sanctuary, a nature preserve in Tenafly, N.J.
Ms.
Toepfer-Hendey, 34 years old, is a doctoral candidate in counseling psychology at Columbia University, from which she received master's degrees in education and in counseling psychology.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is the senior vice president of American University in Cairo.
Her mother, Nancy G. Toepfer, is a retired teacher of the academically gifted for the Leonia (N.J.) Public School District.


The End of Books?
To the Editor:
As a novelist, editor, teacher of writing, former soap opera writer and computer user, I read Robert Coover's essay with great interest.


After 4 Events, It's Joyner-Kersee in the Heptathlon
With just the 200-meter race left among the four heptathlon events being contested here today in the 1992 Summer Games, Jackie Joyner-Kersee watched from a tunnel as her friend, Gail Devers, blasted down the straightaway to a gold medal in the women's 100-meter final.
"I was really happy for her," Joyner-Kersee said.
"It inspired me. I said to myself: 'O.K., I'm in a rut here. So let's get going.' "


Safe Summer Program Focuses on Boating
"BOATING and drinking have gone hand in hand for years," said Jim Mancusi, Mamaroneck's Harbor Master.
"Boating should be recreational and fun. But when you endanger somebody else on the water, then it becomes a problem. Drinking takes the fun out of boating."
It is estimated that 1,000 people die in boating accidents each year in the United States and alcohol is involved in 50 percent of those fatalities.
The statistics, provided by the National Council of Alcoholism and Other Drug Addictions, also show that half of all people injured or killed in swimming and diving accidents have been drinking.
Mr.
Mancusi said the number of boating injuries involving alcohol is probably greater than 50 percent because many minor injuries caused by being intoxicated don't get reported.


As Strauss's Music Comes Back, Fine Voices Sing Out a Welcome
Richard Strauss suffered under clouds of disapproval for decades.
His increasingly conservative-sounding idiom was dismissed by modernists.
His uneasy acquiescence in Nazi rule made him seem morally bankrupt.
The great singers associated with his works died out.
But Strauss's reputation hardly died with them; indeed, it has blossomed in recent years, benefiting from the increasingly conservative temper of the times.
Strauss vocal recordings come in steady profusion -- historical reissues as well as new releases that attest to the continued vitality of the Strauss performance tradition.


'Free Trade' Means No Jobs and High Prices
To the Editor:
"A Breakthrough on Mexican Trade" (editorial, July 17) wrongly congratulates President Bush on the impending "free trade pact" with Mexico, and criticizes "the protectionist demagogy of organized labor and Congressional opponents." You pooh-pooh their "frightening stories" about the export of jobs to Mexico.
The facts make truly frightening stories.
My sources are official documents from the Mexican Investment Board and such United States publications as Business Week for last March 16 -- hardly the voice of labor!


God Comes First, Then Water Skiing and Surfing
STRING bikinis and God? Well, maybe not string bikinis, Russell Ashcraft said.
"Shorts and regular bathing suits are fine," he said.
"But I'd probably have to wrap the string-bikini wearers in blankets, or people might not focus on what they're supposed to be focusing on."


Lucinda Santisario, Gerald Borovick
Lucinda Margaret Santisario, a daughter of Daniel and Jeanne Santisario of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to Gerald David Borovick, a son of Morey Borovick of Durham, N.H., and Frances Johnston of Dallas.
The Rev.
Gerard Hebert performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Chapel of St.
Thomas in Falmouth, Mass.
Mrs.
Borovick, 26 years old, is a senior analyst at International Data Corporation, a market research concern in Framingham, Mass.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire, as did her husband.
Her father is the chief executive and an owner of Certified Moving and Storage in New York.


Dempsey Hangs Up His Mitt and His Mask
RICK DEMPSEY's playing days are apparently over.
The veteran catcher was placed on unconditional release waivers by the Baltimore Orioles on Friday but will continue to work for the franchise as an instructor.


Another Place to See Birds: Teatown Lake
The directors and members of the board at Teatown Lake Reservation were distressed to see that Teatown was omitted from the article "Walks to Take When Watching for Birds"  [ July 12 ] .
Teatown Lake Reservation is one of Westchester County's most vital environmental and ecological centers, where many educational programs for adults and children take place throughout the year.
One of our biggest attractions is our display of birds of prey.
These wild birds were injured and brought to Teatown for care.
Most cannot return to the wild, so they are cared for here by experts and volunteers and can be viewed by visitors to Teatown.


Philadelphia Riverfront Plan in Low Gear
This city's plan for a single cohesive riverfront development has been ambushed by a recession, slack demand for new housing and the travails of a real estate market in decline.
Instead of high-rise apartment and office towers at the Delaware River's edge, the parcels have sprouted smaller, less expensive projects that go up quickly, like restaurants, nightclubs and open-air markets.
They provide a modest income for some owners of property that otherwise would have lain fallow, as well as jobs in what is emerging as a regional playground and shopping center.
Two years ago, a city agency, the Philadelphia Industrial Development Corporation, envisioned not only the complexes of high-rise office and residential towers, but also office buildings and hotels.
These were to have bracketed Penn's Landing public space and to have been connected by an esplanade.
But after Willard Rouse, the Philadelphia development company, withdrew in early 1989, convinced there was no way to make the 37-acre project profitable, smaller developers took on parts of the development.
Five new nightclubs or restaurants have opened this summer.
And two weekend flea markets have opened, the larger covering an acre beneath multicolored tents at Vine Street and the north side of the Benjamin Franklin Bridge, which spans the river between Philadelphia and Camden, N.J.
The other, on the river's edge near Tasker Street and Delaware Avenue, opened during the Fourth of July weekend and has not yet reached its peak.
At least two planned residential developments have been shelved.
One, Portside, envisioned as 286 high-rise condominium units, ran aground for lack of financing even before any physical work was done.
And at Liberty Landing, a $300 million mixed-use development that last year was being re-evaluated for the combination of office, housing and hotel elements, weeds have nearly obscured the optimistic blue sign announcing the project, which also never even reached the groundbreaking stage.
The only housing actually built was not started from scratch but was a renovation at two municipal piers, 3 and 5, which jut into the river with a marina between them just south of the bridge.
The former was converted into 96 fee-simple town houses, the latter into 172 rental apartments, by a joint venture of three Philadelphia partners, Silver Harting &amp; Company, the Edward S. Brown Group and the Radnor Corporation.
The rentals range from one to three bedrooms, with rents of $700 to $3,000 a month.
Rudy Hanisch, a Radnor senior vice president, said that six town house units were presold and that they got a lukewarm reception when they went on sale shortly after completion in 1990, selling out only after prices were cut to below market value.
"This case is illustrative of the cyclical nature of real estate," he said.
"We made the decision to go forward in 1987, real estate values peaked in 1988 and by the time we delivered the units in 1990 the cycle was declining."
Instead of the $300,000 market value the company predicted, the units sold for an average price of $170,000 earlier this year, part of a $1.3 billion write-off taken by Radnor's parent company, the petroleum giant Sun Company, Mr.
Hanisch said.
From its peak in 1988, real estate values dropped by 30 percent by 1991 in Center City.
Sales of luxury condominium units slowed at the same time, to under 200 closings downtown at more than $150,000, he said.
"We came to the conclusion that we had a disproportionate percentage of the market and had to sell them below cost," Mr.
Hanisch said.
"I'm personally bearish on real estate values and levels of activity in the Delaware Valley for the rest of the decade. America's appetite for the good life has slowed."
Mr.
Hanisch said the grand riverfront plans predicted for 30 years by city officials were expensive and came apart just as demand for new offices and housing was softening throughout the region.
The downtown feeling of Philadelphia neighborhoods like Rittenhouse Square and Society Hall is not available on the waterfront because it is severed from the city by Interstate 95, despite bridges for pedestrians and vehicles.
A brief drive along Delaware Avenue offers many sights that suggest the state of flux on the riverfront.
Tropical theme bars look out on dredge barges moored on the New Jersey side and on a state prison in Camden.
Orange and tan self-storage lockers line one side of the six-lane street across from the tony Katmandu nightclub.
One pier near Spring Garden Street is used for a trash transfer station and storage yard for city garbage trucks, another is the city's main impounding lot for towed cars.
Still, the Comfort Inn, with 180 rooms at the south end of the Ben Franklin Bridge near Penn's Landing, about a 10-minute drive from Center City, had an occupancy rate in 1991 somewhere above 70 percent, when the rest of the city was in the mid 60's, said a hotel industry analyst, Peter Tyson, of Peter Tyson &amp; Associates.
Even the name Delaware Avenue was changed to Columbus Boulevard by the City Council, despite public opposition, to commemorate the 500th anniversary of Columbus's voyage.
Yet most highway signs still direct motorists to Delaware Avenue and there is no plan to change them.
Highway access has been the lifeline for such projects as the Riverview Plaza, a $30 million retail center farther south near warehouses and plants that once served the city's thriving port and manufacturing, both of which have been withering for years.
Bart Blatstein and Marc Haber, principals of Tower Investment, bought a narrow parcel between Tasker Street and Washington Avenue on the landlocked side of Delaware Avenue knowing that an exit ramp from I-95 would be able to bring motorists to their doorstep.
The 150,000-square-foot center includes a multiscreen movie theater that opened last November and draws people from both states.
There are 30,000 square feet of occupied offices space in Riverview Plaza, with a potential for 220,000 more in a vacant warehouse, according to Mr.
Blatstein.
There is also a Staples office products store and several restaurants, food shops and small stores.
Plans have been drawn for a second retail component across Delaware Avenue in a former sugar refinery.
"There were no movie theaters at all in South Philadelphia, so people went over the Walt Whitman Bridge to South Jersey," Mr.
Blatstein said.
"Residential may not be an important part of the waterfront. The holding actions may be a year, it could be 10 years. If they're making money, why tear it down to build housing?"
Indeed, although planning maps still indicate that Marina Towers will rise where the Katmandu nightclub now stands, the club's owners are fashioning their own long-term expansion plans.
Three partners, Stuart Harting Lance Silver and David Preefer, were involved in the Pier 3 and 5 project and said they see potential for new hotel or conference center facilities, but not residential growth.
Among the factors that have fueled growth along the riverfront are Camden's aquarium, which opened in February, and a new ferry service linking the two cities.
Most vital was last year's opening of half a dozen new I-95 off-ramps up and down the riverfront and of the Vine Street Expressway, which offers quick east-west travel to the city's other major highways.
Seeing the crowds of cars bouncing over the freight railroad tracks that still rut Delaware Avenue and slow traffic, Marvin Venable started Venable's Philadelphia Water Taxi, using three 26-seat boats to ferry passengers north and south among the clubs and restaurants and the Camden ferry.
Only three restaurants now operate all year, but the success of summertime clubs that close has prompted some restaurateurs to explore year-round ventures.
A Texas-based nightclub company, Dave &amp; Buster's, is negotiating to open a recreation center in an enclosed pier owned by Bell Atlantic Properties and, several blocks inland, a 4,000-seat concert hall and an adult-entertainment nightclub are under construction.


Miss Malinsky, Mr. Fronapfel
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Malinsky of Madison, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Andrea Malinsky to Richard W. Fronapfel Jr., the son of Linda Phillips of Darien, Conn., and Mr.
Fronapfel of Ridgefield, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Malinsky, 23 years old, is an international meeting coordinator for Research Board Inc., an information-systems research company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut, as did her fiance.
Her father is the executive director of creative services for Wyeth-Ayers Laboratories, a pharmaceutical manufacturing company in Radnor, Pa.
Her mother, Barbara F. Malinsky, is a contributor to the International Encyclopedia of Dance.


The Battle Over Choice Obscures Other Vital Concerns of Women
LIKE a postmodern symphony in which a single note is played with mind-numbing repetition, the national din over abortion rights at times drowns out anything else that might pertain to women's lives.
As the debate rages from kitchen tables to courthouses to the Presidential race itself, issues like equal opportunity, access to health care and a surge in violence against women are often spoken of only among the already converted: the feminist groups that devote themselves to a range of family issues.
Abortion has the nation's ear.
People who never used to vote now slap "pro-family, pro-child, pro-choice" bumper stickers on their Buicks.
Two cars in the same garage can sometimes banner opposing points of view.
But how many people are buying stickers that call for an end to infant mortality or better health care in rural Illinois?


Amy Kittenplan, Joshua Hubbard
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Kittenplan of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Blythe Kittenplan to Joshua Uriel Hubbard, a son of Ann Hubbard of Camden, Me., and Robert Hubbard of Chicago.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Kittenplan, 26 years old, is an English teacher at the Iolani School in Honolulu.
She graduated cum laude from Cornell University.
Her father is a first vice president of Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Gail Kittenplan, is the president of Gail Kittenplan Associates, a personal shopping service in New York.


It Didn't Only Seem Worse
Call it the incredible shrinking economy.
For months, Government statisticians said that the recession that began in the second half of 1990 had lasted two quarters and that output had fallen 1.6 percent during that period.
But, presto, on Thursday a Government report announced that the recession had actually lasted three quarters, not two.


Students Also Learn Skills That Companies Need
NEW partnerships between businesses and school districts are striving to close the gap between the skills needed by businesses and those of students graduating from high school.
Students at Sachem High School, for example, took part in the spring in developing an exercise bicycle for Cybex of Ronkonkoma, which sells exercise and medical-rehabilitation equipment.


Classroom Factions, Live on Tape
WHEN Roseanne Perlmutter, a high school teacher in suburban Boston, set out to educate her students about diversity and multiculturalism, she didn't lecture them.
Instead she let them do the talking.
A black teen-ager: "You walk past ladies putting change in the parking meters and they clench their pocketbooks."


Laura A. Malley, R. Scott Schmitt
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph D. Malley of Harrison, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Laura A. Malley to R. Scott Schmitt, a son of Ralph G. Schmitt of San Dimas, Calif., and Sandra Schmitt of Chicago.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Malley, 27 years old, graduated from M.I.T., as did her fiance.
She is studying for an M.B.A. at Columbia University.
Her father is the chief of police in Harrison.


On Sunday; Blazing Trails, Toplessly But Timidly
"I'd feel uncomfortable doing this on a family beach," said Victoria Negron, 38 years old, who was sunning topless at Fire Island National Seashore.
A few hundred feet away was Robert Moses State Park, a family beach, where suddenly, thanks to New York's top court, naked breasts are legal.
"I don't want to go over there and be gawked at."
"I don't want to make families uncomfortable," said her topless friend, Catherine Buthune, a teacher.
Like many of the half- and stark-naked interviewed, Mrs.
Buthune expressed sympathy for people who must wear clothing when it's 95 degrees.
"I used to take my children over there," she said.
"It's just a matter of respecting the public."


Notes With PLeasure
Lost Artists, Healing Art
Rudolf Arnheim finds in the use of art as therapy a pertinent message for disaffected artists.
This is from "To the Rescue of Art: Twenty-Six Essays" (University of California).


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Energy: Vote to kill an amendment to a wide-ranging energy bill aimed at reducing the nation's dependence on foreign oil that would delete provisions giving independent oil and gas producers $1 billion in new tax breaks.
Rejected 63 to 32, July 29.
1
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
N
Lieberman (D) . . .
N
New Jersey Bradley (D) . . .
N Lautenberg (D) . . .
N
New York D'Amato (R) . . .
Y
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
House
1.
Space Station: Vote on an amendment to an $86 billion appropriations bill that would have deleted $1.73 billlion to develop the Freedom space station and would have appropriated $525 million to cover the costs of ending the program.
Rejected 237 to 181, July 29.
1
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
N
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
N
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
N
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
N
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
N
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
3. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
N
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
Y
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
Y
8. Roe (D) . . .
N
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
N
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
N
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
13. Saxton (R) . . .
N
14. Guarini (D) . . .
N
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
N
2. Downey (D) . . .
N
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
N
4. Lent (R) . . .
N
5. McGrath (R) . . .
N
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
Y
9. Manton (D) . . .
N
10. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
11. Towns (D) . . . A
12. Owens (D) . . .
Y
13. Solarz (D) . . . A
14. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
15. Green (R) . . .
Y
16. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
17. Weiss (D) . . .
Y
18. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
19. Engel (D) . . .
N
20. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
21. Fish (R) . . .
Y
22. Gilman (R) . . .
N
23. McNulty (D) . . .
N
24. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
N
26. Martin (R) . . .
N
27. Walsh (R) . . .
N
28. McHugh (D) . . .
Y
29. Horton (R) . . .
N
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
31. Paxon (R) . . .
N
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
33. Nowak (D) . . .
Y
34. Houghton (R) . . .
N
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


RESULTS PLUSFaldo Leads by a Shot Nick Faldo took the third-round lead in the $1.15 million Scandinavian Masters in Barseback, Sweden, yesterday with a six-under-par 66, leaving him at eight-under 208 for the tournament and one stroke ahead of Peter O'Malley of Australia. Faldo had one eagle, five birdies and one bogey in his round. Tony Johnston of Zimbabwe, James Spence of England and Frank Nobilo of New Zealand were two strokes behind. Johnston's 65 yesterday was the best score yet at the 7,290-yard par-72 Barseback Golf and Country Club course. Jose Maria Olazabal of Spain, Danny Mijovic of Canada and Peter Baker of England, all at 211, trail by three strokes.(AP) AUTO RACING Brabham Wins Easily A road-racing star, Geoff Brabham, surprised a field full of oval-racing experts by running away with the third round of the International Race of Champions yesterday at Michigan International Speedway in Brooklyn, Mich. The Australian-born Brabham, the four-time defending champion of the IMSA Camel GTP sports car series, started fourth in the 11-car field and slipped back several spots on the wild start when the field drove five-wide through the first turn on the 2-mile, high-banked oval.
TENNIS Volkov Edges Borg Aleksandr Volkov ended the most successful tournament appearance of Bjorn Borg's comeback with a 6-4, 2-6, 7-5 victory yesterday in a quarterfinal match at the United States Pro Championships in Brookline, Mass.
Borg, making his first appearance at the Longwood Cricket Club since winning the tournament for the third straight year in 1976, advanced farther than he has in tournament play since launching his comeback.
Borg, 36 years old, has said his goal is to play a Grand Slam event next year.
But his experience fell victim to the youth and power of his Russian opponent.
The 25-year-old Volkov advanced to play Richey Reneberg, who beat Jeff Tarango, 6-3, 6-3.
Borg put up quite a fight yesterday.
Down 4-0 in the deciding set, he won a game on an ace, broke Volkov, and fought off three break opportunities by the Russian to move within a game.
Later, while down, 5-3, Borg allowed Volkov three match point chances, but the Russian failed to capitalize, and the world's former No. 1 player eventually tied the set at 5-5.
But Borg began to tire, and Volkov took the final game on an ace after five deuces. (AP) Clavet in Final: Second-seeded Francisco Clavet of Spain defeated Ronald Agenor of Haiti, 7-6 (7-5), 7-5, and advanced to the final of the $265,000 San Marino international tournament.
Clavet will play the winner of a later match between Karel Novacek of Czechoslovakia and Lars Jonsson of Sweden.(AP) GOLF


INSIDE
Calming Fear of New Virus Prominent scientists say that reports of a possible new virus that can cause a disease resembling AIDS have been overemphasized.
Page 7.
Still Reeling in Kuwait
Two years after the Iraqi invasion, many Kuwaitis view Iraq and its people -- not Saddam Hussein alone -- as a threat to the region.
Page 12.
High Court Rules on Haitians
While justices hear arguments about the interception and return of Haitian refugees, the Supreme Court will allow the practice to continue.
Page 21.
Seaver's Long Road
Before his Hall of Fame induction today, Tom Seaver reflected on the twists and turns of his stirring baseball career.
SportsSunday, section 8.


QUAYLE'S MOMENT
Much coverage has been given to Dan Quayle's recent pronouncements about family values.
But legislation that President Bush has vetoed, like the Family Leave Act, shows that his Administration has little interest in preserving the family.


Prune, Water, Plant 'Green Manure'
It's too late to prune or fertilize shrubs and trees; the new growth would not withstand the winter.
Rambling roses are the exception; they may be pruned in early August.
Trim about six inches from the tops of this year's growth.
Cutting more reduces the number of next year's flowers, which bloom on year-old wood.
Cut out all two-year-old wood and remove dead canes and suckers.


A New Role For Bus Drivers
LINDA CRENSHAW, an N.J.
Transit driver, was making her last run of the day one recent evening, rolling along Roseville Avenue in Newark, when she heard a passenger screaming in the rear of the bus.
She quickly pulled over to the side of the road and went back to investigate.
There she found a heavy-set, gray-haired man in his mid-50's, lying on his back on the floor.
"Two persons were trying to administer CPR, and several passengers were yelling at me to drive to a hospital," Mrs.
Crenshaw recalled.
"I knew I couldn't go off my route," she said, alluding to company policy.


For His New Film, Hanif Kureishi Reaches for a 'Beautiful Laundrette'
In a large house in Notting Hill a stately white mansion that has obviously seen better days -- technicians bashed a hole in the living room, trying to attach a bike to the ceiling.
"I wrote this scene in a pub," said Hanif Kureishi gleefully, admiring the pandemonium from the comfort of a sofa.
He was clearly enjoying the trouble he had caused.
The prop was for a hallucination scene in "London Kills Me," Mr.
Kureishi's third screenplay and his directorial debut.
The film opens in New York on Friday.


DOUBTS EXPRESSED ON NEW AIDS VIRUS
Two prominent scientists have questioned the significance of a report of a possible new virus causing an AIDS-like disease.
The report, which is being published this month in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences and was submitted by Dr.
Sudhir Gupta of the University of California at Irvine, has stirred public fear that a potentially fatal virus may be transmitted from person to person and through the nation's blood supply.


Yes, America Needs an Oil Industry
To the Editor:
"The Shrinking of the American Oil Industry" (July 19) describes how American oil companies are shifting more of their investments in operations overseas and asks the question: "Does the United States really need much of a domestic oil industry anyway?" The question is not answered directly, but the impression is given that the United States does not because oil can be found more cheaply abroad.
Thus the movement of oil industry investment, technology and jobs from the United States to overseas is presented merely as a matter of free trade.


Needed: A Sense Of Mission
To the Editor:
Bravo to Edward Rothstein for arguing that the problem of rescuing America's symphony orchestras is only in part higher budgets  [ "Some Modest Proposals to Ward Off Extinction," June 28 ] .
Orchestra board members still do not want to acknowledge that for their organizations to survive, policy makers have to redefine the role of a symphony orchestra.
As for musicians, in recent contract negotiations the best reason that New York Philharmonic players could come up with for why they should get raises was that big-league baseball players earn millions of dollars.


Don't Fix the Electoral College. Scrap It.; Can Clinton Saute?
To the Editor:
It seems Hillary Clinton has been compelled to enter a cookie-baking contest with Barbara Bush to prove she is a true all-American woman.
As the wife of a man who does 90 percent of the family cooking, I am more concerned about Bill Clinton's culinary skills.
Can he saute a piece of fish to perfection?
Does he know how to cook rice properly?
Does he have a feel for which vegetables go well together in a stir-fry?


As They Go for the Gold, Enberg Goes Right for the Heart
Seven o'clock Friday night, Barcelona time.
Dick Enberg calling.
He sounds weary, his voice subdued, his ebullience tamed.
His 17-hour grind as co-host of NBC's Olympics morning show and contributor of the nightly "Moments" film is far from over.
Said Enberg: "I'm only semi-brain dead at this time."
Three hours before, he had closed the morning show as his usual beaming self.
"I've challenged the best makeup people in America, Spain and Europe," he said with a weak laugh.
"They ought to get an Emmy."


Team Reports Finding Continent's Deepest Gorge
Sounding the bottom of a thick Alaskan glacier, scientists have made measurements showing what they feel sure is the deepest gorge in North America, perhaps in the world.
It is the Great Gorge, on a flank of Mount McKinley.
The readings, made with seismic instruments used in subsurface mapping and oil exploration, show the gorge to extend almost 9,000 feet, as measured from the peak of Mount Dickey, straight down the granite walls to where the surface of Ruth Glacier runs through the chasm, and then further down through the glacial ice to the bottom.
The depth of the glacier, which had been the big unknown, was found to be 3,770 feet.


Is New York a Tornado Alley? Storm Reports Are Growing
The tornadoes that tore through parts of two communities Friday night may have bolstered the notion that twisters have hit the New York metropolitan area quite frequently in recent years, and there is validity to that perception, meteorologists said yesterday.
Residents in South Amboy and Hamilton Township, N.J., were clearing snapped trees yesterday and carting tons of other debris left by two tornadoes that touched down Friday when a line of thunderstorms swept across New Jersey and into the counties north of New York City.
And while investigators from the National Weather Service were still trying to determine late yesterday whether it actually was a tornado or just a slashing thunderstorm that battered Pleasant Valley in Dutchess County, N.Y., the distinction made little difference to the townspeople faced with the cleanup.


Making a Difference; New Dealmaker to Japan
With the Tokyo stock market in a tailspin, the Japanese economy in a slump and corporations in that country pulling back on foreign investment, now seems an odd time to open an investment banking boutique in the United States aimed at scouting up Japanese business.
But Mark J. Lerner, the former head of the Japan corporate finance group at Chase Manhattan Bank, believes that the tumult in Japan presents new opportunities for such business.
Last week, Mr.
Lerner opened Morgen, Evan &amp; Associates, a boutique that focuses on deals between Japanese and American corporations.
The firm is named for two members of Mr.
Lerner's family who provided financial backing.


Telephone Line For Denver Deals
Visitors to Denver can now call a toll-free telephone line to find out about special deals on city tour packages.
The line was started by the Denver Metro Convention and Visitors Bureau and the packages are offered by a local tour operator, The Organizers.
In operating the number, (800) 489-4888, Denver becomes one of the few cities whose visitors bureaus are involved in promoting specific travel programs.
One package, called Mile High Lights, features a discount of 50 percent or more at participating Denver hotels and an optional combination of tickets (each sold at regular box office prices) to cultural events in the city.
Choices include performances at the Colorado Symphony, Denver Center for the Performing Arts and the Colorado Shakespeare Festival.
One hotel in the program is the Brown Palace, which is charging a discount rate of $98 for two; Embassy Suites-Downtown includes breakfast in its rate of $72 on weekdays and $66 on weekends.


Sally Ann Black, W. E. Dordelman
Sally Ann Black, a daughter of Donald K. Black of Rowayton, Conn., and the late Elizabeth A. Black, was married yesterday to William Edward Dordelman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Dordelman of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Janet Griffin performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of Saint Mary the Virgin in San Francisco.
Mrs.
Dordelman, 30 years old, is a teacher at the Town School for Boys in San Francisco.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University, from which her husband graduated magna cum laude.
Her father, now retired, was a group director of the Far East and Latin American operations for I.B.M.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Alf Palema Leads A Swedish Sweep At Hambletonian
The 67th edition of the Hambletonian, the most prestigious event in harness racing, turned into a sweep for Swedish trainers this afternoon in the bright sunshine of a windy day at the Meadowlands.
Per Eriksson's Alf Palema was the winner of the $1.38 million race -- the third leg of trotting's triple crown -- and his stablemate, King Conch, who is also trained by Eriksson, finished second.
The third-place finisher was Herschel Walker, who is trained by another Swede, Bjorn Berglund.


WALK A LITTLE FASTER
When I read your article, I was reminded of my last visit to New York City, in the fall of 1983, and the wonderful time I had.
My husband was in town for a conference, and my 4-month-old daughter, Jennie, and I joined him.
While he attended meetings, Jennie and I toured the city -- she in a Snugli on my chest and I wearing a new pair of Nikes, purchased at B. Altman.
Our progress around town was often impeded, however, by New Yorkers -- those reputedly rushed folk who had to stop and sneak a peek at the baby.
Doors were held open, seats were offered and other courtesies were extended to us by young and old, male and female.
SUZANNE LOOMIS
Yardley, Pa.


Chaos Gives Russian Lobbyist Power
Arkady I. Volsky has the superficial slickness of a man long accustomed to deference.
In his huge office in the old Communist Party's Central Committee headquarters, with all the requisite attendants and the long line of supplicants in the corridor, Mr.
Volsky acts as if he has all the time in the world.
These days in Russia, it's almost true.
Power seems to flow toward Mr.
Volsky on an increasingly steep slope built on the chaos of Russia's economy and the inevitable mistakes of the largely theoretical economists around acting Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar, who is the architect of Russia's stumbling reform.


Jazz Player Must Pay
MIKE BROWN, a reserve center with the Utah Jazz, is awaiting a court ruling that may require him to pay a substantial amount in child support dating to 1986.
A Utah judge, TIMOTHY R. HANSON, could rule as early as next week how much support Brown must pay for his 9-year-old daughter, now living in Maryland.
Brown waited until last year to acknowledge he was the father of the child, who was born in 1983 to a woman Brown met while attending George Washington University.
The relationship ended shortly before Brown graduated in 1985, and the player then went to Italy to begin his professional career.


Focus: Philadelphia; The Riverfront Plan Shifts to Low Gear
THIS city's plan for a single cohesive riverfront development has been ambushed by a recession, slack demand for new housing and the travails of a real estate market in decline.
Instead of high-rise apartment and office towers at the Delaware River's edge, the parcels have sprouted smaller, less expensive projects that go up quickly, like restaurants, nightclubs and open-air markets.
They provide a modest income for some owners of property that otherwise would have lain fallow, as well as jobs in what is emerging as a regional playground and shopping center.


Spanish Trains
To the Editor: Readers should be warned that Renfe (Spanish Rail) is not honoring first-class passes for travel on the highly publicized high-speed A.V.E., even with an offer to pay a supplement.
My rail pass (bought in March 1992 and used in May) specifies that "passes are valid for unlimited travel . . . on the entire State Railways of Spain."
I bought the pass so that I could ride the new train between Madrid and Seville but was told by Renfe that I would have to pay a full additional fare (ranging from $60 to $165) in each direction.


Sports of The Times; On Loyalty To Company, Or Country?
IF the shoe fits, wear it.
Especially on the Olympic gold-medal stand.
And especially if you're getting paid to wear it.
But if your Olympic team warm-up suit doesn't fit your portfolio of contracts, don't wear it.
Especially on the gold-medal stand.
More and more, the United States Olympic team is populated not so much by athletes from all over America as by athletes from manufacturers of athletic apparel with brand names that sound like newly discovered planets.
Michael Jordan and Charles Barkley from Nike.
Carl Lewis from Mizuno.
Dave Johnson (and his decathlon rival who didn't make the team, Dan O'Brien) from Reebok.


Ann Munchmeyer, Scott E. Healy
Ann Wells Munchmeyer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Louis W. Munchmeyer Jr. of Ithaca, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Scott Edward Healy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Healy Jr. of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
Scott Hill performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Ms.
Munchmeyer, who is 26 years old and keeping her name, is an associate product manager at Reebok International Ltd. in Stoughton, Mass.
She graduated from Williams College, as did her husband.
The bride received an M.B.A. from Duke University.
Her father is a gastroenterologist in private practice in Ithaca, where her mother, Margaret N. Munchmeyer, is a career counselor at Cornell University.


Toxic Algae Feed on Fish
Over the last two decades, mysterious mass die-offs of fish have puzzled biologists and cost the fishing industry hundreds of millions of dollars.
Now it appears the cause may be "phantom" algae, odd green predators that blur the line between the animal and plant kingdoms, living in what researchers call a biological twilight zone.


New York Banks Are Fumbling a Service They Tout
Every investor is fair game in an all-out advertising blitz by New York banks to win new customers.
For a 25-year-old eager to be in growth stocks or a 50-year-old on the prowl for municipal bonds, the city's banks have a pitch: Just bring your money to us, and we'll sell you mutual funds or annuities right in our lobby.
But it might not be that easy, based on a walk-in survey of 13 banks and savings and loans around Manhattan.
At 9 of the branches, a visitor found employees ill-equipped to answer questions about alternative investments, and often so unaggressive that neither the address nor phone number of a customer was requested for follow-up.
Banks may be whetting customers' appetites for investments, but they are fumbling badly when would-be customers show up.


Mickey-Mousing
AS A CARTOON character, Mickey Mouse is approaching Social Security age, having first seen the light in November 1928.
As an expression,
Mickey Mouse
remains as current as the news.
But it has a different meaning from the one it had when the character was born -- actually, half a dozen different meanings.
A few weeks ago, Ross Perot was grasping for words to ridicule the idea that he spies on his enemies.
He called the charges "fairyland," "animal crackers" and, heaping on the scorn, "Mickey Mouse tossed salad."
Mickey
Mouse,
in that heated context, plainly meant "loony," "cartoony," "outlandish."


Foreign Affairs; Redefining National Security
We all know that the world has undergone a revolution.
Equally evident, U.S. foreign policy has hardly adapted.
But no one has added up the new facts, or clearly demonstrated the gap between the new realities and American responses or pointed to eminently doable ways of bridging that gap and restoring American strength and leadership -- until now.
The job was done by a bipartisan commission of government veterans headed by Winston Lord, former U.S.
Ambassador to China and State Department planning chief.
The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (of which I am a trustee) sponsored the enterprise.


POSTING: Westport Walkway; A Riverfront Legacy
Westporters -- past, present and future -- are laying claim to their hometown brick by brick, as well as to marble benches, Victorian lampposts, trees and shrubbery.
Through their donations -- from $25 for a brick (some bought up to 22) to $2,550 for a lamppost -- and help of local contractors, the Library Riverwalk and Gardens will replace a neglected path along the Saugatuck River, from Jesup Green to the Levitt Pavilion.
It will be dedicated Oct. 4.
The 11-year-old vision got under way with a fundraiser in March, and has met its $110,000 goal plus a $30,000 endowment for maintenance.
Its Walkway of Westporters, 400 by 4 feet, will include over 6,000 bricks bearing names, sayings -- even a marriage proposal.
A stairway of railroad ties will go from the library to the walkway.


Public &amp; Private; Here's To the Winners
The hands-down Olympic favorite in our little corner of the world was the big goofy guy with earrings, a shaved head and a stars-and-stripes bandanna.
The kids loved Nelson Diebel, who said that it was like a drug, man, winning the gold, the ultimate high.
What a role model, I thought ruefully: a swimmer who'd been expelled from prep school, had admitted to past problems with drugs and alcohol, and looked like a biker in a bikini.
Except that after the bravado came the medal ceremony, and as they played the national anthem the bad boy of the breast-stroke choked back tears and moved his lips to the last couple of lines.


Kaori Yamamoto, Thomas McManus
Kaori Yamamoto, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Takao Yamamoto of Tokyo, was married yesterday to Thomas Michael McManus, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James E. McManus of Katonah, N.Y.
The Rev.
William P. Dalton performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary of the Assumption Church in Katonah.
Mrs.
McManus, 23 years old, is a financial analyst in the equity options and futures department of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, the New York securities brokerage.
Her husband is a vice president in the same department.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is studying for a master's degree in engineering at Columbia University.
Her father, an economist, is a senior manager at Nippon Steel in Tokyo.
Her mother, Hiroko Yamamoto, is a Japanese language teacher at the Gakuyukai School, a college preparatory school in Tokyo.


BARCELONA
SCORING DISPUTE IN BOXING Eric Griffin of the United States was defeated and then attributed the loss to the new method of computerized scoring.
A CITY IN ITS GLORY


Gulf Arabs Thinking of a Divided Iraq
"Kuwaitis would eat up any Iraqi alive if they caught one," said Abdelaziz al-Houty, a Kuwaiti driver, the other day in a conversation about the depth of hatred toward Kuwait's former occupiers.
Two years after the invasion of Kuwait, such raw sentiments are giving way to arguments in several Arab countries of the Persian Gulf region that peace and stability cannot return with the death or removal of Iraq's President, Saddam Hussein, alone.


Neither Snow nor Rain . . . Stay a Hartford Dentist's Quest
DR.
LEONARD F. MENCZER regarded the recent nationwide vote on whether to put an old or young Elvis Presley on a United States stamp with some disbelief.
It all seemed too much ado for the 75-year-old Hartford dentist.
He does not have any quarrel with the memory of Elvis but he does wish that the United States Postal Service would devote its energies to honoring Americans he believes are more deserving.
People like Horace Wells, in particular.
Horace Wells was a dentist of the last century, a strange, tormented man who has, Dr.
Menczer maintains, the most legitimate claim to being the discoverer of anesthesia.


ABOUT CARS: A Friendlier Kind of Mailbag; And Speaking of Bias ...
INDULGE me.
For a change, the letters we have here are kinder.
Gentler than usual.
Nobody is accusing me of being on the take from the Japanese.
No one is saying I am a dunderhead.
But the letters are thoughtful, too.
And, now and then, I need the reassurance.
Dear Sir:
Please help me decide who is right.
Half the experts I consulted insist that my 1967 Dodge Monaco (fitted with standard bias-belted tires) is not built to accept radial tires.
The other half insists there is no problem whatsoever, and that I would have a better ride.
They say that a tire is a tire and that it doesn't make any difference to the car.
Who's right?
ALFRED BENAROYA Flushing, N.Y.
Surprisingly, the Tire Industry Safety Council tells me the car may indeed know the difference.
Its suspension was designed with bias-ply tires in mind, and radials will change the way it rides and handles.
On the other hand, the car was not particularly sure-footed to begin with, and radials should make no difference from a safety standpoint.
Just don't mix radials and bias-belted tires on the same axle
because
their characteristics are quite different.


Export News: 'Twin Peaks' Mania Peaks in Japan
It might seem strange that people usually known for their industriousness fly across the Pacific Ocean to be photographed in plastic sheets.
But that is what Japanese fans of "Twin Peaks" do on group tours to Snoqualmie, Wash., where the now-defunct ABC series was shot.
They pretend to be Laura Palmer, the high school homecoming queen whose body, wrapped in plastic, is found as the series opens.
Long after interest in the eerie David Lynch series has faded in the United States, Japan is in the midst of "Peaker" mania.
Several thousand fans attended mock funerals for Laura Palmer in Tokyo and two other cities earlier this year.
Some people say there has even been an increase in the popularity of cherry pie, the food favored by one of the characters, the F.B.I. agent Dale Cooper.


Hillary Mayer, David Jacobson
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Mayer of Albany have announced the engagement of their daughter Hillary Lee Mayer to David Lee Jacobson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Jacobson of Cranston, R.I.
A May wedding is planned.


Wall Street; A Fast-and-Loose 'Short Buster'
Ranking right up there with Mom and apple pie is the indisputable virtue of running abusive short sellers out of the markets.
At their most disreputable, shorts can whisper ugly, untrue stories into the ears of regulators, provoking undeserved selloffs of stocks of perfectly good companies.
At their best, the shorts attempt to bring a much-needed balance to financial markets that are far more influenced by abusive touts.
But never mind about that.
Abusive shorts are the subject of the week, in honor of last Thursday's first annual meeting of the Short Buster Club.


Mix-Up and Mystery: The 1921 Missouri Proof
THE SUPERIOR GALLERIES of Beverly Hills, Calif., will sell a unique American coin at its auction on Aug. 10 in Orlando, Fla.
The coin is the only known example of a proof 1921 Missouri Centennial Half Dollar.
Proof coins are ones that receive multiple strikes of their dies, creating extremely sharp impressions.
Commemorative coins rarely had proofs issued to the public.
Occasionally a batch of proofs would be run off the presses at the mint and saved for presentations to dignitaries, but in the case of the silver Missouri Half Dollar, no proofs were ever authorized.
But one was somehow struck.


Chimney Cracks Need Repairs While Still Small
BRICK chimneys need periodic exterior maintenance to keep them from deteriorating.
If cracks, crumbling mortar, loose bricks or other problems go unrepaired, expensive professional rebuilding may be necessary or, in extreme cases, a storm can blow down a chimney.
Performing routine care is usually fairly easy, provided that the roof is not too steep.
Amateurs should avoid working on roofs that slope more than about four inches per foot of horizontal distance.
The slope can be measured with a ruler or framing square by holding either tool along the edge of the roof at a gable end.


Dr. Campbell, R. F. Rodriquez
Catherine Mary Campbell, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Campbell of Alpine, N.J., was married there yesterday to Robert Frank Rodriquez, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Rodriquez of Cleveland.
The Rev.
Bill Albertus, a Methodist minister, performed the interdenominational ceremony at the Alpine Community Church.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a piano instructor at the 92nd Street Y School of Music in New York and at the Rockland Conservatory of Music in Spring Valley, N.Y.
She graduated from the Manhattan School of Music and received master's degrees in musicology and piano from the New England Conservatory.
She received a doctor of musical arts degree in piano from the University of Rochester.


Schools Offer Student-Back Warranties
SITUATION wanted: high school graduate seeks entry-level position in any field.
Comes with warranty: free repair for all defects.
It may sound odd, but faced with mounting criticism about their performance, a growing number of high schools now warranty the functional literacy of their graduates.


No More Blank Checks for Regulators
EARLY this year, President Bush saw a Federal regulatory system spiraling out of control and instituted a 90-day moratorium on new Federal regulations, which was later extended for four months.
The moratorium, which will expire on Aug. 27, should be renewed.
The moratorium calls for a review of existing regulations and requires that any new regulations be evaluated for benefits and costs.
It encourages the use of market-based mechanisms to achieve regulatory objectives.


An Unusual Event, Many Times Over
A GREAT majority of bridge tournaments bear a close resemblance to those that have gone before.
A competition with an unusual feature is, well, unusual.
One that was played two weeks ago had six unusual features, and that was perhaps unique.
It was the third All-Star Game, organized by Bridge Today Magazine and sponsored by Perrier.
The site was an open area in the Latham Circle Mall, just north of Albany, probably the first such setting in North America.
Curious members of the public stopped to look.


Anne Swinton, Rudy Ruggles 3d
Anne Bradley Swinton, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Neil W. Swinton Jr. of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married there yesterday to Rudy Lamont Ruggles 3d, a son of Rudy L. Ruggles Jr. of Ridgefield, Conn., and the late Nancy O. Meeker.
The Rev.
Stephen White performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Redeemer.


Miller Picks Up 3 Medals In a Day
Two American teen-aged gymnasts competed tonight in the Olympics.
One took home three more medals for a grand total of five.
The other, said her coach, "had turned from the most confident person I ever had into a timid individual, a broken bird."


Tackling Trends They Don't Like
Coming to a telephone booth near you: Charivari's newest advertisements.
Last spring, the owners of the fashionable New York chain proclaimed their boredom, through ads, with ripped jeans and other elements of the back-to-basics movement.


Equipped to Be a Pro But a Junior at Heart
At first glance, America's top junior golfers don't look or play much differently from the game's best professionals.
As the nation's best under-18 players demonstrated at the United States Junior Amateur, which ended today at the Wollaston Golf Club, the profiles might be a little leaner, but the swings are usually more flexible and often more aggressive than the more tempered actions of their professional mentors.


Creepy Crawlers That Multiply in the Moisture
THE abundant rainfall has been glorious for gardens.
Annuals are blooming.
Trees are gorgeous with leaves.
Vegetables are thriving.
So are the slugs.
This has been the kind of growing season that appeals to slugs: plenty of moisture, abundant leafy growth and well-mulched gardens.
All of the factors that favor plants seem to favor slugs.
When favorite garden plants are seen to have mysterious holes or, worse, are completely devoid of leaves and only the stem is left, then suspect slugs.
No plant in particular appeals to slugs; they like them all although they do have a few special favorites, like hostas and marigolds.


Business Diary/July 26-31
COMPANIES Clark Clifford: B.C.C.I. Dupe or a 'Face for Rent'?


Air Show at Oshkosh Is the World's Biggest


Bush and Clinton Open Fire On the Foreign Policy Front
NO attack should be unexpected in a Presidential campaign, but there is still something jarring when the Republicans' first substantive foreign policy criticism accuses the Democrat of being "reckless" about Bosnia.
After all, for most of the last 30 years Republicans said Democrats who ran for President were timid or weak, if not downright cowardly.
But this is the first election since 1936, or 10 years before Bill Clinton was born, that is being conducted when the United States was not imperiled by one or more big bad countries.
So foreign policy is bound to play a different sort of election role, and almost certainly a smaller one.
In the old days, foreign policy "literally vetoed people," said Representative Newt Gingrich, the No. 2 House Republican.
"If you couldn't handle foreign policy, you couldn't handle the Presidency."


Hand Baggage
TOTE THOSE BAGS.
LIFT those sacks.
The whoppingly overscaled handbag will be the one to lug around this fall.
As a rule, designers seldom show handbags on the runways.
But at the recent fall collections in Paris and New York, the models more often than not strode out clutching impossible-to-ignore satchels.


Which Side Are You On?
"THE RIVER RAN RED"
Homestead 1892.
Edited by David P. Demarest Jr. and Fannia Weingartner.
Illustrated. 232 pp.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Cloth, $39.95.
Paper, $19.95.
THE BATTLE FOR HOMESTEAD, 1880-1892
Politics, Culture, and Steel.
By Paul Krause.
Illustrated. 548 pp.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Cloth, $39.95.
Paper, $19.95.


For Drug Addicts, AIDS Fear Is Sex
FOR nearly 10 years, Vera, a 29-year-old East End resident, supported a $200-a-day heroin habit by being a prostitute on the streets of Bay Shore.
For seven years, Robert, 24, also of Bay Shore, used crack and other drugs while patronizing prostitutes like Vera.
Today, Vera and Robert no longer use drugs, and because neither shared intravenous needles, neither is afraid of having contracted AIDS that way.
Even so, they live in fear of the disease because they had unprotected sex.
In the fight against AIDS, drug-treatment officials say they are having some success persuading users to avoid sharing syringes, a major conduit through which the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, is transmitted.
The officials say that many drug users, like Vera, now use clean needles, or that, like Robert, they avoid intravenous drugs entirely.
Little Change in Behavior
But the officials say they have largely failed to change the sexual behavior of this large group of intravenous-drug users -- about 25,000 on Long Island.
As a result, they say, sexual transmission has overtaken needle sharing as their greatest concern about the spread of AIDS among addicts.
"We are making some inroads in how to protect clients by safer needle use," said Dianne Windhorst, administrator of the Suffolk County methadone program.
"There is nothing to document we've made any inroads on sexual behavior."
Sage Gargano, the H.I.V. coordinator for the program, said, "Needles are not the problem as much as sexual promiscuity."
Part of the problem is cultural.
Officials say resistance to using condoms is greatest precisely among the groups most at risk for AIDS.
In Hispanic cultures, for example, a macho attitude often prevails, said Logan Lewis, president of the State Association of Therapeutic Communities and head of Apple Inc. in Hauppauge, the largest private provider of drug treatment on the Island.
"Most male Hispanics are not going to view use of condoms as something they have to do," Mr.
Lewis said.
"And women are not going to be prone to demand that their partners use condoms."
Pierre Lescouflair, 39, a Haitian immigrant who used to inject heroin and smoke crack and who is now a counselor for Apple in some of the most drug-plagued communities, said he found a great deal of suspicion among minorities in Central Islip, Brentwood, Bay Shore and North Amityville.
"Minority populations," he said, "are already isolated from mainstream America." In Train Stations and Parks
His work through the Apple Linkage Outreach and Education program is financed by a $100,000 grant from the State AIDS Institute, an arm of the Health Department.
Mr.
Lescouflair often approaches minority members in train stations, parks and other places.
"I try to engage them in conversation," he said.
"They usually don't show interest."
Part of the problem is also religious.
Most Spanish-speaking people are Roman Catholic, and the use of condoms contradicts church doctrine on birth control.
Many Catholic churches have been very resistant to anti-AIDS education, said the executive vice president of Apple, Muriel Farkas.
"It's too ticklish for congregations to deal with," Mr.
Lewis said.
This attitude, he added, "allows for some false information about AIDS to be perpetuated."
"There isn't a unified effort in any of the organized churches to make this a predominant issue to discuss with congregants," Mr.
Lewis said.
Mr.
Lescouflair said Apple programs had also met resistance from businesses.
In the summer, he said, a few managers of shopping malls have allowed him to set up a table to dispense information about AIDS and sometimes condoms.
But in the Christmas shopping season, he said, when the most people can be reached, the same managers have not allowed him to set up.
They say his table would impede the heavy traffic of shoppers.
Some business owners have been unwilling to allow Mr.
Lescouflair to speak with workers on the job.
In a summary report of Apple Linkage covering the 12 months ending this month, he wrote, "No success has been experienced in reaching business employees, as companies are not willing to lose their employees for a two-hour period during the workday." Programs in Schools
Apple has had more success with schools.
In the last year Mr.
Lescouflair has made presentations in six schools, including two colleges, under its grant.
But his efforts were rebuffed by Central Islip High School, Bay Shore High School and Brentwood High School.
The schools said they had their own AIDS-education programs.
But Apple officials contend that because of their expertise in drug treatment, their presentations, at no cost to the schools, would be more effective.
A spokesman for the schools in Brentwood, Jerold Steiner, said Apple representatives had offered presentations on other subjects.
But, he added, "We have people offering AIDS education, so we don't need anybody right now."
Brentwood, he said, complies with state mandates by including AIDS education in its health curriculum in the 7th, 10th and 11th grades.
But, he said, "It's not a hard, heavy program."
Mr.
Steiner said parental and church opposition to explicit AIDS education was so strong that Brentwood would not go beyond the relatively weak state requirements, even though the community, with its large minority population, is considered highly at risk for AIDS associated with drug use.
Some of the opposition, he said, was "based on ignorance, some based on lack of understanding and some on the old burying-your-head-in-the-sand kind of thing." But, he added, "We can't shove it down their throats."
Some parents' groups, too, have not responded to the Apple outreach program.
The report says "no personal visits have been conducted" with such groups despite mailings to nine P.T.A.'s.
Without a major expansion of educational efforts in minority communities, Apple officials say, AIDS will continue to spread.
From Main Street in Bay Shore to Straight Path in Wyandanch, the officials report, drug use and associated prostitution continue at high levels.
"There needs to be more street advocates in the community," Mr.
Lewis said.
"The message hasn't gotten across clearly."


Beyond Apartheid, A Struggle Over How to Be A Nation
ON a hilltop in Zulu country the other day, a white civil engineer took a break from supervising preparations for the wedding of the Zulu king and volunteered his thoughts on the subject of state-making.
"All over, people are separating," declared the engineer, an immigrant from Holland now employed by the white-invented Zulu homeland called KwaZulu.
"Look at Russia. Look at Yugoslavia. You can't force people together."


'Married Life Is the Only Life There Is'
AFTER MOONDOG
By Jane Shapiro. 323 pp. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $22.95.


Taking Advantage of Season's Tomatoes
REAL tomatoes are back.
For the next couple of months we don't even have to consider commercial tomatoes that have been picked "green-mature," washed in chlorine, coated with parafin oil, ethylene-gassed to make them turn pink and, as a final indignity, refrigerated.
At local markets and farm stands, tomatoes will now be available in their full vine-ripened glory, and chefs everywhere are taking advantage of the fact.
At the Odeon, a bistro in TriBeCa, Stephen Lyle, the chef, blends red tomatoes with fresh corn, roasted red peppers and chilies.
The result is a remarkable deep red soup packed with flavor.
At the Southwestern-style restaurant Mesa Grill, Bobby Flay smokes tomatoes over aromatic woodchips and makes an unusual salsa with them, which he serves with chicken, fish or hamburgers (it is particularly good with grilled salmon).
At Alo Alo, an Italian restaurant on the Upper East Side, Matthew Kenney, the chef, serves an unusual form of gazpacho, making separate purees of yellow beefsteak and red tomatoes, which he seasons with cayenne pepper, red wine vinegar and cumin.
He pours the yellow and red purees into each soup bowl at the same time, creating a two-tone effect, and garnishes the soup with basil leaves and croutons.


At New Bard College Center, a Passion for Modern Works
NEWCOMERS to Bard College will know they have arrived when they see the small polygonal gatehouse on Annandale Road.
This mid-19th-century gem, painted white with black trim, marks the Blithewood Road entrance to a waterfront campus of more than 500 acres, where trees seem to outnumber buildings 100 to 1.
Soon after making the turn, the visitor reaches the Edith Blum Art Institute and the Avery Arts Center on the left and, in a large clearing opposite, the Richard and Marieluise Black Center for Curatorial Studies and Art in Contemporary Culture.
As sleek as its title is bulky, this new complex in gray and tan brick, the work of the Chicago architects James Goettsch and Nada Andric, lies low on a T-shape plan.
Facing front, the crossbar contains the lobby, library and office while the galleries are housed in the two long buildings -- basilicas without apses -- that snuggle up at right angles from behind.
Although the arched roofs of these structures can be seen by stepping back on the grass, the best view is from inside, where curved ceilings and partitions combine into arcades providing glimpses of the Blacks' holdings in late 20th-century art.
The collection is named Rivendell, for the dwelling with rejuvenative powers in Tolkien's "Lord of the Rings."


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
127.15
128.10
137.20
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4745
1.5044
1.7405
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1841
1.1918
1.1501
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9275
1.8942
1.6895
U.S. Dollar per British PoundGold
$357.50
$359.50
$355.90
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Americans on NATO Team Inspect Ukrainian Base


Elizabeth Long, Dr. John P. Furia
Cecilia Long of Penn Valley, Pa., and William Long of Chester, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Carol Long to Dr.
John Patrick Furia, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Furia of Providence, R.I.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Long, 29 years old, is a cook and the gourmet store manager of Edwards Restaurant in Rochester.
She graduated from the University of the Arts in Philadelphia.
Her father is the manager of engineering with Foster Wheeler Corporation, an engineering and design company in Clinton, N.J.
Her mother is a social worker in Philadelphia.


Lost in the MiddleGeorge Judson
MANY PARENTS have long suspected that the children most neglected by public schools are those most in the middle: the ones who spend their years sitting quietly in class, neither causing trouble nor drawing attention with extremely good or bad grades.
Now, as educators focus on the dropout problem in urban schools, they are also acknowledging that these quiet students, a much larger group than expected that is much more representative of American society, have indeed been ignored.


Seizure of Assets by an Aggressive Drug Fighter Raises Eyebrows
Prosecutor Nicholas L. Bissell Jr. makes no apologies about how he enforces drug laws in Somerset County.
His force of 17 assistant prosecutors and 50 detectives, he said, operate "within the law" and he is proud of the millions of dollars in cash and property that his office has seized in drug cases over the last several years.
Yet Mr.
Bissell's aggressive approach to drug cases and his wide use of the law that allows the civil confiscation of the assets of drug defendants before they are convicted touches squarely on a growing national debate over how local authorities wield the powerful new tool of asset forfeiture.


Annette Andrada, Robert Babich
GETTING married in Pamplona, Spain, when the bulls were running wasn't what their families had in mind.
"My father said, 'At least you're original,' " Robert Babich recalled.
"My uncle said, 'You've been reading too much Hemingway.' "
Regardless of what everyone said, Mr.
Babich, 27 years old, and Annette Andrada, 26, contacted the Spanish consulate in New York and arranged to be married in a Catholic church in Pamplona on July 6, the first day of the Feast of San Fermin.
The festival is filled with bullfights and all-night parties in cobblestone streets; it's a time when everyone in Pamplona essentially howls at the moon for a week.


POSTING: Digging Up the Past; Property Data Via Modem
A summary of key information from every deed and mortgage recorded in the Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan and Queens for the last 10 years is now available through a private database compiled by the Public Data Corporation of Manhattan, according to the company.
The information is organized by borough, block number and tax lot number.
It is transmitted, through a modem, to a subscriber's personal computer terminal.
Depending on the scope of the request, a search for information costs between $1 and $4, but subscribers have to pay a minimum of $100 a month.


Wilber Smith, Civil-Rights Leader; Connecticut Democrat Dies at 57
Wilber G. Smith, a civil-rights leader and former Connecticut state legislator, died on Friday at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Newington, Conn.
He was 57 years old and lived in Hartford.
He died of cancer, his family said.


JULY 26 - AUG. 1: Iran-Contra; One Old C.I.A. Hand Confronts Another in Court
There could be no more compelling evidence of the wounds inflicted on the Central Intelligence Agency by the Iran-contra affair than the events that unfolded in Federal District Court in Washington last week as one former agency official took the witness stand against another.
Clair E. George, once the nation's third senior spymaster, is the agency's highest official to go on trial in the scandal.
He is accused of lying to Congress and investigators about the agency's knowledge of the Reagan Administration's illegal sale of arms to Iran and the diversion of profits from those sales to help the contra rebels in Nicaragua.


Festivals Wind Up, and Wind Down
IT might seem a little late to inaugurate a summer festival, but August has been the month of choice of Chestnut Hill Concerts for more than 20 years, so evidently the organization is doing something right.
Part of the secret is adventuresome programming, part the array of top-notch artists who have appeared in the series, and this summer is no exception.
Under the artistic direction of the cellist Ronald Thomas, the four Friday evenings at the First Congregational Church of Madison offer an enticing mixture of the familiar and the rarely heard.
Even with the recent Mozart bicentennial celebrations, for instance, the composer's "Duo for Cello and Horn" was hardly overplayed, and this intriguing novelty opens the cycle this Friday at 8:30 P.M.
It will be followed by an even more obscure Romance for Horn and Piano by Scriabin, and then the lovely D Minor Arensky Trio.
The players, in addition to Mr.
Thomas, are the pianist Mihae Lee, the violinist Christiaan Bor and the hornist Robert Routch.


Taking Another Approach to Staging 'Evita'
AT first, Theaterfest's last show of the summer at Montclair State College held a certain curiosity value.
Although no one was crying for yet another "Evita," there was more than routine interest in the announcement that the role of the trashy opportunist turned notorious First Lady of Argentina was to be played by Andrea McArdle, Broadway's original Little Orphan Annie.
Theoretically, the casting was newsworthy; theatrically, it was a disaster.
Here is an "Evita" without an Evita -- and, worse, without excitement, sweep and glamour.
Ms.
McArdle's colorlessness is but the central flaw in a wrongheaded production that ends an 11-day run after today's matinee.


Janet Buttner, Gary Dean Eakman
Janet Mott Buttner, a daughter of Jean B. Buttner of Westport, Conn., and Edgar M. Buttner of Oakland, Calif., was married yesterday to Dr.
Gary Dean Eakman, a son of E. Frances Eakman of Los Angeles and Paul D. Eakman of Fort Worth.
The Rev.
Dennis Hamilton performed the Unitarian Universalist ceremony at the Reunion Ranch in Terrell, Tex.
Mrs.
Eakman, 31 years old, graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Last month, she received a master's degree in physical therapy at Texas Woman's University at Dallas.
Her father is the president of Coastcom Inc., a manufacturer of telecommunications equipment in Concord, Calif.
Her mother is the chairwoman of Arnold Bernhard &amp; Company in New York, publisher of Value Line financial reports.


What Other Countries Think of the U.S. Elections: Israel; Little Love for Bush, And Clinton Is Untested
Few overseas political events are more important to Israel than a United States Presidential election, but Israelis seem not to have made up their collective mind about preferring a candidate.
A more important concern is whether the end of the cold war, and America's turn inward, have so reduced Israel's perceived value as a "strategic asset" that unflinching American support cannot be assumed, no matter who is President.
No question, President Bush is widely mistrusted because of his often-nasty relations with the recently defeated Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.
While left-of-center Israelis feel that without relentless American pressure Mr.
Shamir would never have moved to thepeace table, there is lingering uneasiness that, deep down, Mr.
Bush is not a dependable friend.


Josephine M. Maneri, James L. Halliday
Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent J. Maneri of Holmdel, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Josephine Marie Maneri to James Lee Halliday, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Halliday of Flossmoor, Ill.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Maneri, 28 years old, is a bond rater at Interactive Data Corporation, a New York financial-research company.
She graduated from Rutgers University.


Four New York Paths Cross in Kent
JOHN CAREY is a painter with four solo shows in Manhattan to his credit and many times that number of appearances in groups, mostly in the East Village in the 1980's.
Francesca Greene is making her name as a painter in Rockland County.
Works by Melissa Stern, a sculptor, have appeared in galleries on both the East and West Coasts, and she has been an artist in residence at the Kohler Company ceramics factory in Wisconsin.
Jim Phalen teaches at colleges in Westchester County and has exhibited in that area as well as in Albuquerque, N.M., and Manhattan.
But it may be that all roads lead to Kent, for it is at Bachelier-Cardonsky Gallery that the artists have converged under the title "New York Four."
Ms.
Greene opens the show with small still lifes in frames so carefully crafted as to seem of a piece with the paintings.
Her subjects are mainly food -- a lone orange seemingly with a patch of mildew on top, acorn squashes one by one, a fat New Jersey tomato and so on.
Casting shadows of black and gray, they repose on tables against backgrounds light and dark.
Although Ms.
Greene is more interested in local color than in the effects of light, her best work is a chiaroscuro study of glistening white coffee cups piled on a stack of saucers.


County Finds Funds for Day Care
AMONG the 4-year-olds building with blocks, feeding month-old baby chicks and playing in a miniature kitchen at the Y.W.
Child Care Center of the Y.W.C.A. here recently were several whose attendance is partly subsidized by public funds.
Thanks to a recent county decision to replace $1.1 million in day-care money cut by the state, those children will keep their places at the center this year.
But County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, who led the initiative to rescue Westchester's Day Care Program, warned that the state's share of Federal Title XX funds for child care would not be covered in next year's county budget.
"You have to have more than the counties involved in this thing," Mr.
O'Rourke said.
"We cannot afford to backfill the state cuts any further."
He suggested that day-care advocates begin now to "get some promises" from candidates for state office that day care will be included in the next state budget.


Creepy Crawlers That Multiply in the Moisture
THE abundant rainfall has been glorious for gardens.
Annuals are blooming.
Trees are gorgeous with leaves.
Vegetables are thriving.
So are the slugs.
This has been the kind of growing season that appeals to slugs: plenty of moisture, abundant leafy growth and well-mulched gardens.
All of the factors that favor plants seem to favor slugs.
When favorite garden plants are seen to have mysterious holes or, worse, are completely devoid of leaves and only the stem is left, then suspect slugs.
No plant in particular appeals to slugs; they like them all although they do have a few special favorites, like hostas and marigolds.


Data Bank/Aug. 2, 1992


Making a Difference; The Entrepreneur Employee
In 1987, when Time Inc. paid $5 million for a 49 percent interest in Parenting magazine, it was with the understanding that it would ultimately acquire the rest and that founder and publisher Robin Wolaner would then depart with another large check.
Ms.
Wolaner sold the balance of Parenting to Time in 1990, but stayed on, and late last month was named to head another Time unit, the Sunset Publishing Corporation.
Ms.
Wolaner, who is 38, acknowledges that it is rare for founders and chief executives of acquired companies to stay on, and rarer still to be promoted, but said that she is a bit outside the mold.
"I don't think I fit the stereotype of the entrepreneur," she said.
"I've always been a very happy employee."


Sports of The Times; This Time, Women Were Running South
It was better this way.
Fifty-three years ago, women wearing black trudged northward in the night along the Costa del Maresme, trying to shelter their children from the bombs and the bullets of the Spanish Civil War.
Yesterday, that path was retraced, along a coast sparkling with sailboats and restaurants and people lining the road to cheer.
Nearly 50 sleek female runners from all over the world, wearing the lightest shorts and shirts, the sturdiest of running shoes, worried about the brutal heat and the pain in their joints rather than incoming fire.


Commercial Property: London Offices; In a Glutted Market, Age-Old Practices Give Way
WITH more and more space flooding into an already glutted London office market, many of the age-old British leasing practices that heavily favored the landlord over the tenant are finally starting to crumble.
As a consequence, commercial tenants will no longer have to sign up for a minimum of 25 years.
Nor will they have to assume full responsibility for repairs during the lease period, although they may still be responsible for paying the property taxes.


Diana Bartlett, Michael Sclafani
W.
Scott Bartlett of Greenwich, Conn., has announced the engagement of his daughter, Diana Chase Bartlett, to Michael Allan Sclafani, a son of Joseph R. Sclafani and Trinita C. Sclafani, both of Greenwich.
A September 1993 wedding is planned.
Miss Bartlett, 31 years old, is an independent textile designer in Middletown, Conn.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father, who retired from E. P. Dutton as editor in chief of the New York publishing house, is an independent editorial consultant in Manhattan.
Her late mother, Miriam Bartlett, was the owner of Genie's Caterers in Greenwich.


Celeste Koeleveld, Paul B. Haskel
Mr. and Mrs.
Frans P. Koeleveld of Newport News, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Celeste L. Koeleveld to Paul B. Haskel, a son of Joyce Haskel of Southbury, Conn., and Allen B. Haskel of New York.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Koeleveld, 28 years old, is an assistant United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York.
She graduated from Harvard University.
She received her law degree from Columbia University, as did her husband.
Her father is a textile engineer at BASF Corporation, a conglomerate in Williamsburg, Va.
Her mother is a secretary in the Newport News public school system.


Anne Touborg, Michael Zimmer
Anne Monroe Touborg, a daughter of Margaret B. Touborg of New York and Dr.
Jens N. F. Touborg of Weston, Mass., was married yesterday to Michael Charles Zimmer, a son of Judith H. Mitchell of Midlothian, Va., and Charles F. Zimmer of Lynchburg, Va.
The Rev.
Sue A. S. Morrow, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel.
Mrs.
Zimmer, 26 years old, is an English teacher at George Washington Middle School in Ridgewood, N.J.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton and received an M.A. in education from Harvard University.
Her father is the director of Walk-In Medical Center in Waltham, Mass.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Merry D. Touborg of Weston.


Reading, Writing And Singing
To the Editor:
If symphony orchestras want to insure their survival they must direct their attention, and funds, to expanding musical education programs.
These programs will raise up a deeply committed audience, one that will not allow an orchestra to die.


Inside Brooklyn College
To the Sports Editor:
A small addendum to Charles Tobey's article ("Brooklyn College's Lesson: Turf Isn't Greener in Division I," July 12):


The Splash Of Youth
At the Metropolitan Pool in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, it was a time to pass through the delicious rites of summer -- meeting, laughing, romping, touching, getting soaked in the splash of youth.


Letter: From President Bush; Market-Based Health Reform Is Best
To the Editor:
As the people of this country seek reform in health care, it is reassuring to see The New York Times's editorials confirm what many already know: that market-based reforms are the best way to make radical changes in the health care system.
Old-fashioned models for health care reform, including Canadian-style systems or greater taxes -- direct or indirect -- on today's job-producing small businesses, provide no real answers for the future.


'Is This What the 15 People at the TV Tower Died For?'
The late-afternoon sun slants through a stained-glass wall in Lithuania's Soviet-built Parliament building, lighting the pained features of Jurate Musteikyte, a 39-year-old translator.
It isn't the glare that is causing her to wince but the racket of three Parliament deputies arguing endlessly over the loudspeakers about privatization.
At issue is whether old Communist Party hacks are getting an unfair advantage.
Not long ago, Parliamentary deputies were heroes who challenged the mighty Soviet Union.
Today, Parliament is split into 10 squabbling factions.
Even Sajudis, the movement that unified Lithuania's independence drive four years ago, has divided into several different camps.
In opinion polls, only half the population now approves of the direction the country is going.


Art Thieves Bleed Italy's Heritage
A new sack of Rome is under way.
And while today's vandals do not rape and pillage, they may be more systematic about picking clean Italy's art treasures.
The country with the highest concentration of art in the world is losing the equivalent of a museum a year, not even counting the objects that disappear most frequently, those dug up and looted from archeological sites.


Christina Weltz, Edmond Ritter
Audrey Rosenman of New York and S. Robert Weltz of Santa Barbara, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Christina Ray Weltz to Dr.
Edmond F. Ritter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmond J. Ritter of Cincinnati.
An October wedding is planned.
Dr.
Weltz, 31 years old, is a senior resident in general surgery at Duke University, where her fiance is an assistant professor of plastic and reconstructive surgery.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and received her M.D. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, now retired, was a member of the New York Stock Exchange.
Her mother, a psychotherapist, is the counselor at the Chapin School in New York.
Dr.
Weltz is also the stepdaughter of Gloria Weltz and the late Mervin Rosenman.


Governors Develop Plan to Help Preschool Children
The National Governors' Association opened its annual meeting today by issuing a bipartisan blueprint for the states to improve children's readiness for school, the nationwide educational goal that had divided Republicans and Democrats.
The report, developed by a panel of governors and 2 corporate executives over the last year, said the states should meet three objectives: more and better preschool programs for all poor and disabled children; improved health and nutrition programs for preschool children, and improved social services to help parents better prepare their children for school.
It did not say how much these programs would cost.


Survey Finds Consolidators' Fares Hard to Get
The low, low fares to Europe advertised by some consolidators -- companies that buy airline tickets in volume for resale -- may be too good to be true, according to a recent survey by the Better Business Bureau of Metropolitan New York.
The bureau surveyed 20 consolidators, seeking New York-to-Paris round-trip flights with two different departure dates: one in late May, one in late June.
For the June departure, the survey found no tickets available from any of the consolidators at the fare advertised, in spite of a lead time of 18 to 20 days; the lowest price available was anywhere from $33 to $284 higher.
For the May departure, only 20 percent of the consolidators had tickets at the advertised fare.
For the June departure, two-thirds of the consolidators either offered no savings over an airline's own lowest price or had no tickets with confirmed seats; for the May departure, half the consolidators fell into one of those two categories.


ABOUT CARS: A Friendlier Kind of Mailbag; Courting the Ladies...Sort Of
INDULGE me.
For a change, the letters we have here are kinder.
Gentler than usual.
Nobody is accusing me of being on the take from the Japanese.
No one is saying I am a dunderhead.
But the letters are thoughtful, too.
And, now and then, I need the reassurance.
Dear Sir:
As the female owner of a 1987 Mazda 323, I am not surprised that Mazda has targeted female buyers, as you discussed in a recent column.
My car is peppy, reliable and inexpensive to run.
All maintenance has been routine or explainable, like worn brakes from city driving.


Charla Krupp and Richard Zoglin
Charla Krupp, a daughter of Walter Krupp of Tucson, Ariz., and Terry Krupp of Wilmette, Ill., was married yesterday in East Hampton, L.I., to Richard Zoglin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Emanuel Zoglin of Kansas City, Mo.
Cantor Debra S. Davidson performed the ceremony at the Jewish Center of the Hamptons.
Mrs.
Zoglin is the entertainment editor of Glamour magazine in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Illinois.
Her father, who is retired, was a corporate manager of Rothschild's, a chain of men's clothing stores in Chicago.
Her mother owns Permut Real Estate, a Chicago brokerage.


When the Elderly Take the Wheel
Re: "New Concern Over Elderly Drivers" (July 20): I am a salesperson who drives more than 30,000 miles a year in New Jersey.
Whenever I see elderly drivers, I get out of the way or off the road.
Many drive well, but most do not.
Cutting me off, running lights, making left turns from right lanes, pulling out of parking spaces without looking are the norm, not the exception.
The scariest common occurrence is seeing an older person who has to use a walker or cane, who can hardly get into or out of a car and can't hear the horn, then proceed to operate a car.


The Military Has a Lot To Learn About Women
As revelations about sexual misconduct in the armed forces continue to emerge in the wake of the Tailhook Association scandal, officials find themselves not only struggling with practical problems of how to integrate women into their ranks, but with a deeper military-culture dilemma: how to teach sensitivity to trained killers.
After years of instruction about how to be aggressive and violent under extraordinary combat conditions, these men are under new pressure to check their behavior around women and keep sexually offensive comments to themselves.
"Until Tailhook, we dealt too often with sexual harassment at the local level, one case at a time, rather than understanding it as a cultural issue," Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, told a hearing of the House Armed Services Committee last week.


Sicilian Symbolizes Mob's Survival
Salvatore (Toto) Riina, son of this hardscrabble village, is a man of many distinctions, for Corleone is the place in Sicily's hills that gave the Mafia its most brutal leaders and he is reputed to be first among them.
He is said by informers and investigators to be the "capo di tutti capi," the boss of all bosses of the Sicilian mob, a status that places him high in the rankings of international crime.
He is the mobster whose ruthlessness finally killed the vestigial myth of the Mafia as "men of honor" and godfathers to this island off the toe of the Italian boot.


An Improbable Marriage Of Artist and Museum
One of the most talked-about exhibitions at the moment is taking place here in one of the most unlikely places.
The show is by the New York artist Fred Wilson, who deals with museums and the ways they represent (or fail to represent) racial and ethnic minorities.
At a time when many other artists are also creating installations that insinuate themselves into, and thereby comment upon, museum displays, Mr.
Wilson's work is fashionable.
And yet his latest endeavor takes place at what may well be Baltimore's least trendy cultural institution, the Maryland Historical Society.
This improbable marriage of artist and museum turns out to be not as discordant as it might appear.
Much of the credit for bringing the two together belongs to a new, ambitious and spunky Baltimore organization called the Contemporary.
Founded about three years ago by George Ciscle, a former teacher and art dealer, the Contemporary has undertaken on a small budget and without a permanent home to do what many museums have only promised to do: organize exhibitions that reach out to, and directly involve, local communities.


Victor Raiser, 52, Financial Aide In Clinton Presidential Campaign
C.
Victor Raiser 2d, finance co-chairman of Gov.
Bill Clinton's Presidential campaign, was killed Thursday when a small plane carrying him on a fishing vacation crashed in Alaska.
He was 52 years old and lived in Washington.
The aircraft, a de Havilland Beaver floatplane, went down near the town of Dillingham, 300 miles southwest of Anchorage, killing Mr.
Raiser as well as his 22-year-old son, R. Montgomery Raiser, and three other passengers.
A sixth passenger and the pilot were injured.


Cost-Cutting Tips for Britain
A new pocket-size booklet, "Amazing Britain," advises on finding bargains in accommodations, transportation, sightseeing, shopping, dining and entertainment and names many art galleries and museums that do not charge admission.
Choices of accommodations include private homes and farms charging from about $18 a person a night and rooms offered at special rates by major hotel groups in London.
The booklet can be obtained from the British Tourist Authority, 40 West 57th Street, New York, N.Y. 10019; (212) 581-4700.


Miss Breed, Mr. Richardson
Rebecca Suzanne Breed, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Breed of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to John North Richardson Jr., a son of Alice C. Richardson and Mr.
Richardson, both of Richmond.
The Rev.
Terence L. Elsberry performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Richardson, 28 years old, graduated from Curry College.
Her father is the founder and president of the Edgewood Management Company, an investment advisory concern in New York.
Her mother, Rebecca S. Breed, is a lawyer and a former First Selectman of Greenwich.


Precedent For Macedonia
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson writes in "An Olympian Who Trained in Sarajevo," (The Times, July 26): "Macedonia as such was not allowed to be represented in these Olympics because Greece, which has a region it calls Macedonia, objected to the use of the name." By barring the Macedonian athletes from competing under their national name, the I.O.C. has cravenly acceded to the wishes of a Greek government seized by irrational fear and hatred of its neighbor and has made a mockery of the true modern Olympic spirit.


Getting Refunds On Foreign Tax
FOR many, shopping is as vital a part of traveling as watching the changing of the guard at Buckingham Palace or visiting the Louvre.
To encourage spending, some countries offer tax rebates on purchases tourists take home.
Here is the usual procedure: after making a purchase, you fill out a form -- a sort of glorified receipt -- at the store after presenting a passport and perhaps a plane ticket to prove you live somewhere else. (In Europe, you cannot get refunds if you live in another European Community country.) On leaving the country, you get the form stamped at customs.
The official will want to see your purchases, so you should have them in your carry-on luggage; keep them in their original boxes or bags to show they are new and unused.


Time to Stop the Crazy Eddie Indignities
To the Editor:
Is Crazy Eddie, who stashed away a fortune selling electronics, truly
insane
? ("Crazy Eddie's Insane Odyssey," July 19.) To advocates for the mentally ill, labeling Eddie Antar insane is nothing more than a cheap stab at humor and a gratuitous source of confusion.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday summarizing Ross Perot's economic proposals attributed projections about the Federal deficit incorrectly in some editions.
The projections came from the Congressional Budget Office, not the Bush Administration.


IN SHORT: FICTION
JUST KILLING TIME  By Derek Van Arman. Dutton. $23.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days: Gov.
Bill Clinton
TODAY: 9:30 A.M., WNYW-New York, "The McCreary Report," interview.
(Channel 5 in New York.)


Yeltsin's Team Seems in Retreat As Its Economic Reform Falters
Eleven months after the failed Communist coup and seven months after the breakup of the Soviet Union, President Boris N. Yeltsin's reformist Government is in retreat and its radical economic plan is faltering.
There is a growing sense that the administration of Acting Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar, who designed Russia's economic reform plan, miscalculated its plans and has lost its authority and bearings.
Indications are that the radical reformers are rapidly losing ground to tough directors and managers of state-owned industries who demand a far slower pace of change.


Saratoga Puts Stars Up for Big Honors
The glamour filly American Royale lost her chance to take charge of the 3-year-old division today when she ran fourth while November Snow was winning the 67th running of the Test Stakes at Saratoga Race Course.
November Snow, a daughter of Storm Cat and granddaughter of Alydar, swept six lanes wide turning into the homestretch and won a free-for-all to the wire by a length and a half over Meafara, who nosed out Preach for second place.
The winner sprinted the seven furlongs in 1:21gffraction1 5 , just three-fifths of a second off the track record; returned $11.40 for $2 to win, and brought home $105,000 for her owner, Earle I. Mack.


KEEPING CONTROL
As I read Marion Hart's Hers column "Keeping Control" (July 12), I was reminded of my own attempts at secrecy when I was 19 and in need of an abortion.
I was not in a foreign country, but in the United States.
Both of us were in countries where abortion was not only legal, but a very common practice, and yet we felt the need to keep it a secret.


Hey, Ken, Take Time Getting To Camp
Ken O'Brien, the starting quarterback who is staying away from training camp in a contract dispute, doesn't have to sit at home next week waiting for a call from the Jets.
Browning Nagle, the second-year quarterback being groomed to be a starter, showed the coaches enough against the Philadelphia Eagles in the Hall of Fame game today that getting O'Brien to camp promptly isn't that urgent.


A House With (Split) Personality
Parade the ghost of the 19th-century interior-design crusader Edith Wharton through this house and even her famously critical eye would relax its squint.
"The better the house, the less need for curtains" was one of Wharton's famous maxims.
In this East Coast family's house by Shelton, Mindel &amp; Associates, the New York City architectural firm that designed the house and its interior, there are curtains --but they're limited to the street side.
That single row of curtains is emblematic of the Janus-like divide in the house: the front and back are totally dissimilar.
The street side is formal, guarded and crisply studded with small-paned windows, which knock the grand edge off the house.
So do its surprising proportions.
The building is 130 feet long but only 22 feet wide, which isn't as massive a width as the structure's size would traditionally command.
"It's a house that's a 'built idea,' " says Lee Mindel, one of the architects.
"The style isn't too fuddy-duddy and it isn't too funky -- it's elegant and employs a tradition of craftmanship."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  STRUGGLE OVER RUSSIAN TILLER


Saudis Embarrassed By Banking Charges
Early last month, as Federal Reserve officials were about to publicly accuse Saudi Arabia's biggest bank and its manager of violating American laws in connection with a multibillion-dollar fraud, the kingdom's regulators rushed to contact Fed officials, hoping to settle the matter quietly.
Disclosure would link the Saudi Government to scandals involving the Bank of Credit and Commerce International and jolt the Saudi banking system.


Thanks for Coming! Now, Please Leave!
In his carefully orchestrated trip to Staten Island last week, Mayor David N. Dinkins was facing a problem that also bedeviled his predecessors: to address somehow the deep-seated and abiding sense in every borough, including parts of Manhattan, that the central government in lower Manhattan holds them in low esteem and serves them less well than it does other areas.
Staten Island, where the Mayor is also spending this weekend, is the fourth stop in his intermittent yearlong effort to spend a week outside of City Hall in each of New York's far-flung boroughs.
He has already visited the boroughs of Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx.
He plans to spend a week soon in northern Manhattan.


Dialing for Data
SOME OF the best new educational software does not come in a box.
It comes over the telephone lines.
Using a personal computer, a modem and a standard telephone line, a parent or teacher can tap into information services for a rich assortment of software at minimal cost.
Several such systems, including Compuserve, Dialog, America Online and Genie, offer features for children as well as adults.
But the best in terms of educational as well as dollar value is the Prodigy Information Services on-line network.


JULY 26 - AUG. 1: No Quick Fixes; A Pinch of Humility Brings An Uptick in Japan
The once unstoppable Japanese stock market suffered another week of perilous swings with prices plummeting at one point to their lowest level in six years.
Japanese investors are so used to such precipitous declines after a two-and-a-half-year market collapse that they barely winced, but Government officials seemed to feel deeply wounded.
The Government attempted yet another in a string of market rescues, with the Bank of Japan cutting a key interest rate to 3.25 percent from 3.75 percent and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa announcing an accelerated program of public works to prime the weakening Japanese economy.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Norwich Planning to Market Its Old Mills
AFTER a year-long study, Norwich will soon start to market more than 2 million square feet of space in 12 largely vacant mill complexes around the city.
The city has $10,000 from the Connecticut Historic Commission, and is itself putting up $10,000 to promote reuse of the mills.
City Planning Director Kathy B. Warzecha said she expects to seek bids soon for a marketing campaign beginning next spring.


Let's Not Overstate the Garbage
To the Editor:
Regarding "A Nation's Recycling Law Puts Business on the Spot" (July 12), yes, Germans discard 824 pounds of household waste per capita per year, but it is innacurate to say that Americans throw away 1,908 pounds.
The authoritative study for discards is the Environmental Protection Agency/Franklin report on the Characterization of Municipal Solid Waste in the United States, 1990.
It reports that Americans discarded 157 million tons of municipal solid waste in 1988.
But 45 percent of these wastes were discarded by retail stores, offices, restaurants, institutions and light industry.
This leaves residential discards of 85.8 million tons, or 698 pounds per capita, a figure 15 percent below German per capita discards.
Our solid waste problem is bad enough.
Please do not make it appear even worse.
JUDD H. ALEXANDER Quechee, Vt., July 13


'Free Trade' Means No Jobs and High Prices; Yesteryear's Work
To the Editor:
"A Breakthrough on Mexican Trade" (editorial, July 17) proves that even you are vulnerable to the deception practiced by lobbyists.
Less than $1 a day for peon labor in Mexico is not only an inducement for domestic manufacturers to establish plants there, but also looms as a fresh example of the hunt for cheap labor that has undermined American industry and destroyed American manufacturing jobs since World War II.


Ferraro Releases Business Tax Data
Geraldine A. Ferraro, the former Vice Presidential candidate who is seeking the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate seat from New York, released income-tax data on Friday from the three companies in which either she or her husband hold interests.
The disclosure follows by four months Ms.
Ferraro's release of her personal income-tax forms.
One of Ms.
Ferraro's opponents for the Senate nomination to be decided in a primary next month, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman, said those forms were insufficient because they did not describe Ms.
Ferraro's business dealings.
In 1984, Ms.
Ferraro's refusal to release her family's tax records became a campaign issue.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Optioned Richie Lewis, pitcher, to Rochester of the International Leauge.
Purchased the contract of Jack Voigt, third baseman, from Rochester.
National League
NEW YORK METS -- Activated John Franco, pitcher, from the disabled list.
Placed Paul Gibson, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 28.
BASKETBALL World Basketball League
WBL -- Announced it has suspended operations. FOOTBALL National Football League
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Clay Matthews, linebacker.
Agreed to terms with Lawyer Tillman, wide receiver.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Signed Jeff Davidson, offensive tackle, to a series of one-year contracts.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Marco Coleman, linebacker, to a four-year contract.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Steve Wallace, offensive tackle, to a two-year contract.


One Suspect's Experience: Property Forfeiture Is Worth $174,000
Although the price of real estate in central New Jersey took a beating in the nationwide recession, little compares with the plunge in price on two vacant lots after the Somerset County Prosecutor's office confiscated them in a drug case two years ago.
The land, in the rolling hills of neighboring Hunterdon County, was bought for $174,000 in 1988 by James Giuffre, a Somerset builder and insurance agent.


Special Report; Living on the Edge
RELIABLE statistics on the extent of the school dropout problem are as scarce as they are suspect.
Until this year, the 50 states have reported their dropout rates to Washington in almost as many different ways.
Few school systems keep track of students who drop out after eighth grade, just before high school, when educators suspect many students are lost.
And evaluations of dropout prevention programs -- a backdoor method for gauging the extent of the problem -- have been practically nonexistent.
But even without numbers, an ever-mounting pile of reports, estimates and anecdotes tell us this much: The problem is bad.


World Markets; Letdown After the British Election
The London stock market fell to a new low for 1992 last week as the enthusiastic response to the Conservative Party's victory in national elections and signs of an economic recovery in April and May have proved to be short-lived.
As the realities of a weak economy have taken hold, the Financial Times index of 100 leading stocks has fallen 12.4 percent from its all-time high on May 11, and closed Friday at 2,399.6, down 12 points on the day.


What Other Countries Think of the U.S. Elections: Japan; Business Prefers Bush, But Clinton's Not Bashing
If Japan had a vote, there is no question how the power elite here would cast it: for President Bush, even if he did lose his dinner in the Prime Minister's lap.
The Japanese detest unpredictability in business dealings, and the relationship with America, after all, is primarily about business.
Their enthusiasm for the Bush-Quayle ticket also stems from Japan's traditional fear of Democrats, whom they view as reflexively more protectionist and more inclined to "Buy America" campaigning.
But Japan's support for Mr.
Bush goes deeper.
Over the last four years, Japanese officials have learned the steps to a delicate dance with the Bush Administration that has repeatedly defused trouble.
It goes something like this: Congress threatens retaliation against Japan for refusing to buy enough from America -- auto parts and computer chips this year -- or for buying too much, like Columbia Pictures and Rockefeller Center.
The Administration steps in, warning Congress against protectionism while signaling ways to cool Congress down.
Invariably, some order or another seeps out of the bureaucracy in Tokyo, and peace is restored.


ABOUT CARS: A Friendlier Kind of Mailbag; Why Don't the Designers Notice?
INDULGE me.
For a change, the letters we have here are kinder.
Gentler than usual.
Nobody is accusing me of being on the take from the Japanese.
No one is saying I am a dunderhead.
But the letters are thoughtful, too.
And, now and then, I need the reassurance.
Dear Sir:
I very much enjoy your columns. But enough about me.
You mentioned a tiny cavil about the Saab Griffin, which reminded me of two items in my first Volvo.
First, the ashtray, when pulled out, completely blocked the radio display.
And second, the cigarette lighter and the radio's volume knob were identical in size, shape and texture.
They also were in a vertical line with each other and about an inch apart.


A La Carte; A Different Roadside Stand
THE dining is outside and the mood is relaxed at the roadside restaurants that dot the dune-lined stretch of Route 27 between Amagansett and Montauk.
The South Fork seafood stands, resplendent with their bright billowing umbrellas and canopies, lure the summer people.
Their succinct signs say "lunch," "clam bar" or "seafood," and there is little to distinguish one from another.
But the warm-weather oases that appeal to the shorts, swimsuit and jeans-clad crowd are not all alike.
Some are comparable to hot-dog stands, where short-order cooks prepare seafood instead of franks.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
RAIN FOREST HABITAT
According to Gregg Dancho, director of the Beardsley Zoological Gardens in Bridgeport, tropical rain forests cover less than 7 percent of the earth's surface, yet they support more than 50 percent of all species.
Today, the rain forests are decreasing by 60 acres a minute, while the world population increases by 250,000 people a day.


More Posturing on Iraq Can Only Lead to More Infant Deaths
To the Editor:
"Time to Punish Hussein -- Again" (editorial, July 24) offers the same stale thinking behind the Bush Administration's failed policy on Iraq.
We do not mean President Bush's coddle and confront strategy (following a venerable tradition in American foreign policy, from Ferdinand Marcos to Manuel Antonio Noriega), which you have rightly exposed and denounced.
Rather, we refer to the belief, repeated as an article of faith in previous editorials on Iraq, that the sanctions in force are a proper means to confront Saddam Hussein, and need only be strictly enforced to be effective.


Mexicans Dispute Election as 5 Other Votes Near
With the governing party and its main leftist opposition still fighting over who won a crucial state election last month, Mexicans prepared to vote Sunday in five other states where the Government's party is expected to face relatively little competition.
In the Gulf Coast state of Veracruz, the poor southern state of Oaxaca, and the central states of Aguascalientes and Zacatecas, the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party is expected to win easily.
Only in northern Durango, where the opposition parties have joined behind a coalition candidate, do they have a good chance of victory.


QUAYLE'S MOMENT
I was shocked to read in Andrew Rosenthal's article "Quayle's Moment" (July 5) that Dan Quayle was chosen, in part, because he had "looks that would appeal to women." I knew the G.O.P. was out of touch with voters, but this is really "beyond the pale," as President Bush might say.
Not only is the strategy wrong, it's insulting.
What women care about is equality and respect in the home and workplace,
real
support for families, in the form of a national family policy, and the unabridged right to make their own reproductive choices.
Get a clue, boys!
DEBRA LEIGH BOYLE
Philadelphia


4 With Singular Styles Stride Into Hall
The 1992 Hall of Fame inductees Lem Barney, Al Davis, John Mackey and John Riggins -- will be remembered for their diversity as a group as much as for their passion for football.
Today, on the steps of the pro football Hall of Fame, they accepted the game's highest honor with grace, serenity and humor.
Their busts and achievements are now part of the Hall's lore.
John Madden, the former Raider coach who presented Davis for enshrinement, summed up the group and the day this way: "You can't beat this. Who needs the Olympics? We got football today, we got fans, we got a stadium. And we got four guys going into the Hall who come from different places but join together here to make this something special."


Q and A
Refinancing for Investors Question: We are a real estate partnership with substantial net worth, owners of investor units in several co-ops in Bergen County, N.J.
We want to refinance, as our mortgages now carry rates of 11 3/8 percent.
We checked with several banks without success.
Are there lenders who will refinance mortgages for investors? . . .
William Shulman, Manhattan Answer: Maybe.
But according to Paul S. Havemann, vice president of H.S.H.
Associates, a mortgage information and publishing service based in Butler, N.J., the list of lenders willing to extend new mortgages on co-op apartments or to refinance co-ops has gotten much shorter recently.
Investor owners, Mr.
Havemann said, are considered more a risk that owner occupants.


The Bad and the Good: Ailing Saberhagen Sits As Mets Shut Out Cubs
The triumph was admirable and resourceful, laudable in loads of ways.
It just couldn't be characterized as encouraging.
The Mets scored runs.
The Mets shut out the Cubs, 3-0.
The Mets defeated Greg Maddux, one of the most accomplished pitchers in baseball, in the first game of a doubleheader.
But the Mets, who began the game with Bret Saberhagen on the mound, concluded it with Saberhagen on the trainer's table.


God's Revelation
To the Editor:
I was bemused to see in The New York Times of Sunday, July 5, that, without formal announcement, Robert Gorham Davis had been appointed court theologian to The Times.
I refer to his letter on the editorial page, which takes issue with Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Reinhold Niebuhr, Pope Pius XII, St.
Augustine and Calvin on the question of original sin, as well as his letter in The Book Review, which argues with no one more important than your humble servant on the question of divine revelation.
Mr.
Davis enjoys the kind of access that not only theologians but also politicians would kill for.
In any case, I am honored by the company I am put in, if not persuaded by the arguments I am assailed with.


Proposal To Change Liquor Laws Draws Fire
A LEGISLATIVE proposal to raise millions of dollars for shore protection by allowing restaurants that do not have liquor licenses to sell beer and wine has drawn loud protests from a range of people and organizations.
Supporters of the legislation hail it as a means to raise desperately needed money for seashore conservation without requiring a tax increase.
The opposition includes municipal officials, Mothers Against Drunk Driving, tavern owners and many members of the restaurant industry.


Places for Coffee And Camaraderie
The July 12 article on the Barnegat Light diner Mustache Bill ("Where Strangers Become Friends") was of great interest to us "locals," and we enjoyed it very much.
What we wished was that the reporter had made the "circuit" -- visited the other coffee-shop hangouts where a regular crowd of fishermen, teachers, retirees, real-estate personnel and just plain folks meet on a pretty much daily basis.
It's the modern-day equivalent of the old-time "going to the well" for information and companionship in Barnegat Light.


U.S. Military Long a Part of the Drug Battle
The use of American aircraft to hunt for a drug trafficker in Colombia is part of a broad and longstanding military and intelligence effort to stop the flow of illegal drugs into the United States.
For much of the last decade, the Pentagon and Central Intelligence Agency have sent tracking aircraft and ships to the region, helped Latin American nations identify areas where narcotics are grown and provided intelligence on suspected drug laboratories.


On the Road Again


Taking Advantage of Season's Tomatoes
REAL tomatoes are back.
For the next couple of months we don't even have to consider commercial tomatoes that have been picked "green-mature," washed in chlorine, coated with parafin oil, ethylene-gassed to make them turn pink and, as a final indignity, refrigerated.
At local markets and farm stands, tomatoes will now be available in their full vine-ripened glory, and chefs everywhere are taking advantage of the fact.
At the Odeon, a bistro in TriBeCa, Stephen Lyle, the chef, blends red tomatoes with fresh corn, roasted red peppers and chilies.
The result is a remarkable deep red soup packed with flavor.
At the Southwestern-style restaurant Mesa Grill, Bobby Flay smokes tomatoes over aromatic woodchips and makes an unusual salsa with them, which he serves with chicken, fish or hamburgers (it is particularly good with grilled salmon).
At Alo Alo, an Italian restaurant on the Upper East Side, Matthew Kenney, the chef, serves an unusual form of gazpacho, making separate purees of yellow beefsteak and red tomatoes, which he seasons with cayenne pepper, red wine vinegar and cumin.
He pours the yellow and red purees into each soup bowl at the same time, creating a two-tone effect, and garnishes the soup with basil leaves and croutons.


Naomi Ishido and Gregory J. Lipper
Mr. and Mrs.
Tadashi Ishido of Tokyo have announced the engagement of their daughter Naomi Ishido to Gregory Jensen Lipper, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Lipper 3d of White Plains.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ishido, 27 years old, is a ground attendant for Cathay Pacific Airways in Tokyo.
She graduated from Gadsden State Junior College.
Her father is a real-estate investor in Tokyo.
Her mother, Hideko Ishido, manages the family's dry-cleaning business there.


The Quiz
The quality and diversity of animal life on earth is a public issue, as more species are threatened with extinction and disappear at an increasingly alarming rate.
Here is a quiz to see how much we understand about a world that, however familiar, manages to surprise us at every turn.


Science Fiction
At its best, multiculturalism means trying to look at other people's lives from their point of view.
In DOOMSDAY BOOK (Spectra/Bantam, $22), Connie Willis brings off a tour de force of what might be called multitemporalism.
Her protagonist, Kivrin, is a bright young history student at Oxford in the 21st century, when time travel has become one of the historian's tools.
As part of her studies, Kivrin is sent back to the 14th century; her destination is Oxford in 1320, 28 years before the Black Death reached England.
Instead, she arrives just as the plague is beginning to devastate the country.
The mistake is not corrected immediately because, by a coincidence that turns out to be more than mere chance, a deadly flu epidemic hits Oxford just as she is transported to the past.


Nonlawyers Learn Law For a Day
FOUR dozen nurses went to law school recently in Seattle.
They took careful notes and posed questions while a panel of experts discussed issues such as living wills, surgical consent forms and do-not-resuscitate orders.
Unlike most law students, however, the nurses graduated not in three years but at the end of the day.
The Nurses Law School is one of five customized seminars for special groups that the Washington State Trial Lawyers Association has added to its People's Law School community outreach program, which also includes discussions of wider topics like divorce and landlord-tenant relations.
The Lawyers Association says it is the first in the nation to offer such seminars.


A Question Of Ethics
SCIENTISTS have been forced by recent events to move from their monkish research university cloisters into the light of public inquiry.
They have emerged blinking and sputtering, reluctantly accepting a few unwelcome truths: that there is a substantial amount of misconduct in science; that as a rule misconduct cases have been handled badly, and that to stem this tide of malfeasance and minimize the interference of outside regulators, they may have to teach succeeding generations of scientists what is acceptable and unacceptable behavior.


Purchase to Hartford: What's Left of the Season
BEYOND the expected breeziness of summer theater fare, much of the remainder of the season offers the state's theatergoers the contrast of darkness and a measure of substance.
Take "Laughing Wild" at Theater Works in Hartford.
"Amid severest woe" is the rest of a line from Samuel Beckett who, in turn, took the words from Thomas Gray where "moody madness" comes before "laughing wild." And that's the two-fold way Christopher Durang, the playwright who has never taken comedy lightly, came by his title for a definitely dark satire that deals with psychosis, neurosis, tuna fish and Mother Theresa.


Unhappy Days
YOUNG, WHITE, AND MISERABLE
Growing Up Female in the Fifties.
By Wini Breines.  261 pp.
Boston:  Beacon Press. $25.


Corrections
An art review on July 12 about Grounds for Sculpture, a new outdoor gallery in Mercerville, misidentified the architect.
He is Brian Carey.


Wall Street; A Lead Lost in Taking Companies to Market
On Wall Street, if you do one thing better than anybody, the markets will someday eat your lunch.
That's the lesson being learned these days at Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, the regional investment house based in Baltimore.
In recent years, Brown has earned a growing reputation as the underwriter of choice for medium-sized companies coming to market for the first time.


T.W.A. Jet Investigation Reveals More Mysteries
After a day of inquiry that raised as many questions as it answered, Federal investigators began a detailed examination of a charred Trans World Airlines jetliner at Kennedy International Airport yesterday, seeking the causes of its aborted takeoff and the fire that destroyed the aircraft as all aboard escaped.
The investigators for the first time got a close look at Flight 843's badly burned tail engine, an aging Rolls-Royce turbine that was nearing the end of its legal life with more than 15,000 flights; it was the section of the plane where the fire on Thursday was most concentrated.


Corrections
An article on July 12 about walking trips outside Paris misstated the length of the Auvers-Pontoise trail.
It is about 4.5 miles, not 14.5 miles.


The Not Ready for Prime Time Conventions
Since the producers of the made-for-television extravaganza that opens in Houston this month have the luxury of going second (the only luxury they seem to enjoy at the moment), they have no excuse for not picking up tips from the laggard ratings of last month's Democratic exercise in New York.
Here then, in a nonpartisan effort to help the Republicans put on a better show, are some suggestions.
The Democrats' theme of unity was a dramatic disaster.
What viewer wants unity in prime time?
The most inspiriting moments in Madison Square Garden were produced by supporters of Jerry Brown, the noncomforming, nonsupporting candidate who provided a semblance of news to occupy network reporters for a couple of nights.


Elizabeth Shulman, Stephen Rosen
October wedding plans have been announced for Elizabeth Anne Shulman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas W. Shulman of Dayton, Ohio, and Stephen Bradley Rosen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Rosen of Lexington, Mass.
Miss Shulman, 28 years old, is a vice president and account director at the D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Williams College.


What Brings You to Mariposa?
A GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED
By Jonathan Levi. 342 pp. New York: Turtle Bay Books/Random House. $20.


KEEPING CONTROL
I find myself increasingly disturbed by the dispassionate terms in which the abortion question is framed by pro-choice writers like Marion Hart.
I am concerned that the equation always seems to be expressed as pregnancy versus "all my plans -- for passing year-end exams and for future travel and study," rather than, say, "all my plans" versus a human life.
LINDA JORDAN
New Hamburg, N.Y.


Masur Making His County Debut
ONE of the most eagerly awaited events of the summer season is the annual visit to Westchester of the New York Philharmonic.
Adding interest to this year's concert on Wednesday at 8 P.M. on the grounds of Westchester Community College in Valhalla is the county debut of one of the newer residents of Rye, Kurt Masur, the Philharmonic's music director.
He will begin with three of the rustic "Slavonic Dances" by Dvorak, then proceed to "La Valse" by Ravel and Beethoven's Seventh Symphony.
Fireworks will conclude the evening.
The concert, as usual, is free, and early arrivals are encouraged to picnic on the lawn.
If weather conditions dictate a move, the concert will be held indoors at the County Center in White Plains.
The telephone numbers for more details are 285-2934 and 285-7275.


Corrections
The crossword puzzle in The Times Magazine last Sunday included an incorrect definition for 125 Down.
The correct definition is "Magic Johnson was one," not "Magic Jackson." (The answer was "Laker.")


Tammy Kien and Brian Jersey; Tracy Kien and Greg Rosen
The engagements of Tammy Lynn Kien to Brian Jersey and of Tracy Beth Kien to Greg Rosen have been announced by the parents of the twin sisters, Mr. and Mrs.
Julian M. Kien of New York.
Mr.
Jersey is a son of William Jersey and Laurie Lowe, both of Berkeley, Calif.
Mr.
Rosen is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Benedict Rosen of Myrtle Beach, S.C.
A November wedding is planned by Tammy Kien, 29 years old, who graduated from Vassar College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is a marketing associate with MBI Inc., a direct-marketing company in Norwalk, Conn.
Mr.
Jersey, 31, graduated from California State University at Chico and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.
He is a product manager with the American Express Company in New York.


Giving the Blind A Sense of Art
JOSEPH Llop has never seen Marcel Duchamp's 1912 painting "Nude Descending a Staircase," but he can tell you quite a bit about it.
He can describe, for example, how the painting's lines feel.
And he can go on about how it "sounds."
While it may smack of a Dadaist prank worthy of Duchamp himself, this kind of art appreciation is serious business for Mr.
Llop, who is 28 years old.
He has been blind from birth and, like scores of other blind and visually impaired people, has been frustrated in his quest to educate himself about painting, sculpture and architecture.


A Little Musical Reveals Its Big Heart
Over the years, I've caught enough lovely little revivals of "110 in the Shade" to confirm my opinion that it is, indeed, a lovely little musical.
But it's taken the New York City Opera to convince me that it's also a lovely
big
musical.
By big, I don't mean to suggest that the director has run amok and hired a hundred extras, or that the set designer, seeing that much of the action takes place on a drought-stricken farm in the West, has chosen to give us the whole working spread.
Frequently, it turns out that there are only two or three people on the stage of the New York State Theater for entire scenes.
And the director, who happens to be Scott Ellis, doesn't seem in any particular hurry to rush on the townsfolk.


Trendy Tuscan Delights in the Hamptons
TUSCAN food is the darling of the East End.
Hip Hamptonites who haunted Sapore di Mare in Wainscott and Basilico of Southampton are now flocking to I Santi in Water Mill.
It has sleek stark Tuscan good looks and food that is a cut above the competition.


The Fake Montblanc
WHAT: It's Montblanc brought down to size, the Taiwanese response to the German company's $125 Meisterstuck ballpoint pen.
Meisterstuck means masterpiece.
This one isn't.
But it sells at selected Canal Street stores for $4 to $25, in both of the traditional Montblanc colors, black and Bordeaux (this seems to be the color that used to be known as burgundy).
Business is brisk.


What Other Countries Think of the U.S. Elections: Europe; Worries About Isolationism, No Matter Who Wins
Traditionally, European politicians prefer the President they know to a challenger they don't.
This is certainly true for Prime Minister John Major of Britain, a Conservative who bonded with President.
Bush during the Persian Gulf war; Chancellor Helmut Kohl has often said Germany's unification could never have come as easily as it did without Mr.
Bush's support.
And President Francois Mitterrand also has an easy rapport with Mr.
Bush even though French-American relations have been under strain.
It is too early to tell how much a Clinton victory would change all this.
One thing European leaders and commentators all worry about is how much Bill Clinton and Al Gore really care about world affairs; even with Mr.
Bush at the helm, America's troubled and self-preoccupied state, and the possibility of American protectionism, worry most Europeans.


Mary Irene Ward, Michael Littles
Mary Irene Ward, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Ward of Beechhurst, Queens, was married yesterday in the Bronx, to Lacy Michael Littles Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Littles Sr. of Middletown, N.Y.
Justice Lewis L. Douglass of the State Court of Claims in Brooklyn, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at Marina Del Rey.
Mrs.
Littles, who is 32 years old, graduated from Boston College and is a candidate for an M.B.A. at Dowling College.
Her father is a former New York City Police Commissioner.
Her mother, Olivia Ward, is a club singer.


'Great Fuzzy Uncertainty'
To the Editor:


Caroline Siderowf, William Leval
Caroline Beck Siderowf, the daughter of Richard and Topsy Siderowf of Westport, Conn., was married last evening to William Charles Leval Graham, a son of Dr.
William and Dr.
Valerie Graham of Charlotte, Vt.
Judge Pierre N. Leval of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York, an uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at the Century Country Club in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Graham, 24 years old, graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in education from Tufts University.
In September, she is to be a seventh-grade teacher at the Buckingham Browne &amp; Nichols School in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father is a first vice president and a stockbroker in Westport, Conn., for Prudential Securities.
Her mother is an assistant editor at Golf Digest magazine.


Elinor Hosterman, J. M. Buck 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
George S. Hosterman of York, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elinor Ann Hosterman, to James Mahlon Buck 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Buck Jr. of Haverford, Pa.
An October wedding is planned.


In Courtrooms, the Stoolie Is Pushed to Squeal Louder
OF all the character traits that society values, loyalty is among the most cherished.
That's why being called a Judas or a Benedict Arnold is such a wounding insult, and why the rat, the stool pigeon and the poor maligned canary have become terms of derision.
But Michael R. Milken, who testified recently against former Wall Street colleagues, and Sammy Gravano, whose full-throated cry was raised this spring against his former friend and employer, John Gotti, the convicted head of the Gambino crime family, have learned to rely on the embrace that Federal prosecutors must give Judases to make cases.
Like the Pharisees, the Government rewards betrayal with the modern equivalent of 30 pieces of silver: reduced sentences.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Throws G.O.P. Slogan Back at President
In a campaign appearance orchestrated here today to counter the Republican slogan that Bill Clinton is "the failed Governor of a small state," the Democratic candidate sharply returned the favor, calling President Bush "the failed President of a big country.
Flanked at a news conference by 14 fellow Democratic Governors in front of a field of grape-laden vines under a sunny blue sky at the La Follette Vineyard and Winery, Mr.
Clinton adopted a pugnacious stance that was somewhat jarring amid the pastoral loveliness, but perfectly fitting in the larger picture of the 1992 election.


No Headline
If we could get the public as involved and as informed about politics as they are about Monday Night Football, we wouldn't have as many problems.
People have to get off their duffs and participate. -- CAROL G. HANSON, a State Representativ from Boca Raton, Fla.  [ 34:6.  ]


Susan P. Garofalo, Peter W. Arendt
Susan Patrice Garofalo, a daughter of Monica D. Garofalo of Montvale, N.J., and the late A. Robert Garofalo, was married yesterday to Peter William Arendt, a son of Frances M. Arendt of Toms River, N.J., and the late Paul-Gerard Arendt.
Msgr.
John F. McDermott performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Presentation in Upper Saddle River, N.J.
Mrs.
Arendt is a freelance writer and video producer in New York.
Her late father was founder of the Fidelity Group, which was a public relations company in Westwood, N.J.
Her mother is the office manager of Pascack Hills High School in Montvale.


The Spruce Goose Will Take Off
The giant Spruce Goose flying boat -- wingspan 320 feet -- built by Howard Hughes during World War II made its only flight in November 1947 off Long Beach, Calif., where it has remained ever since.
But this will be the eight-propeller plane's last summer there.
The Walt Disney Company announced in March that it had decided not to renew its lease on the Spruce Goose, which expires Sept. 30.
Aero Exhibits, owners of the plane, has agreed to either lease or sell it to Evergreen International Aviation, which plans to move it to McMinnville, Ore., near Portland.
The air cargo and service company intends to display the Spruce Goose at a temporary site there next year and eventually in an aviation museum yet to be developed.


Making Music (Boom, Boom) On Computers
Tom Hajdu and Andy Milburn have never released an album, but their music is virtually everywhere.
Known professionally as "Tomandandy," their music has been heard on MTV and Nintendo commercials.
They created the theme song for "Red Hot and Dance" a new benefit album for AIDS groups.
The pounding, ominous music for the assassination scene in Oliver Stone's "J.F.K." was also theirs.
It's all a long way from Princeton, where both men earned master's degrees in music composition.


The End of Books?
To the Editor:
In his essay "The End of Books" (June 21), Robert Coover writes eloquently and passionately about a future world of hypertext fiction.
He intimates that the coming of hypertext forecasts the death of the novel, and perhaps all forms of "linear" fiction.
His argument is forceful and completely wrongheaded.


Bradley Bowman, Serena McKnight
Serena Rhinelander McKnight, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. McKnight 3d of New York, was married yesterday to Bradley Clayton Bowman 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bradley C. Bowman 2d of Wayzata, Minn.
The Rev.
Samuel Matarazzo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Bowman, 27 years old, was until recently an assistant interior designer at John F. Saladino Inc., an interior design company in New York.
She and her husband graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a vice president of Citibank in New York.


Giants Look Good From All Angles
The Giants got good news today on many fronts.
First, Greg Jackson, the starting strong safety, agreed to a two-year contract and will be on the practice field Monday, two weeks late.
Then William Roberts's erratic heartbeat was stabilized by external electronic stimulation, and he will be released Sunday from Morristown (N.J.) Memorial Hospital.


Mary Hartman and Matthew LaMourie
Mary Catherine Hartman, the daughter of Ralph R. Hartman of Swarthmore, Pa., and Marjorie E. Smith of Newark, Del., was married yesterday to Matthew John LaMourie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence L. LaMourie of Allen Park, Mich.
The Rev.
John F. McConaughy, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Harrington Meeting House in Pemaquid, Me.


Patricia DeRusso And C. B. Forrest
Dr.
Patricia Anne DeRusso, a fellow in pediatric gastroenterology at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Dr.
Christopher Brumby Forrest, a doctoral candidate and a postdoctoral fellow in health policy at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.
Judge John G. Turner of Albany County Court officiated at the Hall of Springs at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
Dr.
DeRusso, who is 34 years old and keeping her name, graduated from the University of Vermont, received a master's degree in nutrition from Boston University and was awarded her medical degree from George Washington University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Paul M. DeRusso of Menands, N.Y., and Kathleen S. Murphy of Albany.
Her father is the associate dean of engineering at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y.
She is a stepdaughter of Terry DeRusso of Menands and Joseph T. Murphy of Albany.


At Work; This Degree Is Diesel-Driven
Trust a college student to turn the manly occupation of truck driving into metaphysics by the mile.
But this summer, plying the interstates and freeways of America for Mayflower Transit Inc., Konrad Bouffard
has
experienced a number of possibly cosmic coincidences.
A couple of weeks ago, for example, while driving across Texas, "I was listening to Bill Clinton's acceptance speech," he said.
"I crossed the state line into Arkansas. I started seeing signs: 'HOPE 7 MILES,' and then 'HOPE 5 MILES.' " Suddenly he realized the small town flying by to the right and left of his moving van was the very crucible of Governor Clinton's formative years.


SURFACING
WINE --
After the art label:
photographs on bottles from Long Island's Hargrave vineyard. COMMUNICATION --
Personal conference calls:
group telephone chats at home.


No Fuss
IT must be a trying summer for the Whitney Museum; everything's Guggenheim this and Guggenheim that.
All those upwardly spiraling parties further uptown.
All those rallies protesting sexism downtown at the new SoHo annex of the Guggenheim, where guards encourage visitors in clogs, Birkenstocks or spike heels to walk over Carl Andre's steel floor sculptures.
How does the Whitney compete with all that? It doesn't.


JULY 26 - AUG. 1: 'Cop Killer'; Ice-T, a Mr. Nice Guy, Cuts the Controversy
"Cop Killer" was killed last week by Ice-T, the rap artist who turned heavy-metal singer to release the year's most controversial song.
His debut album, "Body Count," named after his band, included songs in which the singer murders his mother and impregnates the daughter of a Ku Klux Klan grand wizard.


Barcelona Has Things Almost Under Control
By the end of the first week of the Summer Olympics, Pasqual Maragall was relaxed enough to get a good night's sleep.
As both Mayor of Barcelona and President of the Olympic Organizing Committee, the problems he was facing were minimal compared with his worst fears.
"After the first few days of adjustment, the machine is now oiled and working," he said, speaking of the challenge of managing a 120,000-strong army of athletes, officials, journalists, police and volunteers.
"The only dangerous thing is to think it is a routine. We have to keep up the tension."


Doctor Charged With Trying To Murder Wife in Hospital
A doctor from Staten Island was arrested yesterday on charges that he tried to murder his wife by injecting her with a "lethal dose" of insulin while she was a patient in the Brooklyn hospital where he works, the police said.
The doctor, Medhat Shenouda, was charged with the attempted murder of his wife, Georgette, who suddenly fell into a coma on July 15 while at Brookdale Hospital Medical Center in East New York, said Sgt.
Edward J. Burns, a police spokesman.


QUAYLE'S MOMENT
Thanks to your article on Dan Quayle, I have gained greater insight into the Vice President's motivation.
Quayle's emphasis on family values -- and especially his criticism of Murphy Brown -- is put into a new light.


POSTING: Action on the Pfizer Plan; New Brooklyn Homes
Seven years ago, Pfizer pledged its allegiance to Brooklyn, its birthplace, by announcing a long-term effort to develop land near its East Williamsburg plant.
The plan set in motion a public and private effort aimed at bringing in new commercial and industrial facilities and housing as well.
Now the first phase of the housing component -- 59 two-family residences -- is in construction for first occupancy by November.
The developers, Michael Dubb and Leslie Lerner of the Beechwood Organization of Williston Park, L.I., will build a total of 137 two-families in the development, which is named the Edmund T. Pratt Jr.
Houses, after the recently retired chairman of Pfizer.
The homes are going up in an area bounded by Flushing, Park, Marcy and Throop Avenues.


Moratorium On Steinbrenner
To the Sports Editor:
Five full articles on George Steinbrenner in your July 25 sports pages?!
Is the clown really worth five articles, one of them even starting on the front page of the newspaper?
I used to be a Yankee fan.
Then, as Steinbrenner progressively sabotaged the team, until it was an altogether different team with all my favorite players disappearing, I began to lose interest.
Why do you give his antics so much free press?
Can't you simply ignore him?
Maybe then he'll go away.
BROOKS MUNKELT New York


Opera Is . . . a. Drama? b. Nonsense?
If they asked me, I could write a book called "Opera as Nonsense," a retort to Joseph Kerman's classic "Opera as Drama," to defend opera fans against scurrilous attacks by high-minded defenders of the art form.
Given the success of John Corigliano's audience-pleasing "Ghosts of Versailles" and Peter Sellars's Mozart trilogy, the cold war of critics against the tastes of the audience should be over.
Yet just a few months ago, a "recovering fan" in Opera News blamed all the problems of opera today on opera fans' beliefs that "opera means the 19th century, opera means singing, opera means the female voice, opera means high notes." The audience refuses to be properly serious.
This polemic is nearly as old as opera itself.
For the "higher" critics, opera is an exalted form dealing most weightily with the most serious of issues.
It is drama, an imitation of an action intensified through music.
This view goes back to the beginnings of opera by the Florentine Camerata, a group of poets who sought to revive the supposed authentic performance practice of Greek tragedy.


Issue in Campaign Is Biaggi's Record, but Which One?
Mario Biaggi wants to base his Congressional comeback bid on his record, a reputation for championing the working people through unflagging constituent service and legislation over 10 terms in Congress.
Eliot Engel, the incumbent Congressman, also wants to base his campaign on Mr.
Biaggi's record -- on the convictions in two trials for bribe-taking, extortion and other charges that landed Mr.
Biaggi in a Federal prison for two years and two months.


When the Elderly Take the Wheel
As a 72-year-old driver, I appreciated the article "New Concern Over Elderly Drivers."


BEST SELLERS: August 2, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman chained to a bedpost after her husband has a heart attack.
2
3
10
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
3
2
21
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
6
7
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
5
4
6
SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $22.) Continuing the story of the crowd that frequents an ultrachic Beverly Hills store. (LP)
6
10
3
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $20.) A 90-year-old South Carolina woman recalls what she saw while becoming the doyenne of a Maine summer retreat.
7
5
9
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) An insane Jedi threatens Luke Skywalker in the second volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
8
7
2
IMZADI, by Peter David. (Pocket, $20.) The U.S.S.
Enterprise's Comdr.
William Riker discovers a new form of love in a "Star Trek" adventure.
9
11
12
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones. (LP)
10
8
11
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) On a mission to Africa, Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
11
14
119
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
12
15
3
EYE OF THE STORM, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) An American is hired by the British to thwart an Iraqi agent's attempt to kill Margaret Thatcher during the gulf war.
13
13
15
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
14
9
4
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Random House, $21.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
15 *
1
DAMIA, by Anne McCaffrey. (Ace/Putnam, $21.95.) A young woman and her suitor, living in a universe governed by telepathy, work to save their planet from alien invaders.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
2
2
10
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
3
3
7
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
5
8
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save it.
5
4
6
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who became the richest American by creating the Wal-Mart store chain.
6
7
5
A BRILLIANT MADNESS, by Patty Duke and Gloria Hochman. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress tells how she learned to live with manic-depressive illness.
7
9
3
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
8 *
2
DIANA: A PRINCESS AND HER TROUBLED MARRIAGE, by Nicholas Davies. (Birch Lane/ Carol, $21.95.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
9
15
3
THE HAPPY ISLES OF OCEANIA, by Paul Theroux. (Putnam, $24.95.) An 18-month exploration of the South Pacific in a kayak.
10 *
6
10
DIANA IN PRIVATE, by Lady Colin Campbell. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
11
12
27
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
12
16
11
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) From childhood in New York to the White House: the first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
13
11
7
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $20.) Essays on the pleasures of living extravagantly during the high-flying 1980's.
14 *
12
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A journalist's account of how powerful monied interests and elite groups dominate the Federal Government.
15
8
13
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
24
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
35
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
3
4
3
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
4
5
34
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
5
3
7
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
DOWN FROM TROY: A Doctor Comes of Age, by Richard Selzer. (Morrow, $20.) An arresting, idiosyncratic, lyrical memoir of Troy, N.Y., by a man whose parents battled for his soul, one wanting a doctor, the other an artist; both got what they wanted.
VITA AND HAROLD: The Letters of Vita Sackville-West and Harold Nicolson, edited by Nigel Nicolson. (Putnam, $29.95.) They got along quite well, these golden Bloomsbury types, both primarily homosexual, both tolerant, both witty, both outspoken (at home at least), both (after all) in love with each other.
THE PATRON SAINT OF LIARS, by Ann Patchett. (Richard Todd/ Houghton Mifflin, $21.) Ms.
Patchett's delightful first novel concerns pilgrimage and healing in a Roman Catholic home for unwed mothers where one young woman comes to stay.
BECOMING A MAN: Half a Life Story, by Paul Monette. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A probing and provocative memoir, affirmative and even celebratory, of a gay man's journey from "internal exile" through public commitment to self-acceptance.
THE FAMILY ROMANCE OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION, by Lynn Hunt. (University of California, $20.) A historian's original reading of the Revolution's themes and anxieties as they suggest Freudian programs (first, cut off Daddy's head . . .).
ITALIAN NEIGHBORS: Or, a Lapsed Anglo-Saxon in Verona, by Tim Parks. (Grove Weidenfeld, $19.95.) Mr.
Parks, a British novelist, splendidly characterizes the villagers among whom he lives, but who accept him only when his wife becomes pregnant.
SACRED HUNGER, by Barry Unsworth. (Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday, $25.) A heartbreaking novel that dramatizes the 18th-century European and African experiences of slave trading.


Accelerating Poor Achievers
UNTIL A few years ago, John Muir Elementary School in Seattle was dismissed by some as just another casualty of urban neglect.
Since 1907 the school had worked wonders in the polyglot neighborhood of the Rainier Valley.
But eventually the building literally fell apart, its structure decaying, and student test scores went into steady decline.
The low point was a drive-by shooting, in which rival gang members not associated with the school exchanged gunfire near its grounds.
It scared parents and children, outraged community members and helped to galvanize political leaders.


Taking Illness Personally
THE TYPE C CONNECTION
The Behavioral Links to Cancer and Your Health.
By Lydia Temoshok and Henry Dreher. 432 pp.
New York: Random House. $23.


Honolulu Exhibit Makes Music
The Bishop Museum in Honolulu is host this summer to an interactive traveling exhibit called "What Makes Music?" The museum, a center for the study of Hawaiian and other Pacific island cultures, has added some of its own Pacific twists to the show.
"What Makes Music?", developed by the Franklin Institute of Philadelphia, provides hands-on chances to examine musical sound.
For example, visitors can create waves on an eight-foot-long version of a Slinky toy, watch a computer trace the sound waves of their voices or experiment with a vocal-distortion device that can make them sound like anyone from Alvin the Chipmunk to Darth Vader.
They can also make music by dancing on a 16-foot-long keyboard.


New Accord On Transfers of Prisoners
Ending a decadelong dispute, New York State has agreed to remove a backlog of 3,000 inmates from New York City jails by October and then guarantee that no inmate stays in the city jails more than 10 days after being ready for transfer.
City officials have long complained that the state's failure to take inmates more quickly has placed an enormous burden on its system and has cost the city millions of dollars.
The agreement would immediately have an impact on so-called "state ready" inmates who are in city jails longer than they should be.
They are supposed to be housed in state prisons but have not been accepted, largely because of overcrowding.


'Free Trade' Means No Jobs and High Prices; Let's Be Serious
To the Editor:
The imminent completion of a free trade agreement with Mexico should provide the stimulus for a serious discussion of the direction for economic growth in our country.
To term questions about that agreement "protectionist demagogy" in your July 17 editorial demeans all of us who are involved, including Congress.


Making a Difference; A Turbulent Trip to the Altar for Mr. Eyton
He is, if anything, a reluctant suitor.
Not too many weeks ago, Rhys T. Eyton, chairman of Canadian Airlines International, was slamming the aggressive tactics of his bigger competitor, Air Canada, and trying to form an alliance with a giant to the south, American Airlines.
Last Monday, the Calgary-based PWA Corporation, which Mr.
Eyton heads and which is the parent of Canadian Airlines, announced that the discussions with American had collapsed and that PWA was suddenly in marriage talks with none other than its archrival, the Montreal-based Air Canada.


Chimney Cracks Need Repairs While Still Small
BRICK chimneys need periodic exterior maintenance to keep them from deteriorating.
If cracks, crumbling mortar, loose bricks or other problems go unrepaired, expensive professional rebuilding may be necessary or, in extreme cases, a storm can blow down a chimney.
Performing routine care is usually fairly easy, provided that the roof is not too steep.
Amateurs should avoid working on roofs that slope more than about four inches per foot of horizontal distance.
The slope can be measured with a ruler or framing square by holding either tool along the edge of the roof at a gable end.


Sketches of Crew Members Aboard the Shuttle Atlantis
Loren J. Shriver/
Mission Commander
Colonel Shriver, a 47-year-old Air Force pilot, is commanding his second shuttle mission; this is his third shuttle mission since 1985.
As commander of the shuttle Discovery, he supervised the deployment of the Hubble Space Telescope in 1990.


Mediocrity In the Classroom
THEY PUT in their class time but often skip the homework.
They perform passably on tests but do not absorb new material well.
Some bring poignant efforts to the work, but then grope for a handhold in the classroom, often frustrated to the point of pain.
What we're talking about here is a certain class of teacher.
"Marginal" is the term that Don L. Fuhr uses.
A Clemson University education professor who is writing a book on the subject, Professor Fuhr says it is one of the most difficult problems confronting principals and superintendents, none of whom like to talk about it.
"It's not the ones you dismiss that cause you the problems," he said.
"It's the ones still in there, just doing enough to get by."


High Tea And All That
MAYBE it was New York's version of Kipling's "blasted English drizzle" that pulled customers into the Bombay Company three blocks north of Union Square last Sunday.
The three-month-old branch of the home furnishings and accessories chain recreates the glory of the British Empire in what might be called "Masterpiece Theater" style.
Gleaming mahogany and framed pictures of sportsmen riding to the hounds, which if you squint look like the heirlooms of an aristocratic family, are here in democratically priced reproductions.
Among the ersatz-Chippendale hinged butler's tables ($249) and porcelain "Staffordshire" dogs (made in Taiwan, $39 a pair), all that's missing is high tea.


Q and A
Air Price-Fixing Settlement
Q.
What are the details on the price-fixing settlement for people who flew on American, Delta, United and USAir between January 1988 and June 30, 1992? -- Margaret Dietz Meyer, Ithaca, N.Y.


Or Maybe He's Not the Big Bad Wolf
Several nervous-looking, middle-aged men are sitting around the waiting room of TriBeCa Productions.
One wears a three-piece blue suit with a wide-collared shirt open at the neck; another wears gray sharkskin pants, but they all have this in common: dark hair, olive skin and clothes that appear to have fallen off the back of a truck in Little Italy 20 years ago.
They have wandered out of fantasies of "Mean Streets" and "Goodfellas" and are waiting to audition for "A Bronx Tale," the first film Robert De Niro will direct.
In this upscale atrium of plants and glass and brick, they are talking about whacking cops.
One by one, they are called into the De Niro office.
And when they come out, they all say pretty much the same thing.
"He was really nice!" one tough guy yells to another, who answers, "Yeah, I heard he was nice."


American Dance Festival: A Far-Reaching Beacon
At the American Dance Festival in Durham, N. C., last month, no one batted an eyelash when a young Maori woman from New Zealand joined her American, Norwegian and Czechoslovak counterparts in a work by Liz Lerman, a choreographer from Washington.
Once focused almost exclusively on modern dance in the United States, the festival has lately had a more pronounced international accent.
This summer, Americans still dominated the student body and performance series at the festival's home on the Duke University campus: Pilobolus led off the season, and the Paul Taylor Dance Company wound it up last weekend.


Carol Loftus, C. B. Pedersen
Carol Ann Loftus, a daughter of Beth and Thomas Loftus of New York, was married there yesterday to Christopher Brian Pedersen, a son of Ingeborg Pedersen of New York and Douglas P. Pedersen of Los Altos Hills, Calif.
The Rev.
Walter F. Modrys performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola.
Mrs.
Pedersen, 30 years old, graduated from Marymount Manhattan College.
Her father is the president of Corporate Executive Outplacement Inc., an employment advisory company in New York.
Her mother is a financial consultant at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.


The Montrealer
To the Editor: My friends and I traveled on the Amtrak Montrealer to Canada in May and although this was the third time I had made the trip, I was not prepared for the changes that have taken place.
I was told by the conductor that from April 5 Amtrak eliminated the baggage and dining cars and other services on selected long-distance trains.
The complimentary wine and cheese for first-class passengers had been eliminated and the contents of the complimentary stationery was pared in half.


Schlichter Gets Delay
ART SCHLICHTER's day in court has been put off.
Schlichter, the former Ohio State quarterback, was due to face a bad check charge on Thursday.
But Hamilton County (Ohio) Municipal Judge HARRY McILWAIN postponed the hearing until Sept. 9 because the 32-year-old Schlichter was in Sacramento, Calif., on Thursday for an Arena Football game.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Estimates
(I.D.E.A.
Last Period
Inc.)
Monday
Purchasing managers index, July
52.8
54.0
July construction spending, percent change
0.2
-0.2
Tuesday
Mid-July car sales rate, in millions
6.0
6.4
July economic indicators, percent change
0.6
0.3
Thursday
July wholesale trade, percent change
-0.9
0.1
Friday
July unemployment, in percent
7.8
7.8
July consumer credit, change in billions
-$2.4
-$1.5
Monday: South Africa general strike called  Tuesday: Japanese Finance Minister speaks to press club  Wednesday: Senate Finance Committee holds final trade policy hearing  Thursday: Bundesbank central council meeting *
Department stores release July sales figures


WALK A LITTLE FASTER
Thank you for Douglas Martin's article "Walk a Little Faster" (July 12).
Thirty-six years ago, I was lured away to the Middle West by movie versions of ivy-covered college towns.
I returned to New York last fall "to walk a little faster" in this wonderful metropolis.
New York should issue a call home to all of us living abroad in the land.
In our hearts, we will always yearn for one more bite of the Big Apple.
ESTHER LAMIS
New York, N.Y.
ILS&gt;Photo of a New Yorker (Photograph by Edward Keating/The New York Times)


ABOUT CARS: A Friendlier Kind of Mailbag; Mazda Mania No More
INDULGE me.
For a change, the letters we have here are kinder.
Gentler than usual.
Nobody is accusing me of being on the take from the Japanese.
No one is saying I am a dunderhead.
But the letters are thoughtful, too.
And, now and then, I need the reassurance.
Dear Sir:
Your recent column on the Mazda 929 was particularly interesting, because I have owned an '88 and a '90 and went shopping for a '92 before buying a different car.
But I rejected the new 929 for several reasons not mentioned in your column.


What Other Countries Think of the U.S. Elections: Russia; Surprise That the U.S. Isn't So Predictable
For most Russians who look wistfully westward for the kind of stability they wish they had themselves, this year's political season in the United States has come as something of a shock.
"Half a year ago, most people thought it would be another dull campaign, that no one could beat President Bush," said Andrei V. Kortunov, an American expert at Moscow's Institute of Canada and the United States.
Still, it is a rare day when Washington makes the front page of Russian newspapers.
"Relations with Ukraine are more important, politically and emotionally," Mr.
Kortunov noted.


Families See Park Plan As Threat to the Land
Albert Cusick's ancestors migrated to America's eastern edge two centuries ago, claiming the unbroken pine forests and the rocky tidal shore surrounding a sparkling inlet on the Maine coast.
Not much has changed since then around what is now called Young's Cove.
Wildflowers splash the ridges with brash strokes of red and purple.
Bald eagles circle lazily on warm air currents.
This stretch of seaside ground is as wild and unsullied as any on the East Coast, and because of that the Government has decided it wants it all, about 600 acres, for enlarging a national wildlife refuge.
Mr.
Cusick owns 100 acres, and seven other families own the rest.


A.L. Labs reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bush Aides on Attack
In a sharp new turn to the Presidential race, President Bush's campaign headquarters in Washington tried to revive accusations of marital infidelity against Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, even though Mr.
Bush himself has said that the candidates' personal lives are off limits and that he has ordered his aides to stay away from them.
Article, page A14.


Reviews/Music; The Gory Preoccupations of a Scary Sort of Elvis
At the Ritz on Friday night, Nick Cave made an exit worthy of Elvis.
The song was "New Morning," from Mr.
Cave's 1988 album "Tender Prey," a gorgeously schmaltzy piano ballad that would be worthy of Burt Bacharach were it not for the special dour spin Mr.
Cave put on the lyrics: "One morn I awakened, a new sun was shining/The sky was a kingdom all covered in blood." Wearing a white V-neck T-shirt, dark suit pants and shiny white shoes, his shoulder-length black hair swooped off his face, Mr.
Cave poured himself into the song with the passion of an old crooner.
When he finished the lyric, he waved regally and left the stage.
His band, the Bad Seeds, kept playing, throwing down a musical red carpet.
Mr.
Cave is the Elvis of punk, a beloved and semitragic cult icon who for years has been battling the demon of his own image.
In the early 1980's, as the front man for the Birthday Party, he boasted a black hurricane of hair, a bellow that could blister the dead and a sensibility that was equal parts martyr, heathen and poet of doom.
Since 1983, as a solo performer with the Bad Seeds, he has gradually and precisely trimmed away some of the excesses of his approach.
His latest album, "Henry's Dream" (Mute/Elektra), softens his jagged tempos with acoustic guitars; the two previous albums, "The Good Son" and "Tender Prey," have reworked the potentials of orchestral cabaret pop.


Quaker State Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Question Box
Saves and Victories
Q.
Besides Rollie Fingers, who was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame yesterday with 107 victories and 341 saves as a relief pitcher, are there any other pitchers who won more than 100 games in relief and saved more than 100 in relief?
A.
There two others: one a part of Fingers's new team in Cooperstown and the other a part of Fingers's old team in Oakland.
Hoyt Wilhelm, the first relief pitcher ever enshrined, won 124 games coming out of the bullpen during a 21-year career that began with the Giants in New York in 1952 and closed seven teams later with the rival Dodgers in Los Angeles in 1972.
No other pitcher ever won more times in relief.
Wilhem also saved 227 games; several other pitchers have done better.


Re Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Intercel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reporters's Notebook; At C.I.A. Trial, Some Say Loyalty Is in the Dock
They emphasize loyalty and elan as special virtues at the Central Intelligence Agency.
So, for the spectators in the first two rows of Federal District Court 19 here, the atmosphere has been thick with the suggestion of betrayal as one former agency official has been testifying against another in the latest Iran-contra trial.
The two rows have been filled with several retired C.I.A. employees who have been coming to watch the trial of Clair E. George, the most senior official at the agency to go on trial in connection with the Iran-contra affair.
He is charged with deceiving Congress and investigators about the agency's knowledge of the affair.


Delta Queen Steamboat reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


QUEBEC'S PREMIER MAY REJOIN TALKS
Quebec has ended a two-year boycott of talks about a new Canadian Constitution, giving impetus to Government efforts to forestall a breakup of the country later this year.
With Quebec sitting out, Canada's nine other, English-speaking provinces and the federal Government have gone ahead on their own and proposed amendments to the Constitution that would bring far-reaching changes in the way the nation is governed.


Athey Products Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; 3 Networks Frantically Seek Fountain of Youth and Profits
TELEVISION has long sought younger viewers because these are the consumers desired by most advertisers.
And in the coming television season, more shows than ever before are set in high schools, colleges, rock radio stations and twentysomething bars.


By the Sea, China's Leaders Chart the Nation's Path
A Chinese worker circled a small pavilion tucked among the sleepy hills here, and when the guard wasn't looking, he stole a peek at the red-tile roof of a mansion that for the next month may be the most important building in China.
Under the roof of the mansion, which is surrounded by trees, Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, is taking counsel on whom to promote and dismiss, and on how to redefine the Communist road.


Dixie Yarns reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Shoppers' Vote: No Confidence
Rhonda Grimes heads for a Ross Dress for Less store or a Sam's Wholesale Club these days when she needs new clothes or something for her family's rented condominium.
Mrs.
Grimes started a day-care business a year ago and her family's income is higher now than it was last year.
And it is higher, she says, than she and her husband, Clifford, a vice president at the local United Way, expected.


A Pianist With Contradictions, a Soprano With Courage
Christoph Eschenbach, who conducted and played the piano at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday night, is at once an industrious practitioner of musical rectitude and a hopeless Romantic.
Mr.
Eschenbach's piano playing in the Beethoven First Piano Concerto worked hard to reconcile such apparent contradictions.
Mr.
Eschenbach loves broad rubato, and sometimes stretches out note values to such a point that his otherwise terse, tight rhythmic movement comes almost to a halt.
These freedoms, on the other hand, are apparently not at all spur of the moment; rather every flight of fancy seems carefully calibrated and kept in preordained proportion.


Review/Jazz; Young Players, Classics and a Tribute of Today
The tribute to the collaborations of Miles Davis, Cannonball Adderley and John Coltrane at Lincoln Center on Saturday night in the Classical Jazz series was the kind of show that could have left everybody looking bruised and beaten.
The concert, performed by a group of young musicians taken mostly from Wynton Marsalis's band, examined a series of classic recordings long ago taken for granted.
That's tough to do for several reasons, but the show headed right into the fray, unafraid of comparisons with jazz deities; the musicians, in improvisation after thoughtful improvisation, looked history in the eye and didn't blink.
The concert erased any thoughts that younger jazz musicians are simply reproducing older jazz styles.
Though there was rarely any significant formal variation, the musicians -- Marcus Belgrave, Mr.
Marsalis and Nicholas Payton, the trumpeters; Vincent Herring, Wes Anderson and Todd Williams, the saxophonists; Marcus Roberts, the pianist; Reginald Veal, the bassist, and Herlin Riley, the drummer -- mostly flaunted an esthetic that until recently had only been a shadowy presence in jazz.
In the solos by Mr.
Payton and Mr.
Marsalis, by Mr.
Williams on tenor saxophone and especially by Mr.
Roberts, a broad swath of jazz's stylistic history was food for creativity, making the improvisations extraordinarily rich and detailed.
In Mr.
Roberts's forceful solos, mood flashed to different mood, and amid standard harmonies his fertile outbursts became a metaphor for possibility.


The Long Bankruptcy Party Winds Down
The BMW's and Range Rovers began pulling up about noon, and arriving guests were treated to stuffed mushrooms and clams as they milled around the pool, cocktails in hand.
But to some of them, the lack of shrimp said it all.
"Must be a down year," said H. Sean Mathis, making do with a spicy Buffalo chicken wing instead.


Venturian Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rookie Knows How to Score Big Points With the Jets
Every rookie needs that one play that catapults him from the rest of the pack.
For Jets linebacker Glenn Cadrez, a sixth-round draft pick, it happened on Saturday in the Hall of Fame game against the Philadelphia Eagles in Canton, Ohio.
Cadrez intercepted a pass by Eagles quarterback David Archer, then outran receiver Bill Hess in a 73-yard footrace to the end zone.
Cadrez said it was his first touchdown since a Pop Warner football game in 1982.


Editorial Notebook; On August 3, He Put to Sea
"We departed Friday the third day of August of the year 1492 from the bar of Saltes at the eighth hour."
Thus, in Columbus's own words, did the Nina, Pinta and Santa Maria set out 500 years ago today from the little Spanish port of Palos de la Frontera on a voyage that would change the world.
Ten weeks later, in the small hours of Oct. 12, a crewman aboard the Pinta sighted land, at last, and the three ships lowered sail to wait for daylight.
"At dawn," Columbus wrote in his journal, "we saw naked people, and I went ashore in the ship's boat, armed."


Sports of The Times; Glorious and Almost Perfect Day
ON a day sunny and serene, in a meadow of this heartbreakingly beautiful village out of another century, and before an estimated 20,000 vocally appreciative spectators, four men yesterday afternoon were inducted with obvious emotion into the Baseball Hall of Fame.
"This," said Tom Seaver, seeking to put this moment into the perspective of his 20-year major league career, "is the last beautiful flower and the perfect bouquet."


Headway on North American Trade Talks
The top trade officials of Canada, Mexico and the United States began their seventh and possibly final round of negotiations this morning, hoping to produce a North American free-trade agreement.
People close to the negotiations said the ministers' deputies, in talks over the last four days, had largely resolved the issue of citrus imports from Mexico -- to the dissatisfaction of the American industry -- although they had been unable to settle several other disputes.


Indiana Energy reports earnings for 12mo June 30


CHRONICLE
ROBERT REDFORD is a grandfather -- again.
His daughter SHAUNA and her husband, ERIC M. SCHLOSSER, had a son, CONOR JAMES, on Wednesday in Burlington, Vt.
This is the couple's second child; they also have a daughter, ANNA MICHAELA, who will be 2 years old in January.


TakeCare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Central Vermont Public Service reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Bridge
Two star-studded teams faced each other today in the final of the Spingold Knockout Team Championship, at the conclusion of the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
After 16 deals of a scheduled 64, Ron Rubin of Manhattan and his team trailed by 41 against a group headed by Steve Robinson of Arlington, Va.
Rubin is teamed with Michael Becker of Teaneck, N.J., Peter Weichsel of Encinitas, Calif., Bobby Levin of Aventura, Fla., Russ Ekeblad of Providence, R.I., and Ron Sukoneck of Annandale, Va.
They survived a cliffhanger semifinal with a victory margin of 7 imps against Malcolm Brachman of Dallas and his team.


Hawker Siddeley Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rae Dalven, 87, Former Professor And a Historian of Jews in Greece
Rae Dalven, a translator of modern Greek poets and historian of Greek Jews, died on July 27 at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Friends said she had been in declining health but they did not know the cause of death.


Smoking Signals For All Not to Heed
The signs are all around Barcelona in the four official languages of these Olympics: Des Jeux Sans Fumer.
Jocs Sense Fum.
Juegos Sin Fumo.
Smoke Free Games.
That's what the signs say, but don't be surprised if you have to fan away the smoke to see it more clearly.
That's because here, as throughout Europe, smoke-free is a foreign concept in any language.
So the committee organizing these Games, known by its Spanish acronym COOB, will settle for simply not selling cigarettes at sites, designating no-smoking areas in common work areas and not allowing smoking on official buses.
"It is more of a concept, really," said MARTI PERARNAU, chief information officer for COOB.


Cadmus Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Let's Contain the Supercollider
The superconducting supercollider, an enormous and costly instrument for probing the structure of matter, poses a stark issue for the Senate today:
Should the nation, faced with recession and budget deficits, continue to build an $8-billion machine to explore scientific questions that are of great intellectual interest but may have little practical payoff?
Or should it write off the $1 billion spent so far and terminate the project?


Britain Tells TV Company to Divulge Sources
In a serious blow to investigative journalism in Britain, the High Court ruled on Friday that a British commercial television company did not have the legal right to promise absolute confidentiality to a source who took part in a documentary about police complicity in terrorist killings in Northern Ireland.
The television company, Channel 4, and Box Productions, an independent company that produced the documentary, were held in contempt of court for refusing to obey judicial orders that they hand over material that would identify their sources.
The companies were fined $:75,000 ($142,000), plus costs estimated at $:150,000 to $:200,000 ($285,000 to $380,000).


BARCELONA: Rowing; After Injury, Bronze Is as Good as Gold
The medalist walked with a cane.
Silken Laumann of Canada managed to hobble to the victory stand today for her bronze medal in rowing, but the rest of the time she balanced herself on a thick wooden cane.
She is still recovering from a dreadful accident to her right leg on a lake two months ago, but today Laumann was the emotional highlight of the final day of rowing in the green hills here 80 miles north of Barcelona.


VMX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Blacks and Jews Must Reunite Against Injustice; We're in This Together
To the Editor:
"Black Demagogues and Pseudo-Scholars" by Henry Louis Gates Jr. (Op-Ed, July 20) came as a ray of light to me, a nonacademic.
Barbara Jordan, during her keynote address at the Democratic National Convention, attacked "separatism" and its advocates.
Jesse Jackson, in his address, pointedly called for an end to the "drive the Israelis into the sea" rhetoric.
Now I know what is going on and why.


America's Seventh Wonder Of Games
For all the wondrous performances of her career, the records, the medals, the inspiration she has been for others, what Jackie Joyner-Kersee accomplished in the last two days might overshadow it all.
She is 30 years old, well into her 11th year of competing in the heptathlon, and tonight she won an Olympic gold medal, her second in the seven-event grind, something no woman had ever done.
And if it weren't for a hamstring injury eight years ago in Los Angeles, which left her in second place by 5 points, this would have been her third celebration.
No matter.


Burnham Pacific Properties reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lida Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Record-Setting Wheelchair Race


Washington Talk; Science, Maybe, but Politics for Sure
In a chamber renowned for talkers, Senator Alan K. Simpson, the Republican whip, is regarded as a champion.
But after he and other undecided Republicans were invited to the White House recently for a hard-sell lobbying session on the superconducting supercollider, the Wyoming Republican was suddenly at a loss for words.


Fina Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Plan for the Homeless Before Winter
To the Editor:
The premise of "Athletes, No Longer Homeless" (editorial, July 14) is half-right.
The use of armories for high school athletics is marvelous, but your support of New York City's decision to reduce the number of men sheltered in the Fort Washington Armory is bad policy for homeless single men.
It is good to stop using the armories.
Everyone agrees they are unsafe.
But you state that the men will be put into shelters where space has now become available.
What new space has become available?
There is space available because of the seasonal variation in use of the shelters.


Abbagnale Duo Is Toppled
Training in teeming Naples Bay should prepare rowers for almost anything, but it did not prepare the Abbagnale brothers for a stunning defeat by the Searle brothers of England in the Olympic pair-with-coxswain finals today.
Giuseppe and Carmine Abbagnale, brothers who have won seven of the last nine world championships and two Olympic gold medals, were leading by 3.33 seconds after 1,500 meters, but Jonathan and Greg Searle passed them at the end of the final 500 meters, winning by 1.15 seconds in 6:49.83.


Geoffrey W. Lewis, 82, Ambassador in Africa
Geoffrey W. Lewis, a retired career diplomat who served as the United States Ambassador to Mauritania and the Central African Republic, died Saturday at a hospital in Rockland, Me.
He was 82 years old and lived in nearby Cushing.
He died of complications from heart and kidney disease, his family said.


Nancy Bleemer and Gino Di Iorio
Nancy Ellen Bleemer, a daughter of Barbara and Arthur Bleemer of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Gino Albert Di Iorio, the son of Mary and Gino Di Iorio of Providence, R.I.
Rabbi Joel Goor performed the ceremony at the Cobb's Mill Inn in Weston, Conn.
Ms.
Bleemer, who is 36 years old and is keeping her name, is the assistant director of literary rights at Capital Cities/ABC Inc., the media company, in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received a master's degree in educational theater from New York University.
Her father is an educational consultant with Cooperative Educational Services, a state agency in Fairfield, Conn.
Her mother, who is retired, was a social worker for the Norwalk, Conn., public schools.


Moscow Journal; For Lost Comrades and Old Causes, Vodka Helps
By noon, it was clear that the gathering of veterans in Gorky Park today was not going to be a solemn event.
Young men, wearing the turquoise caps and striped shirts that once distinguished elite paratrooper divisions from the rank-and-file of the old Soviet Army, streamed through the gates, clutching each other in emotional embraces that still left one hand free for the ubiquitous bottle of vodka.
By mid-afternoon, the celebration was turning into a drunken brawl, a far cry from the traditional Victory Day gathering on May 9, when old World War II soldiers meet in the park and tell their stories to audiences of respectful citizens.
Today, Moscow militiamen, huddling together for protection, were warning passersby to stay clear of the fistfights that had broken out by the fountains at the park's entrance.


Beth Grossman and Stephen Ulman
Beth Ann Grossman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Grossman of Mineola, L.I., was married yesterday in Sea Cliff, L.I., to Stephen Morrison Ulman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Van R. Ulman of Cove Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Irwin C. Lowenheim conducted the ceremony at Sans Souci of Sea Cliff.
Mrs.
Ulman, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University.
Later this month she will begin studies for an M.B.A. at the University of California at Berkeley.


White House Likely to Block Oregon's Medical Rationing
Bush Administration officials said today that they were unlikely to approve Oregon's pioneering proposal to expand medical benefits for the poor through a system of health-care rationing, because as it now stands the plan appears to discriminate against people with physical or mental disabilities.
The Administration's objections to the Oregon plan are a surprise.
Officials had said earlier that they were looking for every possible way to approve the plan, in keeping with President Bush's desire to encourage states to experiment with new ways of controlling health costs and providing care.
Expansion and Reductions


White Tilt To Balance A Project In Canarsie
A SCHOOL for 1,000 young Soviet emigres will open in Canarsie, Brooklyn, next month with two goals: to assimilate the students into American and Jewish culture and to persuade their parents to apply for apartments in the adjoining Starrett City housing development, which leased the school land for its new building.
"We're trying to attract a broader base, because otherwise you attract the one group that already lives in the surrounding area," said Robert C. Rosenberg, chairman of Starrett's management company.
"The law does not say we cannot encourage diverse people by income and race to apply."


Shift for Durasoft
The Durasoft contact lens account, previously handled in-house at Wesley-Jessen in Chicago, was awarded to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago after a three-month review that initially involved nine Chicago and New York agencies.
In landing the estimated $10 million account, Foote, Cone won over two other finalists, J. Walter Thompson Chicago and McCann-Erickson New York.


Mueller Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


No Headline
Advocates for the mentally ill talk about mainstreaming, but when you create a place where 80 percent of the residents are mentally ill, that's not mainstreaming, that's reinstitutionalization. -- MARYANN RUSS, of the Council of Large Public Housing Authorities.  [ A16:5. ]


Bruncor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Wadkins Wins Hartford Open  Lanny Wadkins birdied five of the first seven holes yesterday then watched the other Greater Hartford Open contenders crumble as he captured his 21st PGA Tour title.
Wadkins, who started the round five strokes back, parred the final 11 holes to match the best final-round, come-from-behind victory on the Tour this year.
His six-under, the leading score all four days, is the highest winning score ever at the Greater Hartford Open and the second highest on tour this year.
Only Tom Kite's 3-under at the U.S.
Open was higher.
Donnie Hammond, Nick Price and Dan Forsman finished two strokes behind Wadkins. (AP) Mochrie Takes the Bay State: Dottie Mochrie shot a two-under-par 70 yesterday to pull away from the field for a three-stroke victory in the L.P.G.A.
Bay State Classic in Canton, Mass.
Mochrie, the tour's leading money-winner this year, entered the final round tied for the lead with Sherri Steinhauer but took command with her steady play on the Blue Hill Country Club course while her playing partners faltered.
Mochrie finished at 10-under 278 for the tournament, earning the $63,750 winner's purse.
Her 1992 earnings are $243,947.
Steinhauer struggled to a 74 and finished third at 282.
Stephanie Farwig set a tournament record with a final-round 64 to finish second at 281. (AP) Archer Wins the Northville: George Archer captured the Northville Long Island Classic in Jericho for the third straight year by shooting a four-under-par 68 in the final round to win by two strokes.
Archer had 14 birdies and three bogeys in the 54-hole event on the Meadow Brook Club and wound up with an 11-under-par 205 total.
Only two other players on the Senior PGA Tour have won the same event three years in a row.
Chi Chi Rodriquez won the Digital Classic from 1986-88 and Bob Charles took the Charley Pride in 1987-89.
Jim Albus finished second, also shooting a final-round 68.
Archer, 52, started the final round with a two-shot lead over Albus, and he never lost it.
He earned $67,500 in winning his 10th Senior title. (AP) Faldo Takes Scandinavian Masters: Nick Faldo, the British Open champion, won the Scandinavian Masters in Barseback, Sweden, by three strokes after firing a three-under-par 69 in the final round for a 72-hole score of 277.
Jose Maria Olazabal of Spain was among six players from five different countries tied for second.
The others were Australians Robert Allenby and Peter O'Malley, Peter Baker of England, Danny Mijovic of Canada and Frank Nobilo of New Zealand. (AP) TENNIS  Lendl Beats Reneberg  Ivan Lendl, hampered by injuries over the past 18 months, breezed past Richey Reneberg, 6-3, 6-3, last night to win the U.S.
Pro Tennis Championship at Brookline, Mass.
The match at the Longwood Cricket Club lasted only 71 minutes, as Lendl, ranked No. 12 in the world, trounced the 26-year-old Reneberg, No. 78 in the rankings.
The championship was Lendl's first since August 1991. (AP) AUTO RACING Goodyear Wins Marlboro 500  Scott Goodyear, who came so close to a surprise victory in the Indianapolis 500, raced to his first Indy-car victory yesterday in the Marlboro 500 at Michigan International Speedway in Brooklyn, Mich.
This time, Goodyear won an all-Canadian late-race battle with Paul Tracy, taking the lead for good with 19 laps to go on a spectacular restart following the fifth and final caution flag of the race.
Goodyear averaged 177.625 miles an hour.
Raul Boesel finished third, and Al Unser Jr., who beat Goodyear in the closest Indy 500 in history, was fourth. (AP) BOXING  Chavez and Camacho: Get Set  Julio Cesar Chavez and Hector Camacho assured six weeks worth of hype by defeating underdog opponents Saturday night in Las Vegas, Nev., as a prelude to a long-awaited fight between the two next month.
Chavez (81-0) made the eighth succesful defense of his World Boxing Council super lightweight title by stopping Frankie Mitchell at 56 seconds of the fourth round at the Las Vegas Hilton.
A right to Mitchell's already swollen left eye sent the 20-1 long shot staggering back across the ring.
He bounced on the bottom rope, slid to his knees and crawled to his corner.
Mitchell managed to pull himself up by the ropes before Referee Mills Lane completed the mandatory eight-count, but Lane decided Mitchell was in no condition to continue.
Chavez, of Mexico, has the longest winning streak of any boxer in history from the start of a career, as well as 67 knockouts.
Mitchell, of Philadelphia, fell to 29-2, with 13 knockouts.
Camacho opened the main card by stopping Eddie Van Kirk at 1:03 of the fourth round of a scheduled 10-round welterweight fight.
Chavez and Camacho have a long-awaited matchup scheduled for Sept. 12 at the Thomas &amp; Mack Center.
The flamboyant Camacho, who entered the ring in a firefighter's outfit, hadn't fought since winning a rematch with Greg Haugen.
He improved to 41-1, with 18 knockouts.
Van Kirk, a 30-1 underdog, fell to 26-8-2, with 13 knockouts. (AP)


Reckitt &amp; Colman Shifts Accounts
Reckitt &amp; Colman Inc. named Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York to handle advertising for its air- and rug-freshener products like Stick-Ups, Carpet Fresh and Airwaves, a new plug-in freshener.
The account, with combined billings estimated at $18 million, had been handled by Campbell-Mithun-Esty in New York.
After Wells Rich worked on a new project for Reckitt, "we made a choice to change," Ken Freeman, Reckitt's vice president of marketing, said in a telephone interview on Friday from Wayne, N.J.
He added that the decision was made without a review.


Berkley (W.R.) Corp.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Domino's Ends Ties With Bayer Bess
Bayer Bess Vanderwarker and Domino's Pizza said Friday that they had mutually decided to end their relationship, which began three years ago when the agency was named to handle the chain's Midwest region account.
Industry executives who insisted on anonymity said the account, the largest regional account for Domino's, covering 13 states, was likely to be awarded to the Ross Roy Group in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
In a telephone interview, Stuart deGeus, a Domino's spokesman in Ann Arbor, Mich., said a new shop would be named today or tomorrow, adding that both Domino's and Bayer Bess had "specific desires to move on." A spokeswoman for Bayer Bess in Chicago, Liane Adduci, said the account's departure would enable the agency to "pursue other opportunities" among fast-food accounts.


Matrix Service reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


When Agencies Put Faith In Stars From the Outside
A SMALL, creatively focused agency is fervently hoping that, as the bromide goes, one person can make a difference.
The agency is Friedman Benjamin Inc., a seven-year-old New York shop with an estimated $15 million in billings from clients including Farberware, Wilkinson Sword and the United Jewish Appeal.
The person is Elizabeth Mason, who joined the agency as president in February, after five years at Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver in New York.


BARCELONA: Diving; Donie Tunes In, Turns It On and Drops In to Qualify
A pair of teen-age Chinese led the 12 qualifiers today in the theatrical men's 10-meter platform diving.
As the two, Sun Shuwei and Xiong Ni, exhibited taut command of their bodies, there was little question that they would make it to Tuesday's championship at the diving pool overlooking the city from Montjuic.


Dear U.S. Athlete, . . . Signed, Snoopy
They have come here from all over the United States: 25,000 post cards in the first week alone, messages from children, from Snoopy, from fans exhorting United States athletes.
It was part of a clever fundraiser in which the United States Postal Service sold pre-addressed post cards at two for $1.
Seventy cents out of each dollar went to the United States Olympic Committee.
The cards were mailed to a Virginia address, where they were gathered and then shipped to the athletes' village.


BARCELONA: Roundup; U.S. Paddling Pair Makes a Golden Splash
Joe Jacobi and Scott Strausbaugh surprised themselves today by winning the gold medal in Olympic whitewater doubles canoeing.
It was only the fifth canoeing or kayaking gold medal won by the United States in Olympic history.
"We knew if we went out there and had the best race we knew we were capable of, we would be in the medals," said Strausbaugh, from Dover, Pa.
"We never dreamed of a gold."


IHOP Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thermedics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


LAC Minerals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Holtzman Criticizes Plan for Incinerators
The New York City Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, has criticized the Dinkins administration's $407 million plan to expand three garbage incinerators, questioning the wisdom of operating the plants at all.
She has urged Mayor David N. Dinkins to stop work on the plants until studies have determined the effects the enlarged plants would have on the health of nearby residents.


Another Last Chance for Lloyd Daniels
With shaved head gleaming in the arena lights during a warmup, Lloyd Daniels motioned to a friend standing at courtside.
"My legs feel weak," said Daniels.
"No energy."
"Want some sugar?" said the friend. "I can get you some sugar."


Three Air Forces Too Many
The U.S. has four, count them, four air forces.
They belong to the Air Force, the Navy, the Marines and the Army.
Each service wants its own planes and helicopters instead of jointly developing aircraft that can be used by the others.
As a result of such madness, the services now spend tens of billions every year flying fighter planes and helicopters, much of it unnecessary.
They are planning to spend well over $350 billion for new planes now on the drawing boards when a fraction of that will do.


Review/Television; Heavy Metal As a Seducer Unto Death
The question before a Reno District Court judge in the case of James Vance v.
Judas Priest was whether some of the heavy-metal band's lyrics carried subliminal messages that caused two teen-agers to attempt suicide in December 1985.
One of them, Ray Belknap, succeeded; his friend James Vance survived and PBS viewers can see him tonight, terribly disfigured, trying to explain his feelings at the moment he pulled the shotgun trigger: "It was like I had no control over it."
"Dream Deceivers," the hourlong documentary in the "P.O.V." series of independently produced works, tells its grim story through interviews with members of Judas Priest, with the parents of Mr.
Belknap and of Mr.
Vance (who has since died) and with other young fans of heavy metal as well as through courtroom testimony.
The so-called subliminal messages, which the judge decided were accidental combinations of sounds, are incidental to the program's real subject: youths unmoored from their families and adrift in lives that had little to compete with the pounding highs of noise and light shows.


F.B.I. Joining Investigation Of Mafia Killings in Sicily
United States law enforcement officials have become heavily involved in the investigation to unmask the killers of two Italian crusaders against organized crime, lending scientific expertise and offering to compel testimony before a Federal grand jury.
In an interview in Washington Friday, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation voiced confidence that American and Italian investigators, working together, would track down the assassins.
Speaking with controlled emotion of the "savage, brutal, vicious" car bombings that killed the two magistrates, who had worked closely with the American authorities over the years, the Director, William S. Sessions, compared the collaboration to the international investigation of the terrorist bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.


Electrochemical Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  NEW TACTICS IN DRUG WAR
Frustrated with soaring arrests and no discernible improvement in New York City's drug problem, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown has quietly shifted emphasis away from the once-vaunted Tactical Narcotics Teams that swept into neighborhoods to arrest street-level dealers.
Instead the Commissioner is focusing on stopping higher-level drug traffickers, while at the same time putting more uniformed officers on foot patrol to try to assure residents that the streets are not being abandoned to street-level dealers.
A1.
UNCERTAINTY ON TIMES SQUARE PLAN
Conceding that the moment has come and gone for the vast redevelopment of Times Square, state and city officials are close to postponing indefinitely the four giant office towers that were supposed to lead 42d Street to a new day but ended up victims of a devastated market.
Rather than hold the Times Square Center project to the current timetable, which would probably force construction of the first skyscraper to begin next year, officials are asking the developers to revitalize, for retail and entertainment use, the four sites where the towers were to rise.
A1.
SEEKING CLUES TO JET ACCIDENT
Federal investigators have turned their attention to maintenance records from the Lockheed L-1011 Tristar that burned at Kennedy International Airport after an aborted takeoff last week, seeking more clues about a broken wing and a possible false warning to the crew that the jet was about to stall.
Under the stress of the landing, a large metal spar that formed one wall of the right wing's fuel tank cracked.
B3.
KILLINGS STUN NEIGHBORHOOD IN QUEENS
The slayings of a couple in Bayswater, Queens, have stunned residents of the quiet neighborhood, where one of the victims, a real-estate broker, was an esteemed civic leader who knew everyone's name and had often helped new neighbors find their homes and move in.
The news that the police arrested two people, including one the broker had helped, left residents even more distraught.
B3.
MAGNET SCHOOL FOR STARRETT CITY
A school for 1,000 young Soviet emigres will open in Canarsie, Brooklyn, next month with two goals: to assimilate the students into American and Jewish culture and to persuade their parents to apply for apartments in the adjoining Starrett City housing development, which leased the school land for its new building.
The school is the latest lure to white applicants as Starrett City tries to mitigate the United States Supreme Court's ruling that racial quotas to maintain integration at the development violated Federal law.
Metro Matters, B3. 3-YEAR-OLD FALLS 10 STORIES
A 3-year-old girl was in critical condition yesterday after she leaned against a poorly secured window guard and fell 10 stories to the lawn outside a Brooklyn housing project, the police said.
The girl's father had removed the guard, which normally covered the lower half of the window, and then put it back without securing it, the police said.
B3.
REGION A PATIO MIRACLE LURES BELIEVERS
Ever since Joseph Januszkiewicz told people that the Virgin Mary appeared on his patio in Marlboro, N.J., in May and promised that she would return the first Sunday every month, word has spread and the usually quiet town in Monmouth County has bustled with thousands of the faithful -- all asking for directions to Mr.
Januszkiewicz's place.
After last month, when 3,000 people showed up to see Mr.
Januszkiewicz's apparition, the Marlboro Police Department decided it had better be prepared.
B4.
CHURCH SEEKS INTRA-RACIAL TIES
In an old stone church Parkill, N.Y., a small congregation is setting out to show the world that the walls separating blacks in suburbia from those in the city can come tumbling down.
The parishioners of the St.
Charles African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church used to anguish over youths caught up in street violence.
But it took the riots in Los Angeles and later the disturbances in Washington Heights, they say, to shake up their congregation, composed mainly of middle-class professionals, educators and retirees.
The 130 church members stopped talking about what they thought needed to be done and moved into action.
B5.
The Traffic Map B4  Chronicle B4


Vestar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Volatile Mix in Housing: Elderly and Mentally Ill
Alma Singleton, 73 years old, used to play cards every evening in the community room at the Codman Apartments, a six-story public housing complex for the elderly.
"We'd play poker, we'd have little parties, there were always people down here," said Ms.
Singleton, a retired waitress who has lived at Codman for eight years.
"On hot nights, we'd leave our doors open to get the breeze. We looked out for each other and there was a sense of community."


DWG Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


The Mayor's Field of Dreams Is on Staten Island


Black Church Links Suburbs and New York City
IN an old stone church here, a small congregation is setting out to show the world that the walls separating blacks in suburbia from those in the city can come tumbling down.
The parishioners of the St.
Charles African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church used to anguish over youths caught up in street violence.
They lamented the lack of role models.
Then they would retreat into their comfortable homes in this Rockland County community, where the pond is laced with duckweed and everyone turns out for potluck dinners and the annual Shad Fest on the church grounds.


Fighting Temptations of Summer; Bridgeport Puts Teen-Agers to Work Helping Other Youths
Officer Friendly, also known as Officer David Daniels, drove the police van as it left City Hall, carrying six members of the unfortunately named Sweat Team.
Their destination: Glenwood Park.
Summer was half over, but here in Bridgeport, the Sweat Team was just being deployed in the city's fight against boredom and temptation among its children.
The mission of its teen-age members: to give other young people an alternative to drugs.


Domco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


RLI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Montana's Return to Lineup Is No Sure Thing
Every morning, sometimes just as the summer sun is rising, fans press against the chain-link fence that separates them from the practice field here and wait for Joe Montana.
They wait for Montana to throw a long pass into the distance, one neat spiral to assure them that he is all right, that he will play this season.
But sometimes, Montana doesn't even show.


Ask Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
The Bridge column in some copies on Saturday, about the Spingold Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals, included an incorrect hand diagram.
The corrected hand appears today on page C20.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congressional Districts; Redistricting Expected to Bring Surge in Minority Lawmakers
When Congress strengthened the Voting Rights Act in 1982, lawmakers wanted to make sure that minorities would have a greater voice in governing the country.
Ten years later, the fruits of that effort can be seen in the new Congressional districts being drawn to comply with the 1982 law.
The number of districts with black and Hispanic majorities has nearly doubled, insuring a sharp increase in the number of black and Hispanic lawmakers in the 103d Congress, to be elected in November.


Shocked by Slaying, a Neighborhood Is Shocked Again by the Suspect
Several months ago, after being released on parole for a slaying he committed eight years earlier, Joseph Hladky, as a way of saying thanks, took a bag of fresh tomatoes to the neighbor who had helped to get him out of prison.
Last Monday, the police say, Mr.
Hladky, with another man, returned to that neighbor's house in the well-to-do Queens neighborhood of Bayswater and bound, bludgeoned and stabbed her and a friend to death.


POLICE IN NEW YORK SHIFT DRUG BATTLE AWAY FROM STREET
Frustrated with soaring arrests and no discernible improvement in New York City's drug problem, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown has quietly shifted emphasis away from the once-vaunted Tactical Narcotics Teams that swept into neighborhoods to arrest street-level dealers.
Instead the Commissioner is focusing on stopping higher-level drug traffickers while at the same time putting more uniformed officers on foot patrol to try to assure residents that the streets are not being abandoned to street-level dealers.


BARCELONA: Track; A Mighty Jump by Sotomayor, a Major Step for Cuba
With a high jump of 7 feet 8 inches and only one previous miss, Javier Sotomayor won himself a small place in Olympic history tonight, not to mention a gold medal.
He became the third winner for Cuba in the Olympic Summer Games after a 12-year political hiatus, a feat that so moved him that he cried when the competition ended.


Power Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Why Keep Wilkins? Let Knicks Count Reasons
Gerald Wilkins, an unrestricted free agent, is looking for a solid offer and the Knicks still insist they might sign him to a new contract.
Why would the Knicks want Wilkins when they already have Rolando Blackman, John Starks and Hubert Davis at shooting guard?
Consider these points:


Audrey Yee, David Fink
Audrey Daphne Yee, the daughter of Gin W. Yee of Secaucus, N.J., and Helen D. Natale of Linden Hill, Queens, was married yesterday to David Michael Fink, a son of Edward and Diane Fink of Park Ridge, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mel Hawthorne officiated at the ecumenical ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Fink, 25 years old, is a computer systems analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, a New York securities brokerage.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father is an avionics division manager in Nutley, N.J., for I.T.T.
Corporation.
Her mother owns IVI Inc., an interior design company in New York.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Regina Yee of Secaucus and Joseph Natale of Linden Hill.


CIS Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dances of Children


INSIDE
New Order Unsettles Israel
Though it is not blind to what it has gained, Israel frets that the end of the cold war has diminished its importance in Washington's eyes.
Page A8.
Japanese Rethink Reactors
Warned that a glut of plutonium could pose environmental and security threats, Japan is rethinking construction of breeder reactors.
Page A3.
More Woes for Mets


McDonnell Douglas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


People
*
Karen Driscoll and Michael Wilder, senior vice presidents and management supervisors at Arnold Fortuna Lane, Boston, were promoted to executive vice presidents and account directors.


MCN Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  ORPHANS FALL VICTIM TO SERBS
After two orphans were killed in a sniper attack, 48 young refugees from the Bosnian capital resumed their journey toward Germany.
They immediately fell afoul of the "ethnic cleansing" policies of the Serbian nationalists, who held back children whom they judged to be Serbs.
A1  The Red Cross tries to check reports of concentration camps.
A6


Broad Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Datron Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Comshare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Child Survives a 10-Story Fall
A 3-year-old girl was in critical condition yesterday after she leaned against a poorly secured window guard and fell 10 stories to the lawn outside a Brooklyn housing project, the police said.
The girl's father, whom the police did not identify, had removed the guard, which normally covered the lower half of the window, and then put it back without securing it, said Sgt.
Benjamin Dawson of the Housing Authority police.


Kelly Schapitl, Lincoln Greenhill
Kelly Marie Schapitl, the daughter of Anita P. Rouser of Wilton Manors, Fla., and John Schapitl of Center Valley, Pa., was married in San Francisco yesterday to Dr.
Lincoln Jared Greenhill, a son of Ira and Elaine Greenhill of Rye, N.Y.
Rabbi Martin Weiner performed the ceremony at Congregation Sherith Israel.
Mrs.
Greenhill, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from the University of California at Berkeley, where her husband is a post-doctoral research fellow.
Next month she is to attend the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where she will be a master's degree candidate in political science and technology policy.
She is a stepdaughter of Sherod Rouser of Wilton Manors and Doloris Schapitl of Center Valley.


America West in Pact
America West Airlines, the Phoenix-based carrier operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, said yesterday that it had reached agreements in principle to expand its debtor-in-possession financing by between $45 million and $60 million.


BARCELONA: Boxing; Griffin Protest Rejected, But Two Americans Gain
On a day that the United States boxing team put itself back on track with a pair of impressive victories, Eric Griffin's quest for an Olympic gold medal officially came to an end this afternoon.
The International Amateur Boxing Association rejected an appeal to reverse a disputed decision that led to Griffin's stunning exit from the tournament on Saturday.
Although the Griffin ruling overshadowed action in the ring, flyweight Tim Austin and light middleweight Raul Marquez both won decisively today to give the United States team momentum going into Monday's bouts.
Austin scored a 19-7 decision over Julian Strogov of Bulgaria.
Marquez defeated Rival Cadeau of the Seychelles.


In Croatian Vote, U.N. Presence Is the Main Issue
Suspended uneasily between war and peace, Croats voted today in an election that is likely to inject new elements into the conflict within the former Yugoslavia.
President Franjo Tudjman of the Democratic Union, who has led Croatia since independence, is seeking a five-year term, and the first returns showed him with a strong lead.


Lawyers Title reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Halliburton Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Thousands, Leap of Faith Is a Drive to a Monmouth Farm
In May, Joseph Januszkiewicz told people the Virgin Mary appeared on his patio here, promising to return on the first Sunday of every month.
So today, this usually quiet Monmouth County town (pop. 30,000) of rolling farmland and clustered single-family homes teemed with an additional 8,000 people, according to the police.
Car after car filled with the faithful and, no doubt in some cases, the curious -- most of whom needed directions to Mr.
Januszkiewicz's place.


It's No Sweat, If You're a V.I.P.
In the Olympic Village, where stifling heat, no air-conditioning and tiny bedrooms can instill insomnia in even the most exhausted athletes, the hours and even days that separate sporting events are spent watching television, playing video games and making friends.
Outside the $500-per-night five-star hotels where top Olympic officials are lodged, chauffeur-driven cars stand waiting to whisk assigned V.I.P.'s -- and spouses and children -- to the best seats in the stadiums or to the fancy parties that compete for their attention every evening.


Blacks and Jews Must Reunite Against Injustice; Portland 'Essays'
To the Editor:
Henry Louis Gates Jr.'s July 20 Op-Ed article traces much of the new black anti-Semitism to intellectuals in the Afrocentric movement.
The public school system in Portland, Ore., where I teach, has produced and uses for instruction "African-American Baseline Essays," a book intended to present an Afrocentric perspective on human history and culture.
Dr.
John Henrik Clarke, called by Professor Gates "the great paterfamilias of the Afrocentric movement," is one of its authors.


Wetterau Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Grey Advertising reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Syracuse Grapples With Debate Over Civilian Review of Police
The police here became notorious in the late 1960's when many white officers proclaimed their support of segregation, George Wallace's Presidential campaign and responding to provocation with violence.
But in more recent years, Syracuse has earned a reputation for being progressive.
For instance, 18 months ago, it passed an ordinance making it illegal to discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation.


On the Mexican Market, Doubt Replaces Demand
When values in the Mexico City stock market plunged in June on false rumors that telephone workers would sell their stake in the monopoly Telefonos de Mexico, company officials tried to tell investors that it had all been a big misunderstanding.
But the stock continued to drop.
When the Mexican exchange tumbled again in early July as the cement giant Cementos Mexicanos S.A. took over a Spanish company without warning or much explanation, business executives here acknowledged that there was a lesson in the failure to communicate.
But two weeks later, the Mexican company bought another Spanish cement maker, investors complained again, and the stock fell once more.


Red Cross Seeking Speedy Access To Serbian 'Concentration Camp'
The International Committee of the Red Cross is pressing for access to several sites in Bosnia and Herzegovina described by some witnesses as Serbian-run concentration camps in which inmates are being executed.
Pierre Andre Conod, head of the Red Cross delegation here, said today, "The concern is there, but I can't confirm that anything is happening because we have no evidence."


Abroad at Home; Yesterday's Man
The men were taken from the village at gunpoint and forced into freight cars.
As many as 180 were jammed, standing, into boxcars measuring 39 by 6 feet.
They were kept that way for three days, without water or food, as the train moved slowly across the countryside.
Nazis transporting Jews in 1942?
No, Serbs transporting Muslim Bosnians in 1992: one glimpse of the worst racial and religious bestiality Europe has known since World War II.


BARCELONA: Basketball; For U.S., A Normal, Standard Victory
In their continuing education in how the rest of the world is doing at their game, the United States Olympic team learned tonight that Americans have no special edge when it comes to blaming the coach.
After the Dream Team hammered Spain, 122-81, tonight, Michael Jordan met the Spanish coach, Antonio Diaz Miguel, in the middle of the floor, where the two men embraced.
Jordan and the Dreamers were going on to the quarterfinals Tuesday against Puerto Rico, whose coach, Raymond Dalmau, announced he was quitting after the Olympics, disappointed and under fire because his Pan Am gold medal team from 1991 will need a miracle -- an upset Tuesday of the United States -- to win a medal here.


New Campaigns
*
To promote its brand of aggressive journalism and increase single-copy sales, The National Enquirer is introducing a campaign by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, that revives its slogan of the 1980's, "Enquiring minds want to know." A fast-paced television commercial, set to the theme music from the television series "Mission: Impossible," ends with the words "The National Enquirer. In relentless pursuit, because Enquiring minds want to know."


Nellcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 5


Comdata Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Company In Bid-Rig Suit To Fix Bridge
Anxious to move ahead with a major overhaul of the decaying Manhattan Bridge, the Dinkins administration has overruled City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman and awarded a $97.8 million contract to a company she rejected because, she said, it was "corrupt" and had failed to disclose safety violations.
Two of the company's workers died in accidents on construction sites last year.
The contractor, Yonkers Contracting Company Inc., is to begin work today on the 83-year-old bridge, whose critical condition was underscored last week when officials temporarily halted subway service on it after inspectors spotted a quarter-size hole in a rusty beam.
It was quickly patched.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Purchasing Managers Report . . .
July Construction Spending . . .
June  Tuesday  Leading Indicators . . .
June Auto Sales . . .
July  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Unemployment . . .
July  Consumer Credit . . .
June


A Day Camp for Homeless Children


Yugoslav Children Inspire a Campaign
The poster shows a Yugoslav child with a bandaged head, with the words Sarajevo '92.
Above it, a photo of happier Olympic times: flag-waving medalists from the 1984 Games in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.


M/A-Com Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


White Sox's McDowell Notches Victory No. 15
White Sox 7, Mariners 4
CHICAGO, Aug. 2 (AP) -- Jack McDowell became the American League's first 15-game winner as the Chicago White Sox beat the Seattle Mariners, 7-4, for their fifth victory in six games.
Robin Ventura broke a 4-4 tie in the seventh with a two-run double off Juan Agosto.
Lance Johnson then tripled in the eighth and scored on Esteban Beltre's fielder's choice.


JWP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Peoples Energy Corp. reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Adina E. Porter and David R. Hecht
Adina Elizabeth Porter, a daughter of Guy and Dorothy Porter of Mount Vernon, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Raymond Hecht, the son of Peter W. Hecht and Eve R. Klein, both of Sydney.
The Rev.
Dr.
Alice Fitzjohn, a cousin of the bride, performed the African Methodist Episcopal ceremony at the couple's home in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Porter-Hecht is an actress in New York.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Purchase.
Her father is a retired service manager for Mercedes-Benz Manhattan.
Her mother, also retired, was a registered nurse at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.


For Black Farmers, Extinction Seems to Be Near
A hundred years ago Booker T. Washington convened the first annual Farmers Conference for blacks at Tuskegee Institute some 40 miles north of here.
It was barely a generation since the end of slavery, and about 60 percent of all employed blacks in the United States worked on farms.
At the centennial celebration of the Tuskegee Farmers Conference earlier this year, there were the usual gospel songs, barbecues and paeans to the rural life.
But even as those at the conference recognized the family of Albert J. Perry as the 1992 Merit Farm Family of the Year, most knew that the American black farmer they were celebrating was an increasingly endangered species.


Dawson Might Take His Bat and Go Home
Chicago Cubs slugger Andre Dawson will be a free agent at the end of the season and says he's intrigued by the idea of playing in his hometown for the Florida Marlins.
"Miami would be a big possibility," said Dawson, who makes his home there.
Cubs General Manager Larry Himes said Dawson would have plenty of options.
"Andre will become a free agent, and he'll have 27 other opportunities," Himes said.
"I'm sure there will be a lot of American League teams that will be interested."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Millions of Americans appear to have changed their spending patterns, and consumers interviewed in Oklahoma City were no exception.
Both consumer confidence and consumer spending have fallen, suggesting weakness in the economy at least through the November election.
Local bankers say Oklahomans' willingness to spend was shaken by lost jobs in two-income households, depleted savings and crimped pension prospects.  [ Page D1. ]
A vast redevelopment of Times Square has been put off, perhaps indefinitely, state and city officials acknowledge.
They are close to postponing indefinitely the four giant office towers that were supposed to lead 42d Street to a new day but ended up victims of a devastated market.  [ A1. ]


Critic's Notebook; Risks and Hopes of Salzburg's New Face
It is no accident that during his first week as artistic director of the Salzburg Festival, Gerard A. Mortier programmed two works about Roman emperors and the exercise of power: Mozart's opera "La Clemenza di Tito" and Shakespeare's "Julius Caesar." The first showed the pains of power, the second its nearly insurmountable dangers.
Mr.
Mortier will have reason to get to know both; there are more than enough people in town who seem to be showing that lean and hungry look.
But Mr.
Mortier is too acutely aware of the importance of signs and portents in artistic governance to ignore the risks.
The Salzburg Festival has always dealt in symbols of authority, from the way its founders in the 1920's used a series of musical and dramatic morality tales -- "Everyman," "Faust" and "Don Giovanni" -- to emphasize the spiritual ground of Austrian and German art, to the way the festival concert halls use the ancient rock cliff that towers over the town as foundation and backdrop.
Mr.
Mortier just has a different set of symbols.
His first season, to run until the end of August, is a declaration of independence from the previous regime, which lasted 30 years under the firm control of Herbert von Karajan.
Mr.
Mortier has moved quickly and decisively.
For some, that is the problem.


Celutel Inc. reports earnings for Year to April 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Campaign Issues Stinging Attack
President Bush's re-election campaign tried to revive the accusations of marital infidelity against Gov.
Bill Clinton as a campaign issue today, giving a sharply vituperative new turn to the exchange of charges between the Presidential campaigns.
Mr.
Bush has said that the candidates' personal lives are off limits and that he has ordered his aides to stay away from them.
But as the President himself said Mr.
Clinton's policies would lead to a health-care system with the compassion of the K.G.B., his Washington campaign headquarters and the White House's traveling press staff distributed a mocking news release that said Mr.
Clinton had had to hire private investigators to deal with what it called "bimbo eruptions."


It Burns More Cleanly, but Ethanol Still Raises Air-Quality Concerns
Ethanol, an alternative fuel made from farm products like corn, is closely linked with the national effort to clean up the air.
But a fierce battle is under way in Washington over whether it is a cure for pollution or a cause.
Late last week, after days of maneuvering by supporters of the fuel, the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine, and the minority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, sent a letter to the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency arguing that the intent of Congress was to allow ethanol in the new, cleaner gasoline required in the nine dirtiest cities by 1995 under the Clean Air Act amendments adopted two years ago.


Kabul Reports Rocket Attack That Killed 14 and Hurt 97
Fourteen people were killed and 97 were wounded today when the Afghan capital was hit by rockets and mortar shells fired by dissident guerrillas, Government officials said.


Lawrence Insurance Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Galveston-Houston Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Blacks and Jews Must Reunite Against Injustice; Between Two Worlds
To the Editor:
It pleased me to see in Henry Louis Gates's July 20 Op-Ed article that there is someone brave enough to speak out against the bigotry that is sweeping the African-American community.
I am the child of an African-American man and a white, Jewish woman.
I call myself interracial, and when asked my religion, I reply that I am a Jew.
The African-American community has not taken kindly to this.
My fellow African-American citizens chant "Solidarity!"; but when I enter the room, I am rejected as a traitor and an aberration.
I have been told by some in the African-American community that I must choose between my halves.
However, if I choose to identify only as a Jew, I must abandon my African heritage, my family's slave history and the great strides my African-American brothers and sisters have made toward freedom.
If I choose to identify only as an African-American, I must reject the hunting of my people in Egypt, Russia and Germany.


Wisconsin Public Service reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Gibson Greetings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pirates Rough Up Smith And Sweep Away Cards
Pirates 2, Cardinals 1
PITTSBURGH, Aug. 2 (AP) -- The Pittsburgh Pirates rallied with two outs in the bottom of the ninth today on run-scoring singles by Jeff King and Don Slaught against St.
Louis closer Lee Smith, beating the Cardinals by 2-1 today and completing a four-game sweep.
The Pirates held St.
Louis to four runs in the series for their first four-game sweep of the Cardinals in Pittsburgh since May 28-31, 1962.
They hadn't swept any opponent in four home games since San Francisco on July 14-17, 1988.


Bruno's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Helping the Elderly to Handle, and Avoid, Crime
In the early morning hours a year ago, 83-year-old Aline Bienvenu of St.
Martinville, La., was snatched from her bed by an intruder, bound, gagged and smashed in the mouth, sending five of her teeth to the floor.
"It just totally devastated her," said Estelle Labbe, the victim's niece.
The attack brought on a succession of mild strokes that impaired Miss Bienvenu's speech.


TransTechnology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
DONALD J. TRUMP, a man not prone to understatement, was true to form the other day as he talked about the party he will give tonight for MARLA MAPLES, after her Broadway debut in "The Will Rogers Follies."
"It is turning out to be beyond all expectations, especially for August with the Olympics going on," Mr.
Trump said.
"We thought we would have 100 people, but everyone is trying to come, so now it looks like there will be 400."
And who might they include?
"KEITH CARRADINE, TOMMY TUNE, MAURY POVICH, KATHIE LEE GIFFORD and FRANK GIFFORD, REGIS PHILBIN, MIKE WALLACE, JACKIE MASON, FREDERIC FEKKAI, the hairdresser, ALAN GREENBERG, CAROLINA and REINALDO HERRERA, SIRIO MACCIONI of Le Cirque, LEROY NEIMAN ; that's a pretty good group, isn't it?" he said.
In keeping with the theme of the show, the theme of the party will be Western, "or as Western as the decor of the Plaza Hotel will allow," he said.


Treasury Is Planning to Auction Only Bills
Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill markets, beginning with today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was 3.17 percent and the rate on the six-month bill was 3.26 percent.


Dance in Review
Eleo Pomare  Fiorello Festival La Guardia Concert Hall Manhattan
There is a choreographer named Eleo Pomare whose sensitive, powerful dances boldly zero in on individual lives and turn them into universes.
But that Mr.
Pomare was seldom in evidence on Friday night, when the Eleo Pomare Dance Company presented the closing program in the Fiorello Festival.
The choreographer who took his place created and chose old and recent dances, which for the most part meandered at great length, seldom getting under the skin of the themes that informed and sometimes overwhelmed his abstract dance theses.
In the two new works on the program, the other Mr.
Pomare poked through chiefly in small, powerful solo moments for the two lead women in the cast of "Postcards From Soweto." Set to wonderfully lilting, raw music by Miriam Makeba and Nelcy Sedibe, the new group work offers seven tableaux from township lives, snapped by a wandering white photographer in pretty tourist clothes.


Chesapeake Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Cairo Now, A Coffee Shop Is Just a Shop
Two centuries of grime cake the walls of the Fishawi coffee house.
Beneath the slow whirl of ceiling fans, a few patrons gurgle into their water pipes and old men huddle over domino boards, clinking their tiles and sipping thick Turkish coffee.
The scene, seemingly as immutable as the Nile itself, has characterized Cairo for more than 500 years.


The Lonesome Linebacker: Banks Works Out and Waits for Contract
For two weeks, the Giants have been in training camp here, battering bodies and trying to absorb new philosophies and formations on offense and defense.
For two weeks, the unsigned Carl Banks has stayed home, working out on his own, hoping his agent can convince the Giants that the veteran linebacker is worth more than what the Giants want to pay him.
In some ways, Banks's story is typical of labor-management relations anywhere.
But it is also different because of the questions it raises: Do the Giants still want Banks?
Are they willing to trade him?
Have they discouraged teams that have inquired?
Have teams even inquired?


Want to Go Bowling Just for the Fun of It?
JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH threw out the first ball, in a manner of speaking.
The head of the International Olympic Committee is one of thousands of Olympians and Olympic-types who are bowling -- yes, bowling -- in the athletes' village.


Twin Disc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


After Riots, A Paradise Lost for Advertisers
Three months after riots rocked Los Angeles, Southern California advertisers are slowly coming to grips with the psychic damage to consumers.
Many ad agency executives are trying to soft-pedal the city's uneasiness.
A few are trying to exploit it.
And some, by coincidence, are soothing frayed nerves with campaigns planned well in advance of the riots.
Images of Los Angeles seen throughout the United States and the world are also due for revision.
For example, the Los Angeles Convention and Visitors Bureau will roll out a $25 million to $30 million marketing campaign next year to help the city's recession-wracked tourist industry, which has been depressed even more by recent earthquakes as well as the deadly racial disorders and their aftermath.


Review/Cabaret; The Peggy Lee Charisma That Withstands the Years
The most remarkable thing about Peggy Lee, who at age 72 still personifies high-style nightclub glamour, is her sheer tenacity.
The singer, who is appearing through Aug. 29 at Club 53 in the New York Hilton Hotel, has difficulty walking.
Several strokes have given her speech a pronounced slur.
Her singing voice, which was never large, is now severely diminished in size and range and has a noticeable wobble.
Her eyesight also seems to be failing.
Yet in performance, Miss Lee treats these difficulties as minor inconveniences.
Together, her will power, musicality and professionalism enable her to project a fair degree of the old magic.
And at Wednesday evening's show, Miss Lee, swathed in a glittering gown and wearing dangling diamond earrings and a platinum wig with bangs that covered her eyebrows, exuded a smoldering charisma that recalled the 1960's Mae West.


Market Place; USAir Pact Offers Little for Holders
BRITISH AIRWAYS' agreement to invest $750 million in USAir Group, parent of USAir, in exchange for 44 percent of the overall equity and 21 percent of its voting stock, has met with widespread approval on Wall Street.
But most analysts doubt that the investment, which is subject to clearance by regulators in both countries, will prove a bonanza for USAir shareholders.
"Any time a company seemingly on the brink of extinction suddenly gets a deep-pocket savior, you have to love it," said Kevin Murphy, airline analyst with Morgan Stanley.
"The deal takes a beleaguered balance sheet and makes it one of the strongest in the industry. Three quarters of a billion dollars is still a lot of money."


Vintage Cone Has Cubs Flailing
It was the perfect example of David Cone baseball.
A "microcosm" of the way he pitches, to use Cone's own word.
Yesterday afternoon at Shea Stadium, Cone went into the seventh inning against the Cubs with a 4-2 lead and a fastball that had just the inning before come to life.


San Francisco Journal; Such an Amazingly Cool Place for a Summer Visit
The city that has no summer is teeming with tourists on summer vacation who shiver in the fog on the cable cars, huddle against the wind on ferry rides across the bay and marvel at empty beaches where it is never warm enough to swim.
Travel agents warn visitors about the Bay Area's peculiar micro-climates, with icy fingers of fog keeping temperatures here in the 50's in July and August.
Natives warn visitors to bundle up -- advice that is routinely ignored, leaving local residents readily identifiable by their black leather jackets, tourists by their white shorts and sweatshirt vendors by their bulging wallets.


Schultz Sav-O Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 11


T.W.A. Inquiry Shifting To Maintenance Records
Federal investigators have turned their attention to maintenance records from the Lockheed L-1011 Tristar that burned at Kennedy International Airport after an aborted takeoff last week, seeking more clues about a broken wing and a possible false warning to the crew that the jet was about to stall.
Acting on the stall warning, the Trans World Airlines crew brought the jet back to the runway after it had already become airborne.
The plane, which in its lifetime had flown nearly 50,000 hours and made 19,659 landings, was heavy with fuel for a cross-country trip and therefore 71,000 pounds over its normal maximum landing weight.


Books of The Times; How in the World 'Ulysses' Got So Mixed Up
The Scandal of Ulysses  The Sensational Life of a 20th-Century Masterpiece  By Bruce Arnold  273 pages.
St.
Martin's Press. $22.95.
The novel "Ulysses" is, in Bruce Arnold's words, James Joyce's "most famous work, and also his greatest." He adds that it "is certainly the most famous work of fiction of the 20th century, and arguably the profoundest and best as well." Finally, he calls the book "the most profitable work of fiction" of the century, though he doesn't offer numbers to back up this assertion.
But what interests Mr.
Arnold most is that "Ulysses" has "always been a source of scandal." He points out that it is "an obscene book" (though not pornographic) and "very dirty." He reminds us that it was banned in the United States and Britain soon after Joyce completed it in November 1921.
And he recounts how in recent years it has become the casus belli in a fierce conflict among professional scholars.
This latest uproar is what concerns him above all in "The Scandal of Ulysses," which is partly a life of the novel, partly a guide to it and partly a polemic on the scholarship surrounding it.


Tunisia Puts Nearly 300 Muslim Militants on Trial
The trial of nearly 300 militant Muslim fundamentalists that is under way here is part of a major campaign by the governments of Tunisia, Algeria and Egypt to confront an offensive by Islamic movements that has cost hundreds of lives in the last six months.
Hundreds more fundamentalists are scheduled for trials in Algeria and Egypt on charges of murder, illegal purchase of weapons and plots to overthrow the state.
More than 40,000 fundamentalists are under arrest or detention without trial in Tunisia, Egypt and Algeria, according to government officials and human rights groups.


BARCELONA: Gymnastics; On Scherbo's Night, Dimas Also Sparkles
Vitaly Scherbo of the Unified Team connected on the Olympic equivalent of a grand slam tonight, capturing four consecutive gold medals in the individual men's gymnastics events.
In combination with his team gold and his all-around gold last week, that gave him a total of six gold medals in the 1992 Games, an Olympic record for a gymnast.
Then, an American of all people, 21-year-old Trent Dimas, capped the evening by capturing the gold in the horizontal bar.


New Missions For 'Cry Baby'
A manufacturer of extra-sour gum and hard candy, which have enjoyed a surge of popularity among children and teen-agers, plans to take advantage of the phenomenon by entering the world of licensing.
The Philadelphia Chewing Gum Corporation in Philadelphia has named Bradford Licensing Associates in New York to represent the "Cry Baby" cartoon character that appears on its wrappers and packages.
Bradford will seek to license the character in product categories like stationery, apparel and toys.


Andrea Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Barcelona
2d GOLD FOR JOYNER-KERSEE
Jackie Joyner-Kersee of the U.S. won the heptathlon, repeating her 1988 victory, and said she might try again in 1996.


Pitts-Des Moines Inc.(AX) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


International Recovery Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Roadmaster Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Sports of the Times; A Lesson in Boxing's Olympic Job Market
WHEN Yogi Berra was once asked what he thought about while in the batter's box, baseball's eminent philospher blurted, "You can't think and hit at the same time."
Many of the Olympic boxing judges would agree.
While they're thinking about trying to assess what's happening in the ring above them, they can't seem to hit the blue and red keys on their scoring computer quickly enough to register a punch.


Shuttle Releases Satellite, But Its Success Is in Doubt
After a one-day delay, astronauts of the space shuttle Atlantis released a European science satellite into orbit today, but the satellite's ultimate success remained in serious question.
The five-ton satellite's ascent to a higher orbit was interrupted when European flight controllers received signals indicating that the craft was improperly oriented, a situation that threatened to disrupt its control and operations.
The firing of the satellite's steering rockets was immediately halted, leaving it still in the vicinity of the shuttle and far short of its planned destination 322 miles above Earth.


Datascope Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Zenith Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Blacks and Jews Must Reunite Against Injustice; Reciprocation Needed
To the Editor:
Prof.
Henry Louis Gates Jr.'s July 20 Op-Ed essay is superb and very timely.
We have long considered it important for prominent figures among us African-American intellec tuals to speak out firmly and candidly against anti-Semitism among African-Americans.
Black anti-Semitism has been an important element of the tenacious fault line that has fissured blacks and Jews for nearly 20 years.
However, only a small number of black intellectuals have been willing to speak out forcefully on this issue, notably Bayard Rustin, Ralph Ellison, Albert Murray, Prof.
Cornel West of Princeton, Prof.
Adolph Reed of Northwestern, Prof.
Jerry Watts of Trinity College and a few others.


Gilbert Assoc reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Flowers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


LONG DELAY LIKELY IN REBUILDING PLAN FOR TIMES SQUARE
Conceding that the moment has come and gone for the vast redevelopment of Times Square, state and city officials are close to postponing indefinitely the four giant office towers that were supposed to lead 42d Street to a new day but ended up victims of a devastated market.
Rather than hold the Times Square Center project to the current timetable, which would probably force construction of the first skyscraper to begin next year, officials are asking the developers to revitalize for retail and entertainment use the four sites where the towers were to rise.


Judge Nils Boe, 78; S. Dakota Governor And Aide to Nixon
Former Gov.
Nils A. Boe of South Dakota, whom President Richard M. Nixon appointed as a White House aide and later as chief judge of the United States Customs Court, died Thursday at Sioux Valley Hospital in Sioux Falls, S.D.
He was 78 years old and lived in Sioux Falls.
His family said he died of cancer.
While serving on the Customs Court, Judge Boe issued several notable decisions, including a sharply worded rebuke of Mr.
Nixon in 1974.
The President had ordered a 10 percent surcharge on all import duties to reduce the nation's trade deficit, a move that generated $500 million in four months.
But a three-judge panel led by Judge Boe ruled that the power to impose such a surcharge rested with Congress and that Mr.
Nixon had overstepped his authority.
Ordered Imposition of Duties


Japan Buys Too Few Chips, U.S. Finds
The United States has concluded that Japan's efforts to open its semiconductor chip market to American exports are inadequate so far, but will not impose immediate sanctions, American officials said over the weekend.
In an agreement reached a year ago, the Japanese Government supported the American industry's goal of having foreign companies account for 20 percent of all chip sales in Japan by the end of 1992.
The agreement, however, specified no penalties if the target was not met.


Blacks and Jews Must Reunite Against Injustice
To the Editor:
"Black Demagogues and Pseudo-Scholars" (Op-Ed, July 20) by Henry Louis Gates Jr. is very ambitious, but courageous; Mr.
Gates appears to have taken a swipe at issues that affect the relationship between African-Americans and Jewish Americans.
However, his opening observation, that anti-Semitism is "generally on the wane in this country," might come as a surprise to many who have been combating the increasing number of hate crimes in neighborhoods and on college campuses.
While Mr.
Gates hints at a class division in the African-American community, he does not discuss the key role African-American nationalism plays in perpetuating some of what people believe are anti-Semitic beliefs.
There are books popular among young African-American students primarily because they present a simplistic understanding of how society is governed or operates.
Along with Kennedy conspiracies and who shot Malcolm X are beliefs about how Jews controlled the slave trade, own and control the news media, run Hollywood and every African-American civil rights organization.


Zeos International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Tennis; Sampras Tanks a Set But Comes Up Empty
For nearly three hours, Pete Sampras had matched Andrei Cherkasov crosscourt backhand for crosscourt backhand, with only an occasional break to watch his lightning serve hit the soft red clay and nestle in.
Forays to the net had produced more of the same: aggravation and exhaustion as the sharpest angled volley would merely melt into the court.
The result was that Sampras, the third-ranked tennis player in the world and the last American man in contention here for a medal in the Olympics singles competition, found himself down, 3-0, in the fourth set, drenched in sweat and looking up at a cloudless sky with a decision to make.
For Sampras, it wasn't a tough call.


In Brazil, Indians Start Fighting Back
To the Editor:
You report that Paulinho Paiakan, a Kaiapo chief who "has emerged in recent years as a worldwide symbol of Brazilian Indians' defense of their Amazon homelands," has been accused of rape by an 18-year-old white woman (news article, July 5).
As you report, there is a growing backlash in Brazil against recent victories by Indians fighting for their rights and survival.
Now, as has happened so often in the past, the alleged crime of one leader is being used to attack a whole people.
Unfortunately, errors and distortions make your article an instrument of this attack.
You state that "the 5,000 Kaiapo earn millions of dollars a year in royalties from gold and mahogany extracted from an archipelago of reserves." However, under pressure from the Brazilian Government (allowing gold mining was a condition for the demarcation of the Kaiapo reserve), 5 communities (out of 14) in one reserve have allowed gold and mahogany extraction.


Up North, Yanks' Season Goes South
With their season growing more and more dreadful by the game, routine plays turning into robust headaches and victories making as many appearances as Ross Perot, the struggling Yankees continued to tumble toward last place today.
They could not maintain a pair of two-run leads, they could not catch balls hit to left field and, once again, they could not defeat the Blue Jays as they were humbled, 7-6, at the Skydome.
It is the ninth straight time the Blue Jays have handled the Yankees, and the loss tossed them 15 games out of first place and eight games below the .500 mark, their lowest points of the season.


Times Offers Discount Card
The New York Times has introduced a card that provides home-delivery subscribers with discounts and other benefits at some restaurants, retailers and other businesses in the New York area.
Called the Times Card, it looks like a credit card and is provided without charge to people who subscribe to The Times seven days a week and agree to pay in advance for six-month subscriptions.


Gunman Fires at U.N. Guard In Front of a Baghdad Hotel
An unidentified gunman shot at a United Nations guard today in front of a hotel in Baghdad, in another incident suggesting the obstacles faced by the organization's personnel in Iraq, United Nations officials said.
The guard was not hurt.


Breakthrough for Technology? Unfancied Colt Wins Haskell
Technology, a disappointment in the Triple Crown campaign, resurfaced as one of the nation's top 3-year-olds this afternoon with a 1 3/4-length victory in the $500,000 Haskell Invitational Handicap at Monmouth Park.
With a rallying triumph over Nines Wild, the colt redeemed himself for a 10th-place finish as the second choice in the Kentucky Derby and a sixth-place finish in the Preakness.
He also made up for being the runner-up in the Ohio Derby.


Nova Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Amy Iverson and M. J. Handelman
Amy Alice Iverson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Iverson of Spokane, Wash., was married yesterday to Matthew Jacob Handelman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter J. Handelman of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Judge Norma Huggins of King County Superior Court performed the ceremony at Parsons Gardens in Seattle.
Ms.
Iverson, who is 27 years old and keeping her name, is a teacher in Seattle.
She graduated from the University of Washington and received her master's degree in education from the Bank Street College.
Her father is a regional coordinator of the Washington Education Association in Spokane.
Her mother, Joann Iverson, is a teacher there.


Day Runner reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


This Majestic Site Has a Past to Match
Since the 1992 Summer Olymics began, Montjuic has been the Games' esthetic center.
Yesterday, television viewers again thrilled to platform divers seemingly soaring above Barcelona as they plunged into a pool that sits atop the mountain.
Now track and field has taken hold on the mountain in the 65,000-seat Olympic Stadium, which has also become the focus of some misplaced controversy.


Dividend Meetings


Bliss &amp; Laughlin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Cold Shoulder For a Hot Croatian
MICHAEL JORDAN and SCOTTIE PIPPEN have shown TONI KUKOC of Croatia little respect and have extended no hand of friendship to the man who is likely to join them in the future with the Chicago Bulls.
It is not for Kukoc's lack of trying.
The 6-foot-10-inch European Magic Johnson was spotted yesterday leaving the Palau d'Esports wearing a T-shirt bearing Jordan's smiling likeness after Croatia's victory over Angola.


Marietta Corp.(X) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Honors
*
Arthur Shapiro, vice president and group marketing director of new products for the House of Seagram, New York, was named 1992-93 president of the American Marketing Association's New York chapter.


Equity Issues for This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Active Noise and Vibration Technologies Inc., 3 million common shares.
Paine Webber Inc.
Allied Waste Industries Inc., 3.5 million common shares. Rauscher Pierce Refsnes.


Uni-Marts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Santa Fe Energy L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. Chief's Dispute With Council Boils Over
The peacemakers who run the United Nations are fighting again.
Not since the days of Dag Hammarskjold, the Secretary General from Sweden, who locked horns three decades ago with the Soviet delegation over policy on the Congo, have the Security Council's permanent members been confronted with a Secretary General so determined to shape the international organization.


Perini Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cone's Arm Stays On But Wheels Fall Off
The roster for the Mets, under fate's grim assault all season, was savaged again yesterday.
Bobby Bonilla and Howard Johnson, suffering fractures of a rib and a wrist, were both disabled indefinitely.
And so the question, one asked often and in anger for so long, was asked again with unprecedented urgency:
With what remains of the Mets, what remains of the season?


The Talk of Hollywood; 3 Competing Chiefs Are Suddenly Allies In a War on Costs
Studio chiefs in Hollywood have traditionally resembled warlords who view one another with fear and loathing.
Competitive, temperamental, strong-willed and as subtle as street fighters, they generally smile at each other when face to face.
But as soon as their backs are turned -- well, watch out.
But now, three major studio chiefs are not only speaking frequently to each other but also are quietly engaged in a kind of joint guerrilla campaign, Hollywood-style.
The enemies: overblown budgets and the high cost of stars, directors and producers, and also packages that are created and driven by agents, notably the Creative Artists Agency, the biggest in town.
Beyond this, the three horsemen of Hollywood are subtly and not so subtly promoting and encouraging one another, which is about as rare as a producer or agent without a cellular phone in his car.


TNP Enterprises reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Serbs' Campaign for Ethnic Purity Divides Up a Busload of Orphans
After two orphans were killed in a sniper attack on a bus bound for Germany on Saturday night, the surviving young refugees resumed their journey today and immediately fell afoul of the "ethnic cleansing" policies of the Serbian nationalists besieging this city.
The children, many of them infants and all younger than 4 years old, were secured to the bench seats of an old intercity bus with torn sheets when automatic rifle fire burst out at dusk as the bus traveled a stretch known to Sarajevans as Sniper Alley.


Governors at Annual Meeting Discuss Education


Nabors Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NBC Ratings Remain Strong
The first full week of the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, earned a 19.2 rating -- 3.9 points above NBC's guarantee to its prime-time advertisers and 1.4 points above the rating for the first seven nights of the 1988 Games in Seoul, South Korea.
But NBC's ratings edge over the 1988 Olympics is narrowing.
After five nights, the 1992 ratings were 17 percent higher than those in 1988.
Now, with seven nights completed, this year's ratings are only 8 percent higher, even though gymnastics, a magnet for viewers, has finished.
Popular track and field events, however, still lie ahead.


Corporate Management Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


World Economies


Midlife Crisis Passes for Ad-Free Ms.
Twenty years ago this summer, Ms. magazine burst onto the scene, exhorting women to rethink old assumptions and establish new patterns for leading their lives.
Two years ago, it took its own advice.
Ms. set out then to prove -- against heavy odds -- that a magazine can survive without advertising.


Joseph Shuster, Cartoonist, Dies; Co-Creator of 'Superman' Was 78
Joseph Shuster, a co-creator of Superman who sold the rights to the character for $130, never dreaming it would become a legendary figure in popular culture reaping billions of dollars, died on Thursday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 78 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, the Los Angeles County coroner's office said.


CHRONICLE
JOSEPH J. CICIPPIO spent the third anniversary of what was to have been his execution day by enjoying his freedom and the honoring those who prayed for his release.
Mr.
Cicippio, 62 years old, was the toast of a cocktail party at the Friar Tuck Inn in Catskill, N.Y.
The party was given by about 75 people who had kept vigils for him for the five years he was held hostage after being kidnapped in Lebanon.
After the party, in a telephone interview with The Associated Press, Mr.
Cicippio said his happiness mingled with old grief.
"Who would ever think that I would be here today?" he said, adding, "I don't think of myself right now. Colonel Higgins is on my mind right now, because he didn't make it back." Mr.
Cicippio was referring to Lieut.
Col.
William Higgins of the Marines, who was hanged in captivity.
Mr.
Cicippio was comptroller of the American University in Beirut when he was kidnapped by the pro-Iranian Revolutionary Justice Organization in 1986.
The group threatened to kill him on Aug. 1, 1989, unless Israel released SHEIK ABDUL KARIM OBEID, but suspended the threat just before the deadline after intense international pressure.
He was freed in December.


FINANCE BRIEFS
BRIEFS Debt  *
Kroger Co., Cincinnati, is offering $250 million of 9.875 percent senior subordinated notes due Aug. 1, 2002, at 100 to yield 9.875, through Goldman, Sachs.
Callable after seven years, the notes are rated B-1 by Moody's Investors Service and B by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Artisoft Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hyde Athletic Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Atlanta Sends Out Its Notepad Squad
One of the largest contingents in Barcelona doesn't run, jump or shoot.
But 135 people from Atlanta are taking notes.
"Some of us meet every night for a debriefing of what we've seen," said BILLY PAYNE, chairman of Atlanta's organizing committee for the 1996 Summer Games.


Block Drug Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Republicans' 'Electoral Lock' Is Looking Much Less Secure
There are many ways to measure President Bush's problems these days, but a glance at the political map may be the most telling: He is at risk of losing the Republicans' renowned "electoral lock."
For a generation, Republicans began most Presidential campaigns with the comforting knowledge that the South and much of the West were conservative bastions.
This dominance of the Sun Belt, where more and more of the votes and the people are, gave the party an enormous edge in winning the White House -- what many analysts described as a lock on the Electoral College.


Shell Oil reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


After the Cold War: Views from Israel; Israelis Worry That U.S. Will Need Them Less in New Global Realignment
Now that they have a new Prime Minister in Yitzhak Rabin, many Israelis want to believe that they have turned a corner in the search for Middle East peace and in relations with the United States that have been muddled for quite a while.
But a development that, unlike the election, is beyond Israelis' control -- the end of the cold war -- has left them with nagging worries that somehow they are going to wind up on the short end of the ballyhooed new order, and no amount of hopefulness over a new national leader can ease those concerns.


Review/Opera; Passions of 'Carmen' As Bizet Saw Them
The New York City Opera has many different fires to tend: the pursuit of unusual and challenging repertory is one; new directorial looks at more familiar operas constitute another.
Add to this the honorable servicing of the standard repertory.
Bizet's "Carmen" belongs to the last of these functions, an opera of great worth and immediate appeal that pleases the connoisseur, reassures the faint of heart and helps form bridges to new listeners.
Prior to Saturday night's new production, the City Opera's most recent "Carmen" belonged to category No. 2, with the hot passions of an older Andalusia updated to the Spanish Civil War.
Now the company brings us a literal evocation, complete with braided blue uniforms, kerchiefed bandits and full-skirted cigarette girls.
It is a serious attempt to see Prosper Merimee's novel through the eyes of Bizet, not present-day reinterpreters.
Taken on its own terms, it deserves our equally serious attention.


Enquirer/Star Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


BARCELONA: Weight Lifting; Medalist's Ban Is A Tangled Tale
Ibragim Samadov of the Unified Team has been banished indefinitely from the Olympic Games, and all future weight-lifting competition, because of a tantrum, a missing fax and the use of less-than-formal stationery by his federation.
The severe penalty, and the tangled tale of bruised feelings, evolved from an unseemly display Friday on the medal stand.
Samadov, who finished third in the light-heavyweight division, hurled his bronze medal to the floor, and stormed off the stage during the awards ceremony.
When the Greek champion, Pyrros Dimas, carried the medal back to Samadov, the 24-year-old resident of Grozny again tossed it to the ground.


Japan Thinks Again About Its Plan to Build a Plutonium Stockpile
Facing growing criticism from abroad, Japanese Government officials say they have begun rethinking the nation's ambitious nuclear energy plans, and may delay or derail the building of self-sustaining breeder reactors that would add to the worldwide oversupply of deadly plutonium.
The quiet change seems to reflect the Government's reluctant conclusion that efforts to develop new technology for energy independence, begun in the energy crises of the 1970's, are becoming prohibitively expensive and politically untenable.


Ducommun Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Gore Warns of G.O.P. Ads
Senator Al Gore, the Democratic nominee for Vice President, joked today that television networks should apply a "lie detector test" to commercials from the Bush-Quayle campaign before agreeing to broadcast them.
Mr.
Gore, speaking at a morning rally here in the Central Valley of California, was responding to news reports that the President's advertising advisers were planning to be selective about which television shows they would put their commercials on.


Body of a Baby Is Found
The decomposed body of an infant was discovered in a Brooklyn apartment last night after a neighbor, suspecting an attempted robbery, peeked through an open window, the police said.
The body of the baby, believed to be 5 to 8 months old, was so badly decomposed that police could not determine its sex, said Sgt.
Ed Burns.
He said neighbors told investigators that the man who lived in the apartment, at 305 Ocean Avenue, in Flatbush, had been in the hospital for more than a month.
The man's identity was not known, the sergeant said.


Rank Outsider Rescues The Jim Dandy Stakes
In racing's celebrated house of upsets, chalk up one of the biggest.
Thunder Rumble, a 24-to-1 outsider who had raced once in five months, outran some of the elite 3-year-old colts in the country today and won the Jim Dandy Stakes by half a length over Dixie Brass.
And in an upset within an upset, the undefeated colt Furiously ran fourth in his debut in the big leagues.


By Design; The Long Skirt Abroad
In London long skirts are already popular street fashion.
Young women are wearing them with bare legs and clunky black clogs.
Interestingly enough, though, in Paris the long skirt is not seen on the streets.
But this is, after all, the traditional vacation-exodus time for working Parisians.
The temperature has been particularly torrid, as well.
Any of the people left toiling in the city tend to dress to keep cool.
The dress you see all over Paris is the same one that is also a hit in Riviera resort towns -- the rayon "house dress" in a small flower print with short sleeves and a bit of swing to the skirt.
A summer or so ago it would have been thigh high, but now the hemline is always just above the knee.


Sports of The Times; The Knives May Be Out For Fencing
THE Olympic officials have it all backward.
As usual.
In their zeal to jazz up the Summer Games for their masters from the television networks, they are looking to evict the wrong people.
One well-placed Olympic official is saying it is a done deed, that four sports will be history by 2000: modern pentathlon, equestrian, Greco-Roman wrestling and fencing.
They are giving the bum's rush to noble horses and keeping synchronized swimmers, people who put globs of mousse on their heads.


Pacific Nuclear Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Times Square's Future May Be Found Back at Its Roots
For more than a decade, city and state officials sought to reinvent Times Square as a major office district, in the hope of bringing new vitality to the crossroads.
This week, they acknowledged publicly that there was little chance of luring a major commercial tenant to the neighborhood until the next century.
Even Prudential Securities, a subsidiary of one of the partners in the Times Square development team, would not move to 42d Street.


COMPANY NEWS
CONTROL DATA SYSTEMS INC., announced that it had completed an agreement under which Silicon Graphics Inc. would purchase 10 percent equity in Control Data Systems.
EQUIFAX INC., Atlanta, an information services concern, has signed a letter of intent with Halliburton Co. to acquire all of the capital stock of Health Economics Corp., a wholly owned subsidiary of Halliburton.


Swank Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sex Videotape Scandal Jolts Exclusive School
Police investigators examining pornographic videotapes allegedly made by a teacher at Phillips Exeter Academy have identified about 10 former Exeter students in the videos, law-enforcement officials said today, in a case that school authorities worry will prove damaging to one of the nation's most prestigious private schools.
The teacher, Larry Lane Bateman, the 51-year-old chairman of the drama department, was dismissed by Exeter after the police confiscated 650 pornographic videotapes from his campus residence and charged him with possession of child pornography two weeks ago.
At the time, the police said they had information that one former Exeter student might have appeared in the videos.


Atlanta to Celebrate World's Black Cultures In a Weeklong Festival
From folk art to the performing arts, the National Black Arts Festival, which begins here today, will try to trace "the cultural journey" of blacks from West Africa to the Caribbean and then to the rural byways and urban centers of the United States.
That theme has been touched upon in the two previous biennial festivals, but the organizers of this year's program are predicting a far more coherent expression of the interrelation of black cultures around the world and over time.


Anheuser to Keep Ads Aimed at Coors
Despite a lawsuit threatened by the Coors Brewing Company, Anheuser-Busch Inc. said yesterday that it would continue running regional television and radio commercials meant to cast doubts on the brewing process used to make Coors Light beer.
The commercials, for an Anheuser beer called Natural Light, were created by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis and began running last week in New York and Philadelphia.
They say that Coors Light "concentrate" is diluted with "local water," drawing a contrast with Coors's famous "Rocky Mountain spring waters."


Telus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Durakon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NO U.S. ACTION SEEN ON PRISON CAMPS
The State Department said today that it had information that Serbian forces had opened detention centers in Bosnia where civilians were tortured and killed.
But a spokesman said the United States had no plans to intervene to try to stop such actions.
In response to questions from reporters, Richard Boucher, the department spokesman, said that "our own reports, information similar to press reports," made it clear that "Serbian forces are maintaining what they call detention centers for Croatians and Muslims," and that "there have been abuses and torture and killings taking place in those areas."


How Bad Can It Get? Saberhagen Returns To the Disabled List
The long season got longer today for the Mets when they learned that Bret Saberhagen, who returned to the starting rotation two weeks ago, would go back on the 15-day disabled list on Tuesday with a recurrent inflammation in the tendon area of his right index finger.
The right-hander, who made just three starts after missing more than two months with the finger problem, joins pitchers Dwight Gooden and Paul Gibson and outfielders Howard Johnson and Bobby Bonilla on the disabled list.


Croats Return to Ruins: Can Lives Be Rebuilt?
Tomislav Turkovic, a towheaded 11-year-old, has a recurrent nightmare.
He sees his grandfather Ilija, taken away by armed Serbs last Aug. 24 and missing ever since, tending the family cattle.
"I run toward him faster and faster," he said.
"Just as I am about to get into his arms, I wake up and I feel horrible."


Escape From New York Violence; In Homelands, Caribbean Children Find Calmer Summers
Oscar Camacho, who come fall will be a ninth grader at John F. Kennedy High School in the Bronx, considers New York home.
But this summer he has traded the city's perilous streets for the endless beaches of his native Dominican Republic.
In many ways, out there on the beaches of Puerto Plata, Oscar represents one of the enduring facts of life in Dominican and Puerto Rican New York.
Too poor to have stayed in the old world, but unable to stay away, these New Yorkers regularly travel the "air bridge" between new home and homeland.
Just as many Northern blacks maintain their ties to the South, these Caribbean New Yorkers go back to visit, to retire, sometimes to die.
And in the summers, they send their children to stay with relatives in their hometowns.


INSIDE
Nuclear Testing Freeze
The Senate approved a nine-month halt in atomic tests, setting up a battle with President Bush.
Page A7.
Russian-Ukrainian Accord
The Presidents of Russia and Ukraine agreed to joint control of the Black Sea Fleet until 1995.
Page A3.
Icahn May Sell T.W.A.
Employees and creditors are negotiating to buy Trans World Airlines from Carl C. Icahn.
Page D1.


Clayton Homes reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vicon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 3


BARCELONA: Track &amp; Field; A Medal of Honor Amid the Gold and the Brazen
They were the kind of events that made you think.
Four performances within three hours of one another today symbolized the emotional power of track and field, how it can lift the spirits, deflate them with dark-side realities, then start the cycle all over again.
By the end of the fourth day of track and field competition at the Barcelona Olympics, you were not sure what to feel: elation for the winners, sadness for the losers, contempt for a possible cheater or maybe a little of everything.
That's the kind of day it was.


Wallach Sparks Expos
Expos 3, Cubs 2
MONTREAL, Aug. 3 (AP) -- Slumping Tim Wallach, told by Manager Felipe Alou before the game that he might be benched, hit his 200th career home run and went 3 for 3 tonight, leading the Montreal Expos over the Chicago Cubs, 3-2.
Wallach, who began the game batting .228, hit a two-run homer in the fourth inning for a 3-0 lead.
He pumped his right fist into the air as he made his way to first base and received a rousing standing ovation.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The Next Olympian You See May Be an Actor in Shorts
FORGET about all those Olympic athletes in Barcelona running, swimming, jumping and feuding over logos.
Madison Avenue has flipped over faux Olympians.
The predominant motif of the hundreds of commercials that are occasionally interrupted by NBC's coverage of the 1992 Summer Olympics is, naturally enough, sports.
That's why members of the United States Olympic team like Matt Biondi, Carl Lewis, Michael Jordan and David Robinson are seen pitching products almost as often as they are seen competing in Olympic events.


Lee Brown's Legacy
Lee Brown took his share of criticism as New York City's Police Commissioner, but as he departs to care for his ailing wife, he leaves the department changed for the better.
The Commissioner arrived in New York at the beginning of 1990 after leading departments in Portland, Houston and Atlanta, where he earned a reputation for management expertise.
He met his first test that summer, when a media frenzy developed over stray-bullet shootings and other drug-related violence.


Senate Resuscitates Big Science Project
The Senate overwhelmingly endorsed spending $550 million next year for the superconducting supercollider, which just weeks ago was rejected by the House as unaffordable.


Avondale Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Delphi Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Arcadian Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Executive Changes
AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL UNDERWRITERS, New York, a property-casualty insurance unit of American International Group Inc., named David Blake senior vice president of major accounts.
FINGERHUT COS., Minneapolis, catalogue marketers, appointed Leo Toralballa executive vice president of marketing and a member of the management committee.


Clinton Is an Economic Realist
Republican contentions that Gov.
Bill Clinton's economic program is based on reckless taxing and spending are predictable.
More important are the concerns of moderates that the blueprint is less substantive than it first seemed -- that, unlike Ross Perot's program, it would do little to reduce the Federal deficit.
It is certainly possible to argue that the Clinton program would do little to hasten a reduction in the budget deficit.
Still, the program is pretty good and represents a much-needed change of direction in economic policy.


Review/Jazz; Reflections on a Master By Those Who Follow
For its first concert of 1992, the Classical Jazz series at Lincoln Center shifted its approach to jazz repertory.
"Monk's Mood: Solo Reflections on Thelonious," presented on Friday night at Alice Tully Hall, moved away from the series's usual emphasis on re-creation (which jazz repertory shares with classical repertory) and into jazz's distinctive kind of tribute to a composer: radical reinterpretation.
The composer was Thelonious Monk; 14 musicians played solo versions of Monk's pieces.
It was probably as close as Classical Jazz will come to the so-called loft jazz of the 1970's, when avant-garde musicians often gave unaccompanied recitals.
Monk may have been the most obstinate eccentric in the jazz pantheon, creating his own laws of musical time and space.
Although he was steeped in blues and stride piano and a founder of be-bop, he remained outside them all, using his own vocabulary of dissonant intervals (especially the whole-tone scale and the minor second, the collision of two adjacent keys on the piano), in-between tempos and rhythmic pauses and lunges.
No other musician has been able to make a silence seem at once brusque, suspenseful, sarcastic, willful and split-second precise.
Other musicians refer to Monk, quoting his quirks and dissonances, but imitating him has proved impossible.


A Quiet Bond Market Awaits Data
The bond market's focus turned yesterday toward Friday's unemployment report for July and the auction of around $36 billion of Treasury notes and bonds next week.
The uncertainty before both events, combined with some mixed economic data, made for a quiet day in the market as a lot of investors stayed on the sidelines.
But yesterday was notable as Salomon Brothers returned as a full-time player in the bond market for the first time since its Treasury auction scandal was disclosed a year ago this Sunday.


CHRONICLE
Most of the time ANDREW BURNSTINE is staid and businesslike, as befits his position as executive vice president of Martha, the bastion of high fashion on Park Avenue and in Palm Beach and Bal Harbour, Fla.
But every once in a while he undergoes a metamorphosis.
"I run into a telephone booth and become Grandpa Giggles, master of mirth, jester of joy," Mr.
Burnstine said yesterday.


No Change of Venue in Kidnapping Case
A Federal judge today denied a request by the man accused of the fatal kidnapping of the Exxon executive Sidney J. Reso to move his trial out of New Jersey.
The judge told lawyers to be ready to begin arguing the case on Sept. 10.
Judge Garrett E. Brown of Federal District Court denied the change of venue motion by the public defender representing Arthur D. Seale, a former Exxon security officer who is charged with abducting Mr.
Reso.
The lawyer, Chester Keller, had argued that the intensive press coverage of the kidnapping case would make it impossible to empanel an impartial jury.


Peeler Looking to Italy?
ANTHONY PEELER, the first-round pick of the Los Angeles Lakers, reportedly is looking into the possibility of playing in Italy.


After the Fade to Black, The End Isn't Hollywood
THE people who make movies can always count on happy endings: they just write one into the script.
In "Other People's Money," starring Danny DeVito, a financier persuades stockholders to liquidate an aging wire and cable company; at the last minute, employees step forward to buy the company and run it themselves.
Happy endings are harder to come by in the Naugatuck Valley, which bled tens of thousands of factory jobs in the 1970's and 80's as one brass mill after another shut down.
But in 1985, employees of Bridgeport Brass in Seymour did save their jobs by buying their mill.


How the Taste Bud Translates Between Tongue and Brain
WHILE shrimp barbecued in a tangy marinade may provide your taste buds with a burst of simple delight, researchers who study the workings of individual taste cells have recently shown that those sensory organs are far from simple.
Such a dish would send the taste buds into overdrive as they raced through a series of recently discovered biophysical reactions to process the complex seasonings even before you swallowed the first bite.
The information gleaned from taste-cell studies, mainly on animals like the mudpuppy and catfish, is expected to lead eventually to many tangible benefits.
These include modifying people's "taste appetites" to aid in weight control, make dull, nutritious foods taste better, improve the taste perceptions and appetites of the elderly, produce tastier substitutes for sugars and salt, and develop drugs to counter taste disorders.


Iraqis Left Coarse Scars On the Psyche of Kuwait
Her name is Haifa, and on the second anniversary of the invasion of Kuwait she recalled how difficult it had been to love and care for her one-year-old boy, a baby born of her rape by two Iraqi soldiers.
"My Son, My Enemy," said the headline over the article that told her tale, splashed across the front page of Arab Times this morning.
It proceeded, like other newspapers and radio and television stations here, to examine the legacy of what is by far this country's most traumatic experience: the brutal seven-month occupation by Iraqi troops, whose victims are still being counted.


Q&amp;A
Flying Upside Down
Q.
How can a plane fly upside down?
Why doesn't the shape of the wings force the plane downward?
A.
The wing shape is designed to create relatively lower pressure above the wing as it meets the oncoming airstream, according to the Fort Worth Division of the General Dynamics Corporation in Fort Worth, Tex., and the key word is relatively.


No Such Thing as a Sure Winner
It is early in the morning on the day after the first big weekend of upsets, and the barns along the backstretch at old Saratoga Race Course are filled with star horses, star jockeys and even star visitors.
But on this serene and summery day, no runaway candidates are in sight for championships in any of the divisions of the racing business.
Outside Barn 27, horses are being walked in the ring, potted flowers are hanging from the eaves and two Jack Russell terriers are commanding the compound between the barn and Scotty Schulhofer's cottage office.
Schulhofer will be inducted into the Racing Hall of Fame on Thursday for his career as a trainer of champions.
But he reports that a lot of races must still be run and won before they crown anybody on the track this year.


McCaw Sets Joint Venture
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., the nation's largest provider of cellular telephone service, said yesterday that it had formed a joint venture with Associated Communications of Pittsburgh and that it was selling certain cellular interests to Associated for $82.5 million.
The 50-50 joint venture brings together 586,000 potential subscribers in Buffalo and 307,000 in San Francisco.
The cellular business measures the size of markets by potential, rather than actual, customers.


Yanks Near Harvest Time on Farm
If there is a positive for the Yankees after being swept away by the first-place Blue Jays this weekend, it is that they were finally given a rude but necessary reality check.
By pushing the Yankees 15 games out of first place, the Blue Jays have done them a favor.
It is now incredibly clear that the Yankees must play the final weeks of the 1992 season for 1993 by making roster changes to begin answering questions about the future.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an article on Sunday about Republicans who are fighting against their party's anti-abortion plank misidentified Mary Dent Crisp.
She is a former co-chairwoman of the Republican National Committee, not the current one.


Plan to Ration Health Care Is Rejected by Government
The Bush Administration rejected Oregon's proposal to ration health care today, saying the plan was "tainted by discrimination" against people with disabilities.
The action, roundly criticized by Oregon officials from both parties, underlines the legal pitfalls and political difficulties confronting states that take painful steps to control health costs.


Hanover Insurance Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


How to Avoid That Leathery Complexion


MILLIONS ON STRIKE TO BACK MANDELA ON MAJORITY RULE
In what organizers hailed as a resounding and comparatively peaceful black "referendum" in support of ending white rule, millions of South Africans began a two-day general strike today that stilled large portions of industry and turned urban centers into ghost towns.
The day was marred by sporadic violence that killed at least 12 people, a fairly typical death toll in South Africa these days.


BARCELONA: Tennis; Medals and Milestones for Croatia and South Africa
A piece of Olympic history was written here today on adjacent tennis courts when Croatia was assured its first-ever Olympic medal and South Africa was guaranteed its first medal in 32 years.
Both countries can still aspire to win gold in the tennis competition.
But by moving into the semifinals, their players -- Croatia's Goran Ivanisevic in the men's singles and South Africa's Wayne Ferreira and Piet Norval in the men's doubles -- were certain of winning at least bronze medals.


Interim Leader Has a Reputation as a Problem-Solver
Long known in the upper ranks of the New York City Police Department as a problem-solver and a sure-handed manager, Raymond W. Kelly began his career in the department 29 years ago as a cadet fresh from college.
In recent weeks Mr.
Kelly, the department's second-ranking official until his appointment yesterday as acting commissioner, has been in charge of investigating accusations that senior officers interfered with an Internal Affairs inquiry into an officer suspected of drug trafficking.


Johnson Isn't Open to a New Idea
In his six previous years with the Giants, Pepper Johnson became one of the best inside linebackers in pro football.
He is a fierce hitter who has earned two Super Bowl rings and a Pro Bowl watch.
But now he is being asked to change his technique against the run.
He says that Dave Brazil, the Giants' new linebacker coach, wants the inside linebackers to attack the blocker with heads and arms rather than shoulders.
Brazil says he wants changes, but not the way Johnson describes them.


Bosnians Provide Accounts Of Abuse in Serbian Camps
They differ in the details, but the outlines of their stories coincide with chilling clarity.
These are Croatian and Muslim refugees who have fled the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and they speak of having been herded by the tens of thousands into camps where they witnessed beatings and shootings of prisoners by masked Serbian guards.
None of the factories, schools and stores reportedly being used as human holding pens are on the list of prison camps that Serbian authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina permit the International Red Cross to visit.


Governors Seek to Shed Burdens of Medicaid
Led by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut, the nation's governors today proposed major changes in Federal Medicaid laws to relieve state governments of some of the financial burdens and bureaucracy of the program.
"The evolution of Medicaid, especially in the past five years, has made the program so complex that is it incomprehensible to recipients and providers and unmanageable for governors and states," the National Governors' Association said.


Ralph Strait, Actor, 56
Ralph Strait, a character actor who appeared in plays, feature films, television dramas and commercials, died on Friday at Beekman Downtown Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 56 years old and lived on Staten Island.
Jan Kirshner, a spokeswoman for his family, said he died of a heart attack.


BARCELONA: Diving; Springboard's New Dawn: China First, U.S. Shut Out
Symbolic of diving's new world order, China today completed its second consecutive Olympic sweep of women's events.
Gao Min defended her 3-meter springboard Olympic title on a day when Americans were shut out of a medal in the event for the first time.
The United States was so dominant that it won the event from its inception in 1920 to 1956.
Except for 1980, when Americans boycotted, the United States never finished worse than third.


UNSL Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Wreck, a Lawsuit And a Record Liability
In July 1988, four young Americans touring the south of France with their families were returning from an evening out near Cannes when their car swerved to avoid some pedestrians and ran into an oncoming car.
The crash on that darkened highway left one passenger permanently brain damaged and spawned a legal case unusual for its record liability award and its combination of American law and the Napoleonic code.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about a Vermont newspaper reporter who has refused to testify about her interviews with a prisoner misidentified the prisoner in some copies.
He is Charles Gundlah.


U.S. Sprinter Said to Have Named Drug Users
Someone is not telling the truth.
Juliet Cuthbert of Jamaica, the silver medalist in the women's 100-meter race on Saturday, said today that Gwen Torrence, the United States champion who finished fourth in the final, had named names.


Northeast's Strange Weather: Don't Blame It All on the Volcano
AT the New York Botanical Garden, the abnormally cool summer of 1992 has thrown the schedules of flowering plants thoroughly out of kilter.
Throughout the Northeast, beaches and mountain campgrounds have been discouragingly cold.
And around the Great Lakes and in northern New England, temperatures have lately dipped into the 30's.
"I don't think I've ever seen that in July," Jim Wagner, a veteran analyst at the National Weather Service's Climate Analysis Center at Camp Springs, Md., said of the low readings in the North.
"It's almost reminiscent of the year without a summer in 1816."


Turks Find Demand, but Few Deals So Far, in Central Asia
There is gold there, and oil and gas and coal and cotton.
The problem, Turkish business travelers are discovering in Central Asia, a newly opened area they would like to turn into an economic fief, is there isn't any money.
"They want everything from chewing gum to blue jeans," said Omer Agirgil, the head of an Ankara trading company, who joined one of several recent forays by Turkish and American business people into the territory of the former Soviet Union, from Azerbaijan to Uzbekistan and beyond.
"But none of these states have any money. So if you want to trade, you have to barter."


Mesa Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Accounts
*
Domino's Pizza, Ann Arbor, Mich., named Ross Roy Advertising, Bloomfield Hills, Mich., to handle the chain's Midwest region account, previously at Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago.
Billings were not disclosed, although trade publications have estimated them at $8 million to $10 million, and recent spending was estimated at $4 million to $5 million. *
Malaysia Airlines, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, to Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide , Kuala Lumpur, to handle its global advertising account with billings estimated at $35 million to $40 million.
The agency was chosen over two local agencies in a review: the incumbent, AMC Melewar Zecha Communications, and McCann-Erickson Malaysia .


Milosevic Isn't Hitler, But . . .
"Greater Serbia." "Ethnic cleansing." Civilians transported in sealed buses and railway cars.
And now, concentration camps.
The chilling reports from Bosnia evoke this century's greatest nightmare, Hitler's genocide against Jews, Gypsies and Slavs.
The parallel, mercifully, is not complete.
Serbia's leader, Slobodan Milosevic, does not directly threaten the entire European continent.
He does not have one of the world's largest economies at his disposal.
His aggressive designs are limited to the Balkans.


VMX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Worm Uses Hormone Of the Immune System To Infect and Multiply
ONE of the great unsolved challenges of biology is to understand how tiny pairs of parasitic worms, which live their entire lives copulating in a blood vessel, manage to escape all the body's defenses.
The worms somehow know exactly where to settle in and start mating.
The thousands of eggs they release each day are somehow walled off by the body in tiny granulomas, masses of white blood cells, where they are protected from the immune system and the body is protected from toxins in the eggs.
The entire system seems incredibly complex and almost impenetrable.


American Wins Triple Jump


Central Louisiana Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yankees Prolong Ultimate Agony
The last-place Yankees.
It is an ugly tag they want desperately to avoid, but they inched closer to it as their game with the last-place Indians faded into the late innings last night at the Stadium.
The Yankees were fading with it.
They stopped long enough to bounce back from a two-run deficit and send the game into extra innings, but long fly balls and an ineffective John Habyan doomed the Yankees again as the Indians scored twice in the 12th inning and snatched an 8-6 victory.


Trenton Legislators Vote Repeal Of Florio's Assault-Weapon Ban
Calling their measure an "anti-crime bill," the Republican majority in the Legislature voted today to repeal Gov.
Jim Florio's two-year-old ban on military-style assault weapons.
Mr.
Florio, joined by the Governors of Maryland and Hawaii, said the repeal was a surrender to the gun lobby and would leave drug dealers better armed than the police.
Governor Florio, with Gov.
William Donald Shaefer of Maryland and Gov.
John Waihee 3d of Hawaii at his side, vowed to veto the repeal bill and take his case to the people.
Big Margins of Approval
The Republicans, who gained control of both houses of the Legislature last fall with strong financial and organizational support from the National Rifle Association and its state affiliate, the Coalition of New Jersey Sportsmen, rushed the repeal bill through the Senate and Assembly with overwhelming margins.


BARCELONA: Boxing; Underdog Fights the Good Fight Before Losing
Danell Nicholson of the United States, given a slim chance at best of defeating Felix Savon Fabre of Cuba, came within 2 points of pulling off one of the most stunning upsets in recent Olympic boxing history tonight.
In a quarterfinal heavyweight bout here at the Pavello Club Joventut, the powerful Savon, who has not lost an amateur bout since 1988 and had not come close to being challenged earlier in the 1992 Summer Games, was roughed up and outboxed for two rounds by Nicholson, who fought the match in tennis shoes rather than in the customary high-top boxing shoes.


Karnaugh Family Returns Home
Swimmer Ron Karnaugh and his family returned home from the Olympics, still grieving over the death of his father at the opening ceremonies on July 25.
Karnaugh, who finished sixth in his event, arrived Sunday at Newark Airport with his mother, Jane, and older sister, Debbie, a family friend, Al Brown, said today.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
WEDNESDAY: 8-8:30 A.M., C-Span, meeting with the editorial board of USA Today.


One Farmer's Dream: Truffles People Can Afford
Most locals in this village in north-central Spain, near one of Spain's most isolated regions, regarded Salvador Arotzarena as eccentric to think that anything would sprout on 1,680 acres so rocky and hilly it had defied reforestation by agricultural authorities.
But when wild boars went into drooling frenzies trying to break into the plantation and drinkers at a tavern spotted what they identified as French spy planes over what had come to look like a sort of mega-bonsai experiment gone awry, their ridicule turned to respect.
Mr.
Arotzarena seems to be on the verge of becoming the world truffle czar.
Next year, the 300,000 evergreen oak trees he planted two decades ago, near a town whimsically called Deer Village, are expected to yield 10 to 30 tons of the most expensive and exquisite fungus -- black truffles.
That makes Mr.
Arotzarena one of the few farmers to cultivate the legendary fungus on a large scale and puts him in control of about half of a global market worth $20 million to $30 million annually -- and one that he is betting will grow.
Big Decline in Production
This season, beginning in December, half of his trees, whose roots act as hosts to the fungus, will be in full production.
The other trees are expected to come into production within five years, doubling the farm's output -- and perhaps bringing down prices.


Liuski International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Unico American Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Detrex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Bush Campaign Shows Fire, Then Lands in It
Just when it was starting to get a little better, it got a lot worse.
Under savage criticism from Republican officeholders and strategists for a tardy, flaccid and unimaginative campaign, President Bush headed into the Midwest and on to Texas and California last week, putting some fire into his speeches for a change while aides in Washington distributed "distortion of the day" attacks on the record of his opponent, Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Republican governors meeting in New Jersey reacted happily, with Gov.
John Ashcroft of Missouri praising "the intensity of the last week" and asking for more.


DATA GENERAL TO RESELL NEXT'S COMPUTER WORK STATIONS
The Data General Corporation and Next Computer Inc. will announce an agreement today in which Data General, based in Westborough, Mass., will resell Next work stations along with its own Aviion servers, devices that let computers share software on a network.
The agreement is designed to give Data General customers access to Next's object-oriented software, a faster and easier way to program computers.
A Data General spokesman said the joint shipments would begin in this year's fourth quarter.


Taro Vit Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Irene Santolalla, 90, Peruvian Specialist On Children, Is Dead
Irene Silva de Santolalla, a Peruvian educator and author who in 1956 became the first woman in the country to be elected senator, died on Thursday at her home in Lima, the capital.
She was 90 years old.
Her family said yesterday that she died after a long illness.
Further details were not available.


A First Step in Putting Genes Into Action: Bend the DNA
BY traditional reckoning, DNA is the benign dictator of the cell, the all-knowing molecule that dispenses commands to create enzymes, metabolize food or die a gracious death.
But a series of new discoveries suggest that DNA is more like a certain type of politician, surrounded by a flock of protein handlers and advisers that must vigorously massage it, twist it and, on occasion, reinvent it before the grand blueprint of the body can make any sense at all.
Scientists have recently found an extraordinary class of proteins that serve almost exclusively as molecular musclemen, able to grab the cell's genetic material and, in a fraction of a second, kink the strands into hairpin curves.
Then, just as quickly as they flexed the molecule of life, the proteins may jump off and allow the DNA regions to snap back to straightness.


Aflac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Synch. Swimming; U.S. Has Opposition Seeing Double
When the Josephson twins finally came up for air today after 35 seconds of bubbles and flashing limbs, there were no cheers at the Bernat Piscornell pool.
"I was wondering, 'What did we do wrong?' " Sarah Josephson said.
"Usually, the clapping tells us we're doing good, even if we're not."


L. L. Bean and Politics
To the Editor:
In view of your July 27 article on Linda Lorraine Bean's campaign for Maine's First Congressional District seat this fall, I would like to state L. L. Bean's position on her candidacy.
Linda Bean is a candidate who happens to be a family member, a stockholder and a director of the company.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BROWN TO LEAVE POLICE POST
Lee P. Brown resigned suddenly as New York City's Police Commissioner, jolting the nation's largest police force and raising questions about whether his grand scheme of remaking the department through community policing can be achieved.
Mr.
Brown, who took control of the department two years ago, said he was leaving to spend more time with his ailing wife.
A1.
Community policing was the hallmark of Mr.
Brown's tenure.
B2.


Brown Abruptly Resigns His Police Post
Lee P. Brown resigned suddenly as New York City's Police Commissioner yesterday, jolting the nation's largest police force and raising questions about whether his grand scheme of remaking the department by putting more police officers back on the street will be fully achieved.
The resignation was announced at a hastily arranged news conference at City Hall where Mayor David N. Dinkins also said that David W. Scott, the department's highest ranking uniformed officer, would step down.


Business and Health; States Weighing Cost-Control Ideas
DISMAYED by climbing Medicaid budgets and the growing numbers of Americans without health insurance, several states are considering bold new efforts to hold down health-care costs.
Many states have concluded that they cannnot afford to expand access to health care unless costs can be brought under control at the same time.
Vermont and Minnesota have already decided to set targets for overall medical spending.
Colorado and Vermont have authorized studies of systems that would funnel all health-care payments through a single agency to a limited number of competing insurers.
California is looking at a similar approach.
Iowa is studying a combination of both spending targets and regulated competition.


HealthInfusion Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Survey of Purchasers in July Shows Gains in New Orders
The nation's manufacturing economy expanded in July, according to a monthly survey by the nation's purchasing managers.
But economists were quick to point out that the purchasing managers' index was not particularly robust and that any upturn in the economy would be slow.
The National Association of Purchasing Management said that its index of economic activity rose to 54.2 percent in July from 52.8 percent in June.
The rise in the broad economic index was fueled by increases in new orders and production in July.
A reading below 50 percent indicates that the economy is contracting, the group says, while a reading above 50 is a sign of expansion.


U.S. Rejects Demands to Tighten Limits on Ozone in Smoggy Cities
Rejecting calls to tighten permissible levels of ozone in the nation's smoggiest cities, the Environmental Protection Agency said today that it would not change a 13-year-old safety limit because scientific evidence does not warrant it.
Ground-level ozone, a primary constituent of urban smog, is formed from a chemical mix of nitrogen oxide and volatile organic compounds that react in the presence of sunlight.


When Game Isn't Fun, Astros Owner Knows It's Time to Get Out
Despite all the talk about George Steinbrenner since he ousted himself from baseball two years ago today, nothing memorable has been said about him, certainly nothing that compares with the comments made about the Yankees' owner more than a dozen years ago.
"The two of them deserve each other," Billy Martin uttered July 23, 1978, referring to his boss and his star player, Reggie Jackson.
"One's a born liar, the other's convicted."


Varco International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jannock Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Environmental Debate; Gore Says Bush Is Hypocritical on Ecology Issues
Giving full voice to an issue that has been muted in the early stages of the Presidential campaign, Senator Al Gore today sharply criticized President Bush for his environmental record, saying he had been hypocritical on those issues.
In stops at a factory in Irvine, Calif., that makes environmentally safe intravenous bags for hospitals and at a plant here that recycles used motor oil, Mr.
Gore sought to highlight his own credentials as an environmentalist.


Healthcare Compare reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Senate, in Defiance of Bush, Votes to End All Nuclear Tests in '96
With the support of moderate as well as liberal lawmakers, the Senate voted today to impose a nine-month moratorium on nuclear testing and to stop testing permanently in 1996.
It was the first time the Senate had voted to stop nuclear tests, which are viewed by proponents of the moratorium as a cold-war relic that should be abandoned.
The House has already approved a one-year moratorium.


BARCELONA: Boxing; Boxer Beware of Cuba's 'Right Hand'
Over the last four decades, the Olympics have supplied boxing with names to remember: Patterson, Ali (then Clay), Frazier, Foreman, Stevenson, Leonard, Holyfield.
All but Evander Holyfield won an Olympic gold medal.
The reigning world heavyweight champion had to be satisfied with a bronze medal in 1984 after a controversial disqualification.


Trade Talks Bog Down Over Dispute on Apparel
Negotiators made slow progress today on the final details of a planned North American free-trade agreement, largely because of an obscure dispute involving Canada's apparel industry, people close to the talks said today.
The trade ministers of the three countries plan to continue the talks on Tuesday, and possibly through the week.
But a foreign official said that Trade Minister Michael H. Wilson of Canada and Commerce Secretary Jaime Serra Puche of Mexico might go home if a deal was not reached on Tuesday, and return on Friday for more negotiations.


Bosnians Provide Accounts Of Abuse in Serbian Camps; Red Cross Cites Violations
After visiting 10 prisons and internment camps throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina, the International Committee of the Red Cross today accused all sides in the four-month conflict of blatantly violating the human rights of civilians.
"Violations of humanitarian law and of basic human rights perpetrated by all parties to the conflict have reached such a point that they have become common practice," said the Red Cross statement, issued today at the headquarters of the organization in Geneva.


Market Place; With No Fees, A Fund Shrinks
BROKERAGE firm products are sold, not bought, the saying goes.
And Prudential Securities is offering the latest example of that truth with a short-term bond fund it introduced in 1982.
The Prudential Government Securities Trust Intermediate-Term Series is one of a dozen or so short-term bond funds that have become increasingly attractive to investors as interest rates have plummeted.
Vanguard, Wright Investors and Twentieth Century also have such funds, which appeal to the investor looking for a little more yield and only a little more risk than money market funds provide.


New Test May Spot Metastasis Of Cancer To Bones
A NEW test may help doctors in the early detection of cancer that has spread to the bone.
It is based on two chemicals that are unique to bones and are found in the urine when bones break down.
The spread of cancer from its original site to other organs, called metastasis, is particularly dangerous.
When cancer metastasizes to the bones, the resulting bone cancer is generally considered incurable.
Autopsies suggest that about a quarter of all cancers reach the bones.


Baldwin &amp; Lyons reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; In a Swift Counteroffensive, Clinton Assails Bush's Stand on Health Care
In a Presidential race that is fast devolving into an increasingly harsh game of charge and countercharge, Bill Clinton today excoriated President Bush for his Administration's position on health care, while defending himself against a weekend barrage of Republican assaults on topics as diverse as Mr.
Clinton's own health-care proposals and his waistline.
Mr.
Clinton had scheduled today to be free of public appearances, but for the second time in five days, he changed plans and called a news conference because of the march of events.


Nevada Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mos June 30


Killer Fungus Attacking Leaves of Dogwood Trees
From a distance the crisp green leaves of the dogwood trees glisten in the sunlight along the Taconic State Parkway.
Up close, the leaves are full of small tan circles rimmed by a line of purple -- telltale signs of a deadly disease, dogwood anthracnose.
"These are very unhealthy trees we are looking at," said Michael Birmingham, an associate forester for the State Department of Environmental Conservation, standing in a median of the parkway south of Millbrook in Dutchess County.


Amoskeag Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Six Theaters to Benefit From Revised Times Square Plan
Six theaters on 42d Street will be among the biggest beneficiaries and most closely watched symbols of the revised redevelopment plan for Times Square.
Two or possibly three of the theaters -- all of which were taken over by the city and the state during condemnation proceedings in 1990 -- are to be renovated with $18.2 million committed by the developers of the original Times Square Center office project, the Prudential Insurance Company of America and Park Tower Realty.
That is the largest outlay of money for a single purpose under the new renovation plan.


Critic's Notebook; TV's Sexual Circus With a Purpose
Between the soaps and the sitcoms When boredom is beginning to lower, Comes a lift in the day's occupation That is known as the peeper's hour.
A dip into the afternoon television talk shows last week began and ended with Robin and Sandy, two stylish young women got up like hopefuls at a singles bar, who were classified on a rerun of the "Maury Povich" show (Channel 4 at 3 P.M.) as "lipstick lesbians." There they were again, hair in order, jewelry sparkling, plenty of leg and a bit of bosom showing, on the "Montel Williams" show (Channel 5 at 5 P.M.).
On both programs they were seated near women described as "L. L. Bean lesbians," who evidently outfitted themselves from the men's pages of the catalogue and had their hair chopped at the local barber shop.


Capital Holding reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
MARLIN FITZWATER, the White House press secretary, was back in his office yesterday after having surgery for skin cancer last week.
No further details were released, but SEAN WALSH, an assistant press secretary, said, "The unstoppable Marlin Fitzwater will be traveling and back to his normal routine."


Charities Sued in Fund-Raising Schemes
Four national charity groups were accused today of participating in what Connecticut officials described as a sort of daisy chain of false accounting, in which often worthless donated items were shunted from charity to charity at wildly inflated values.
The point, the officials said, was not good works, but good numbers on the ledger sheets.
The accounting made it appear that charities were raising more money and spending a lower percentage on fund-raising and administration than was really the case, officials said.


NO SECRET IN AID, EX-SPY TESTIFIES
The prosecution's principal witness in the trial of a former Central Intelligence Agency official wound up his testimony today by insisting that the Reagan Administration's covert effort to assist the Nicaraguan rebels in the mid-1980's was an "open secret" long before the operation was publicly disclosed.
Alan D. Fiers Jr., who formerly headed the agency's covert operations in Latin America, made his assertions in a mostly tedious round of questioning in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George, the agency's former deputy director in charge of covert operations.
Mr.
George is charged with lying to a grand jury and misleading Congress.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Renouncing an Attack on Clinton, Bush Vows to Stay Above 'Sleaze'
President Bush today repeated his promise to "keep this campaign out of the sleaze business" and disavowed the comments of a top campaign official who issued a strident personal attack on his Democratic opponent, Gov.
Bill Clinton.
On a day that highlighted the frustration and increasingly frantic edge of the Bush re-election drive, the White House renounced a news release issued on Sunday by Mary Matalin, the deputy campaign manager.
Headlined, "Sniveling, Hypocritical Democrats," the release assailed Mr.
Clinton and others in his party on a variety of grounds, and raised anew the accusations of marital infidelity that Mr.
Clinton fought earlier in his campaign.


U.S.O.C. Aide Urges An End to Privileges
Tired of complaints by American athletes that some of their teammates at the Barcelona Olympics are living better than others, the head of the United States delegation said today he intends to press for a policy that would require all members of future American teams to reside in the Olympic Village.
Leroy Walker, the chief of mission and nominee as the next United States Olympic Committee president, said he planned to propose the measure at a meeting on Tuesday with U.S.O.C. officers.
It is aimed at athletes who are staying in luxury hotels at their own expense, their federation's or a sponsor's -- in particular, the American basketball team, members of the track and field team and some tennis players.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Sunday about Gov.
Bill Clinton's appearance at the National Governors' Association meeting omitted the identification of the man at the left in some copies.
He was Gov.
Zell Miller of Georgia.


Senate Approves More Financing For Supercollider Project in Texas
Rejecting arguments that the superconducting supercollider is a luxury the country cannot afford, the Senate today overwhelmingly approved spending $550 million next year for the Texas-based proton smasher.
The $8.2 billion supercollider was put in peril six weeks ago when the House voted to stop its financing.
But with concerns over the budget deficit now overshadowed by worry over unemployment and slow economic growth, a House-Senate conference committee is likely to follow the Senate's lead and resuscitate financing for the project.


Incentive Plan By Fernandez For Teachers
Hoping to entice New York City's most seasoned teachers into its most troubled schools, Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez wants to offer them amenities like free parking, cheap college courses and guarantees of a summer jobs.
Mr.
Fernandez is trying to attack one of the most stubborn imbalances in the New York City school system: The most experienced and qualified teachers tend to collect in middle-class schools while novice instructors struggle with the students who are toughest to teach in the city's harsher neighborhoods.


No Headline
My priorities are quite clear.
My family comes first. -- COMMISSIONER LEE P. BROWN  [ A1:6. ]


Homeowners Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Maples in Spotlight on Opening Night
In the opening minutes of her opening night, Marla Maples rose slowly from the orchestra pit, a Venus rising on hydraulic lift, and shimmered in gold cowboy boots, gold hot pants, gold cowboy hat and gold hair.
As applause rippled around her, Ms.
Maples sang, twirled a giant branding iron, strutted and skipped across the stage, smiled and wiggled her nearly naked behind.
She didn't trip, and she dropped neither the iron nor a note.
"Her pants are too tight," Harrison J. Goldin, whispered to his wife, Diana.


Hamburger Hamlet Restaurant reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Russia and Ukraine to Run Black Sea Fleet Jointly
The Black Sea Fleet, which has been both a symbol and a source of tensions between Russia and Ukraine, will be placed under the joint command of the two countries until 1995, according to an agreement reached today by President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine.
Meeting near Yalta on the Crimean Peninsula, the two Presidents appeared arm in arm before television cameras, signaling an end to the exchange of threats and conflicting presidential decrees that have dominated talks over the fleet since the Soviet Union broke up last year.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about aggravated manslaughter charges against the bus driver in a fatal crash in Sussex County, N.J., referred incorrectly to witnesses who said they saw and smelled smoke coming from the rear wheels.
They were passengers in two cars behind the bus, not in the bus itself.


Dr. David W. Molander; Cancer Specialist, 69
Dr.
David W. Molander, an internist and expert on cancer who practiced in New York City for 36 years, died yesterday during a stay at his summer home in Chatham, Mass.
He was 69 years old and also lived in Naples, Fla.
He died after being taken to Cape Cod Hospital in Hyannis, said a representative of the Nickerson Funeral Home in Chatham, who did not know the cause of death.


Bow Valley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Motorola Using Erasable Chips
Motorola Inc., one of the world's leading makers of microprocessors, said yesterday that it would incorporate into a communications product an innovative approach that is increasingly being used by computer manufacturers: "flash" memory chips that may never become obsolete because they can be erased and rewritten with new software.
In theory, this could mean televisions, telephones and other consumer electronics that would never go out of date because their obsolete functions could simply be eliminated and new functions added.


Buffets Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 15


Off-Duty Detective Shoots Theft Suspect
An off-duty police detective trying to stop what he thought was an auto theft shot and seriously wounded a 20-year-old man during a struggle in Queens last night, the police said.
Valdemar Wilson, of 98-38 57th Street in Queens, was in critical condition at Booth Memorial Hospital last night with at least one bullet wound to the abdomen.
The detective, Fernando Losado, who is assigned to the Manhattan South Tactical Narcotics Team, was treated for cuts and bruises to his head at St.
John's Queens Hospital in Elmhurst.


Candidate Families
To the Editor:
I rarely agree with Anna Quindlen.
However, much of "Suffer the Little Children," her July 26 column on intrusion into the privacy of political families, is on target -- even, I am embarrassed to say, her rebuke of me.
I regret my remark, which Ms.
Quindlen quoted, about the "liberal Democrat version" of the one-child family, which was made in the heat of a spirited television debate over whether Democrats or Republicans were exploiting the family-values issue more.


Review/Music; Sounds From Several Centuries In a Long Tanglewood Weekend
Seiji Ozawa took up some unfinished business on Saturday evening, conducting the Boston Symphony Orchestra in a tribute to the French composer Olivier Messiaen, who died in April.
Mr.
Ozawa had been scheduled to perform "The Garden of the Sleep of Love," the sixth movement of Messiaen's huge "Turangalila Symphony," to open the orchestra's season at the Tanglewood Festival here a month ago, but he missed that concert and several others because of tendinitis in his shoulders.
The relocation, with the piece now opening the annual Serge and Olga Koussevitzky Memorial Concert, was apt, for Serge Koussevitzky, the patron saint of Tanglewood, commissioned "Turangalila" (though Leonard Bernstein conducted the premiere, with the Boston Symphony in 1949).
In addition, the movement enhanced the representation of 20th-century works in the orchestra's programs during the Tanglewood Music Center's weeklong Festival of Contemporary Music.


CHRONICLE
Three decades after Marilyn Monroe died, apparently of an overdose of drugs, the playwright ARTHUR MILLER says that his former wife was "highly self-destructive" and addicted to sleeping pills.
According to The Associated Press, Mr.
Miller, 77, said in an interview published yesterday in the French newspaper Le Figaro that after he married Miss Monroe in 1956, "All my energy and attention were devoted to trying to help her solve her problems."


Garden of Lofty Goals Grows High
On the roof of a homeless center in midtown Manhattan, seven stories above a metal detector that checks people for guns and knives, four people who spend their nights in church shelters and Y.M.C.A.'s are spending their days pruning rose bushes, fertilizing broccoli plants and battling aphids.
Since June, as part of a work-placement program at the Grand Central Partnership building, they and others at the center have planted and cared for an organic garden on a rooftop about the size of a tennis court.


We Gain Little by Imprisoning More Women
To the Editor:
"Are American Jails Becoming Shelters From the Storm?" (The Week in Review, July 19) points out that, sadly, some "services" for the poor, including meals, housing and medical care, are more likely to be available in this country's jails and prisons than in the community.
In comparing government spending for welfare (mostly for women) with government spending on prisons (primarily inhabited by men), you suggest that inmates fare better than honest folks.
That analysis ignores the facts on female incarceration.
Since 1981 the rate of incarceration of women has been increasing much faster than that of men.
Nearly half of this increase is a direct result of the national trend favoring sentencing drug offenders to prison, rather than probation.
Commitments to women's prisons have more than tripled in the last decade.
But "services" in women's jails and prisons have lagged behind those in men's facilities.
Today the rapid growth of the female inmate population has strained whatever limited programs exist.
And poverty, as well as drug addiction, has soared for women since the early 1980's.


COMPANY NEWS Taubman Centers, a Mall Empire, to Go Public; Big Developer To Shed Debt In Stock Sale
A.
Alfred Taubman's shopping mall empire plans to sell shares to the public, hoping to raise between $335 million and $389 million from investors who would get a 22 percent stake in a group of 19 large shopping malls from California to Connecticut, the company announced yesterday.
The move would effectively free Mr.
Taubman of hundreds of millions of dollars of personal debt.
The company said the offering and the accompanying restructuring would enable it to slash debt and expand.
It said it planned to enlarge some large regional shopping centers and might buy or build others.


Books of The Times; Historical Novel Flavored With Passion and Ideas
The Volcano Lover  A Romance  By Susan Sontag  419 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
The doomed 18th-century love affair of Lady Hamilton and Lord Nelson seems an improbable subject for Susan Sontag, famed explicator of the avant-garde and author of such opaque, willfully modern novels as "The Benefactor" (1963) and "Death Kit" (1967).


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.37
5.79
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.17
5.51
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.30
3.26
5.58
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.26
6.25
7.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.45
8.22
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.45
8.46
9.15
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.15
6.11
7.07
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


This China Bill Is on Target
This year there doesn't have to be a Washington stalemate on whether to renew China's trading privileges despite its human rights abuses.
Congressional human rights champions have come up with a much improved bill.
It threatens targeted trade sanctions should Beijing fail to improve its record of repression, trade abuses and reckless weapons exports.
The House has given overwhelming bipartisan approval to the bill, sponsored by Representative Nancy Pelosi of California.
Senator George Mitchell, the majority leader, is now trying to assemble a veto-proof Senate majority as well.


A Legal Shortcut to Wordperfect
LAWYERS may not be slower learners than the rest of us, but they certainly are luckier.
They have "Wordperfect in One Hour for Lawyers," by Gerald J. Robinson, published by the section of law practice management of the American Bar Association.
This is a slim paperbound book intended to help a lawyer -- or anyone else, for that matter -- quickly get up to speed with the most popular word-processing program, either version 5.0 or 5.1, for MS-DOS-based computers.
The vast majority of personal computers operate under plain DOS, not through Windows or the Macintosh operating system.


Arkla Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chess
Two world champions, Alexander Alekhine, 1927-1935 and 1937 to his death in 1946, and the current titleholder, Gary Kasparov, have in common their marvelous attacking skill, but on another matter they are as different as night and day.
Whereas Alekhine was notorious for concocting scores of games he never played and for insisting on an infallible detailed grasp of every hypothetical nuance in his best combinations, despite witnesses to contradict him, Kasparov excoriates himself for errors he takes pains to find in the interest of the truth.
A good example of Kasparov's fastidiousness in examining his own games is his encounter with the Bosnian-Herzogovinian grandmaster Predrag Nikolic in the Manila Olympiad, which took place June 7 to 25.
You might not guess that Kasparov had won the brilliancy prize for this performance, had you come upon his self-critical analysis of moves that turned out to be second best..


Milwaukee Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Minority Students Cite Bias In Higher-Education Quest
When Denise Galarza Sepulveda told her high school guidance counselor that she dreamed of one day teaching at a university, the counselor looked at her and rolled her eyes.
Ms.
Galarza Sepulveda had good grades, but she was the only Puerto Rican in her class.
Her guidance counselor had approached other, nonminority, students and suggested they apply to college.
With deadlines looming, Ms.
Galarza Sepulveda asked for an appointment and offered up her dreams.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Fired Bo Schembechler, president, and Jim Campbell, chairman of the board and chief executive officer.
Announced that team owner Thomas Monaghan will assume the duties of president.
National League


Without Cars in Central Park, New Yorkers Will Breathe Easier
To the Editor:
A July 26 article on the crowding of Central Park's roadways does an excellent job of focusing attention on conflicts between the park's recreational users and motor-vehicle commuter traffic.
I am concerned, however, that you did not quite present both sides of the story.
You quote New York City's Department of Transportation, regarding its study of park traffic, without noting:
*
Solutions to the loop-road problems have been held up for almost two years while government officials have awaited completion of the department's study.


Review/Fashion; For Couture, a Fine Line Blurs
The demise of the haute-couture branch of the French fashion industry has been as widely heralded over the years as the death of the novel or the theater.
The subject came up repeatedly during the proliferation of inventive clothes at the fall and winter showings.
There was an unusual mixture of wearable styles and rather outrageous ones that could percolate down to the level of ready-to-wear.
The line between the two fashion areas seems to be blurring anyway.
On July 25, the day before the showings officially began, Pierre Berge of Yves Saint Laurent introduced a new ready-to-wear collection by Robert Merloz.


Vestar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Gymnastics; Many of Unified Team's Medal Winners Are Going Off on Their Own
Barely 12 hours after he achieved an Olympic record with six gold medals in gymnastics in a single Games, Vitaly Shcherbo said today he plans to leave his beleaguered home in Belarus, probably for Germany in the short term and, ultimately, the United States.
At a news conference with other gymnasts from the Unified Team, Shcherbo said his decision was based on economic and practical factors.


Esco Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Perot to Outline Plans in a Book
Ross Perot has agreed to write a book in which he will discuss his economic recovery plan for the country and offer a critique of the American political system.
The book, "United We Stand: How We Can Take Back Our Country," is scheduled to be published this month by Hyperion, Robert Miller, the company's vice president and publisher, said today.


N.F.L. Training Camp Report
Miami Dolphins
Coach Don Shula said he would wait until a court ruling before deciding whether to punish a veteran player and a rookie arrested on a charge of soliciting prostitution.
The club confirmed on Sunday that just before the team's 11 P.M. curfew last Thursday, tight end Ferrell Edmunds and rookie defensive end Larry Webster were arrested by the Opa-locka police in an undercover prostitution sting.
Both players were released on their own recognizance and played in Saturday's victory over Washington.
If convicted of the second-degree misdemeanor, each would face up to a $500 fine and 60 days in jail.


Thai Premier Bears Down on Military for Killing of Pro-Democracy Civilians
Thailand's military commanders are finally being punished for their role in the crackdown on democracy protesters in May, in which soldiers gunned down scores of unarmed civilians on the streets of Bangkok.
The nation's Supreme Military Commander and the army chief were ousted from their posts last weekend.
They and their colleagues are also being ejected from the board rooms of large state-run corporations.


Review/Theater; Quadruplet Candidates and Other Improvisations
Want to see a high-wire act over a great white shark?
Try an improvisational comedy show.
Comedy is always a high-wire act.
Failure is the great white shark.
And never do the jaws of doom seem so gaping as when the comedy must be made up on the spot.


COMPANY NEWS Taubman Centers, a Mall Empire, to Go Public; Still Dealing And Living In 80's Style
Contrary to the talk from the Hamptons' links to London's auction rooms, A. Alfred Taubman is not going bust, at least if his extravagant life style is any indicator.
At a time when developers are struggling to survive, the 67-year-old shopping center and real estate magnate is acting as if the 80's never ended.
He is still collecting art, still playing host to parties at his homes in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.; Manhattan; Southampton; London and Palm Beach, still playing golf and attending game-hunting parties and still globetrotting in his private jet.
He has money in the bank, $130 million to be exact -- the proceeds from the sale of part of his stake in Sotheby's, the auction house he bought nine years ago.
He remains chairman and still owns $170 million worth of Sotheby's stock.


Airgas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kaneb Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Two Offers For LTV Unit Submitted
The bidding war for the military division of the LTV Corporation escalated today with the Martin Marietta Corporation offering $440 million for the unit and the Loral Corporation countering late tonight with a $445 million bid.
Loral's offer modifies a bid that it made last week with the Carlyle Group, an investment firm in Washington, and the Northrop Corporation.
The modified bid includes $424 million in cash and $21 million in preferred stock, providing more cash than Martin Marietta's offer.


Rival Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


APPLE COMPUTER TO OFFER FASTER, CHEAPER POWERBOOK
Apple Computer Inc. said it would offer a midpriced version of its popular Powerbook notebook computer, offering higher performance at a lower price.
The new Powerbook 145 incorporates all of the features of its predecessor, the 140, but offers 35 percent better performance by means of a faster microprocessor.
It is available immediately, at $2,399 with a 40-megabyte hard disk, or $2,799 with an 80-megabyte disk.
Apple's price reduction and improved performance reflect similar moves by makers of I.B.M.-compatible notebook computers.


Brown Legacy: Community Policing Will Neighborhood-Patrol Concept Survive Commissioner's Departure?
As Lee P. Brown steps down two and a half years into his term as Police Commissioner, he can boast of a number of accomplishments.
More police officers are on the force and more are walking beats.
Reports of serious crime are down.
And as some city officials said at the time of the recent Los Angeles riot, New York was spared the same kind of heated confrontations between police and residents.


Salant Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Greyhound Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Patterns
Mainly for Show
While most people are thinking about their summer vacations, designers have leaped ahead to next winter's resort wear.
Norma Kamali started off the week with a swimwear show that was high on glamour if not necessarily on practicality.
Because Ms.
Kamali is a trend-setter who went a long way toward popularizing the underwire bra, her shows are important.
She is still showing underwires on both one-piece and two-piece styles with halter necklines.
Maillots are cut high on the leg, but some have a skirtlike piece in front.There were very bare bikinis, as well as navel-covering briefs and swim dresses with flared skirts.
Nearly everything was white, black or red.


A Refresher Course On Social Security
To the Editor:
In "Who Will Play Captain Courageous?" (Op-Ed, July 18), Charles Peters exhorts Gov.
Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore to make "a call for education reform that confronts the problems of bad teachers, a call for health care reform that threatens the Park Avenue specialists and a call for entitlement reform that challenges the greedy geezers to give up benefits that they don't need."
I am neither a bad teacher nor a Park Avenue specialist, but since I am 70 years old and a recipient of Social Security benefits, "geezers" presumably applies to me, and "greedy" merits discussion.


Simon Rosenzweig; Lawyer, 86
Simon Rosenzweig, a Manhattan lawyer who specialized in mental health and housing law, died on Sunday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 86 years old and lived in White Plains.
The immediate cause of his death was heart failure, and he had been suffering from heart and spine ailments, said his wife of 51 years, the former Margaret Lybolt.


Wyoming Ethologist Pursues Robber Flies For Complex Behavior
ROBBER flies are neither pests nor pollinators.
They bite neither man nor beast, and they do not spread disease.
Yet despite this detachment from any realm of human affairs, they have become the central passion of Dr.
Robert Lavigne, a biologist at the University of Wyoming in Laramie.
Some 30 years ago, while helping to survey the parasites and predators of Wyoming's grasshoppers, Dr.
Lavigne (pronounced la-VEEN) became so intrigued with the predatory stealth, aggressiveness and occasional cannibalism of robber flies that he has remained engrossed in their study ever since.


American Bankers Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


We Gain Little by Imprisoning More Women; Born Behind Bars
To the Editor:
As a volunteer at New York State's Bedford Hills Correctional Facility, I spent a number of hours with Felisha, a child born to an inmate mother, whom you picture in a July 10 article.
She lived at the prison with her mother for her first 18 months.
She spent most days in the infant center, where inmate mothers leave their babies on weekdays and go to jobs or classes, while other inmates are paid care givers.
In this peculiar microcosm, everyone gains practice by playing out real-life roles.
"How cruel," my friends would say, "forcing a baby to live such a sad life in a deprived environment." Ask Felisha, who at age 1, never napped, never even slowed down and explored every square inch of her available space, finding something new and exciting each time.
And watch her cheerful expression ignite when her mom walks into the room.


Cuomo Announces Grants for Housing on Long Island


Calmat Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wainoco Oil reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Animal Transplants Save Human Lives
To the Editor:
Suzanne Roy (letter, July 16) criticizes the baboon liver transplant done to save a dying patient in Pittsburgh last month because she believes animals may become "spare parts supply houses" for humankind, and this would "entail enormous suffering for animals." Her letter represents the thinking of many sensitive members of the public and calls for close and thoughtful attention by medical scientists using animals to alleviate human ill health and suffering.
Because primate animals have to be blood type-matched with human recipients and our World Health Organization Collaborating Center is the only laboratory performing such tests, I have been involved in practi cally all such xenotransplants (transplants between different species) since early 1960.
I would like to share my experience in 1963 of the immense gratitude and relief of the first successfully xenotransplanted patient: "Doctor, but for that monkey, I would be a dead man. I am thankful for every day I live."
About 30 patients received primate kidneys in the 1960's before the availability of dialysis; their clinical course was not much different from that of patients transplanted with kidneys from unrelated human donors.
With the advent of cyclosporin and, most recently, of an experimental antirejection medication, new possibilities are opened to save patients, many of them young and vigorous, who are dying because of the failure of only one organ in otherwise healthy bodies.
I believe that Ms.
Roy's perspective would be changed by a visit to a transplantation ward where she could see and talk to patients slowly dying while awaiting the so scarce human donor organs.
Moreover, the laws do not allow the removal of an organ from an animal to "entail enormous suffering." Such procedures are strictly monitored by the institutions and by state and Federal authorities: an organ is removed under deep anesthesia, followed by euthanasia.
There are thousands of patients whose hearts were repaired using pig heart valves.
It must also be taken into consideration that baboons are considered pests, and there is a bounty on them in several African countries.
Surgeons would prefer not to kill a baboon or any other animal, but they hope that xenotransplantation will save dying patients; such a hope is strengthened by the Pittsburgh case.
JAN MOOR-JANKOWSKI, M.D.
Director, W.H.O.
Collaborating Center for Hematology of Primate Animals New York, July 21, 1992


Rae Dalven, 87, Former Professor And a Historian of Jews in Greece
Rae Dalven, a translator of modern Greek poets and historian of Greek Jews, died on Thursday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Friends said she had been in declining health but they did not know the cause of death.


Stinging Jabs at Punch-Drunk Scoring
Al Bernstein, NBC's boxing analyst for the Summer Olympics, has a fight-for-success strategy for those who must endure the computer system that has turned punch counting into Stupid Human Tricks: "No body shots or uppercuts. Jabs are rarely counted. Left hooks, straight lefts, straight rights are counted. But no body shots. No uppercuts -- as Eric Griffin will tell you."
Griffin is the 106-pounder who lost his fight, 6-5, on Saturday to Rafael Lozano of Spain.
Three of the five computer-unfriendly judges were unable often enough to push the correct button within a second of one another to credit Griffin with more than a fraction of his punches.


Government Is Seeking Gotti's Assets
Federal authorities are pressing forward with plans to seize millions of dollars in assets accumulated by John Gotti as well as two social clubs he used to run the Gambino crime family, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
Among the properties that the authorities hope to confiscate are the two Gotti headquarters, the Ravenite Social Club in Manhattan and the Bergin Hunt and Fish Club in Ozone Park, Queens.


A U.S. Offer To Train Iraqis
Three months before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, while many Mideast nations were expressing concern over Baghdad's intentions, United States military officials sought approval for a training program with Iraq, according to Department of Defense documents.
The plan was blocked by the State Department, apparently because of domestic political concerns, the documents show.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with the Dance in Review column carried an incorrect caption.
It showed Eleo Pomare in "Postcards From Soweto," not Ariel Herrera in "Graceland."


T.W.A. Holding Sale Talks With Unions and Creditors
Trans World Airlines said yesterday that it was negotiating an agreement with many of its unionized employees and its creditors to buy out the troubled airline's chairman, Carl C. Icahn, who would step down.
The deal would provide short-term relief for T.W.A., which entered bankruptcy court protection in January, industry analysts said, but it would leave a once-proud carrier ill positioned to compete.
T.W.A. has sold some of its most attractive assets and it has an aging fleet, shortcomings that threaten its long-term health.


Tagliabue Testifies About the Virtue of Plan B
Spending his second full day on the stand in the players' antitrust trial against the National Football League, Commissioner Paul Tagliabue continued today to defend the league's current system of free agency as a necessity to maintaining competitive balance.
Tagliabue was cross-examined by Jim Quinn, an attorney for the players, as the trial over free agency began its sixth week.
The commissioner, who will resume his testimony on Tuesday, reacted strongly when Quinn charged that the current system, known as Plan B free agency, was a plot to freeze or reduce players' benefits and that it was designed to make the right of first refusal over protected players more palatable.


Riots' Start Is Relived as Witness Identifies 3 Suspects in a Beating
At a preliminary hearing for three black men accused in the beating of a white truck driver at the flashpoint of the Los Angeles riots, two eyewitnesses recounted the violence in stark detail today, and one identified the defendants as the attackers.
The hearing, in Los Angeles Municipal Court, is intended to allow the judge, Larry P. Fidler, to determine whether the matter will go to trial.
In this case, it is viewed as little more than a formality.
The hearing, which began Friday, is expected to last at least a week and to provide a preview of the trial.


William Weidman, 70, Hospital Chief of Staff
Dr.
William Weidman, the former chief of staff of the Arabian American Oil Company hospital in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, died July 30 at Fairfax Hospital in Fairfax, Va.
He was 70 years old and lived in Great Falls, Va.
Dr.
Weidman died of liver failure as a result of chronic hepatits, said a son, Dr.
Richard C. Weidman, of Reston, Va.


Value Health Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Taylor Stays Late, Trying to Catch Up
Troy Taylor participated in his first practice today, sort of, when the Jets worked out at Hofstra.
He wore a green uniform and mostly watched while other quarterbacks took snaps during passing drills.
Browning Nagle and Jeff Blake got more action, and so did Mike Norseth and Kerwin Bell.
It wasn't until after practice, when most of his teammates were in the showers, that Taylor got a chance to throw more than a few footballs.
A handful of backup receivers stayed with him on the field so Taylor could work his arm back into shape.
And after most Jets left the training grounds, Taylor remained to catch up in the weight room.
Nagle Is in the Lead
Such is the workload for a man trying to get back to where he once belonged.
Last season, Taylor was the backup quarterback to Ken O'Brien, the starter.
This summer, both Taylor and O'Brien missed the start of camp in contract disputes and O'Brien is still not here.
With his impressive performance in Saturday's 41-14 victory over Philadelphia at Canton, Ohio, Nagle appears to hold the lead in the fight for the first-string position.
He will probably start on Saturday when the Jets play host to the Washington Redskins at the Meadowlands.
Jeff Blake, a rookie, was less impressive as Nagle's backup against the Eagles.
Assuming that O'Brien will settle with the Jets and come back for a 10th season, that could leave Taylor and Blake fighting for the bronze medal in the quarterback competition.
"I don't make the decisions," Taylor said.
"I just want to get ready to play. I don't really worry about competition. I stick with what I do. You compete against yourself."
Taylor said an absence such as his "is always a setback."
"How much, we'll see," he added.  Beginning His Third Season
Taylor, who earned $170,000 last season, signed a one-year deal worth up to $400,000, if he makes the team.
Last season, his second with the Jets, Taylor appeared in five games and completed 5 of 10 pass attempts for 76 yards and one touchdown.
As Taylor spoke during the lunch hour, a couple of teammates drifted by, mockingly asking him for autographs.
"Just friendly jabbing," Taylor said.
He wasn't making any demands or issuing any ultimatums today.
"Something needs to happen here," he said of his personal situation.
"I'd like something to happen this year. I've known it's a business for a long time. You've got to separate the two. I'm done with the business part."
Taylor was on the sidelines in Canton when Nagle completed completed 10 of 15 passes for 142 yards and one touchdown.
Nagle also ran for one touchdown and seemed to impress teammates, fans and coaches with his poise.
"I thought he played well," said Taylor. "He did a fine job."
Blake completed 3 of 10 pass attempts, had one pass intercepted and lost a fumble playing with mostly a backup crew.
"He had a rough day; it was a rough first test for him," said Coach Bruce Coslet.
"He had some misreads. He made some mistakes a rookie would make. He'll fix those." EXTRA POINTS
ROB MOORE, the wide receiver who sprained his left ankle on Saturday, will miss the next two games and will have the ankle in a cast for a week "to calm it down," Coach BRUCE COSLET said. . . .
DAVE CADIGAN, a left guard, joined the team after coming to contract terms, leaving only KEN O'BRIEN still out.
Cadigan has a two-year deal, reportedly for $1.3 million. . . .
DENNIS BYRD said he was enjoying the move from defensive tackle to defensive end, in part because of more free space.
"There's a lot less traffic," said Byrd.
"I enjoy that. I'm an open-plains type of guy; I like the prairie," said Byrd, who comes from Mustang, Okla.
He returned an interception 7 yards for a touchdown against the Eagles. . . .
CORWIN ANTHONY, a tight end, has been traded to Green Bay for a future draft choice. . . .
SIUPELI MALAMALA, the rookie offensive tackle drafted on the third round, returned to practice Monday after missing two weeks with a sprained left shoulder.


COMPANY NEWS: Inside the Global Greenhouse; Woodman, Spare That CO2 Eater
Electric utilities looking for ways to recapture the carbon dioxide that their plants pump into the atmosphere have bought tropical rain forests in order to preserve them, or have planted new trees.
But the New England Electric System announced a new approach yesterday.
The utility plans to pay lumber companies to work more gently.
Scientists believe that carbon dioxide, which is produced when fuel is burned, is helping to create a global greenhouse, although they disagree about the speed or importance of climate change.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7  TALK OF SERBIAN ATROCITIES  Croatian and Muslim refugees fleeing Bosnia and Herzegovina talk of being herded into camps where they witnessed beatings and shootings by Serbian guards.
The details vary, but outlines of the stories coincide.
A1  The U.S. says it has information on detention centers in Bosnia.
A6


Idaho Power reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Corrections
The caption yesterday with a picture from Agence France-Presse showing President Bush's visit to Chicago omitted the identification of the man at the left.
He was Lieut.
Gov.
Bob Kustra of Illinois.
The caption also misidentified Jack O'Malley in some copies.
He is State's Attorney for Cook County, not for Illinois.


Lannet Data Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Borland Halts Use of Lotus Menus
Borland International Inc. said today that it was shipping a version of its Quattro Pro spreadsheet program without a feature that duplicates the command menus of the Lotus Development Corporation's 1-2-3 program.
A United States district court judge in Boston ruled on Friday that Borland's use of the menus infringed Lotus copyrights.
Attorneys for Lotus said they would continue to seek a court order barring distribution of the infringing program.
Borland plans to appeal the ruling.


Serv-Tech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Florida East Coast Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Mary Matalin; Protegee May Have Atwater's Eye for Jugular but Not His Deftness
Among the mementos Mary Matalin keeps of her late mentor, Lee Atwater, is his rock-and-blues album with the inscription: "Dear Mary, you have gotten me through many storms. I deeply love you, Lee."
But now, it is Ms.
Matalin who is in the center of a storm.
In one sense, the storm was caused by the brand of bare-knuckles political tactics she learned from Mr.
Atwater.
But it also raised the question of whether she can match the subtlety and craft of her late boss, who was the architect of President Bush's 1988 election drive.


The Tender Goya Who Preferred Cupid's Arrows to a Cynic's Darts
With the Columbus quincentenary being marked by a world's fair in Seville, the Olympics in Barcelona and a cultural feast in Madrid, Zaragoza has mobilized its most famous son -- Francisco de Goya -- to insure that it too is noticed during the Year of Spain.
Not that Goya was from Zaragoza.
He was born in 1746 in Fuendetodos, 26 miles south of here.
He spent most of his life in Madrid.
And he died in exile in Bordeaux, France, in 1828.
But he began painting -- and frequently returned -- here.
And above all, Zaragoza always claimed him as its own.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Bush: Change and Principle . . .
Television Script (President Bush speaking): "Everyone wants change. America must change. But change must be guided by principle, and there are three basic principles that must lead our quest for change.
"First, we must control wasteful Government spending. That's absolutely essential for the kind of change the American people want.


Midlantic Plans to Raise $113 Million
The Midlantic Corporation, a New Jersey banking company that two years ago was widely expected to collapse from losses on commercial real estate loans, has staved off that fate and yesterday announced plans to raise about $113 million of additional capital.
Most of it will come from overseas investors lined up by Fox-Pitt, Kelton, a securities firm known for its expertise in banking.
Fox-Pitt, which will buy 5.75 million to 6.6 million shares from the company, said about 150 overseas investors had indicated they would buy the stock.
Another one million shares will be sold directly to five American investors, including some Midlantic customers in New Jersey.


Reliance Group Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Roundup; Bald Heads Send Italy an Upsetting Message
The United States men's volleyball team, those guys with the chips on their shoulders and the stubble on their heads, have been talking for most of these Olympics about fighting the power.
They finally got their chance tonight and came out swinging.
And it wasn't the $1-million-a-year professional Steve Timmons or the loud and proud reserve Bob Samuelson who came through.
It was Brent Hilliard, a senior to be at Long Beach State University, who served the final ball that could not be handled, giving the United States a 9-15, 16-14, 15-11, 15-13 upset of Italy, the defending World Cup champion and the gold- medal favorite.


U.S. Panel Urges Phaseout of Anti-Communist Broadcasts
Joining a debate on the future of Government broadcasting overseas that began with the end of the cold war, a Presidential commission called today for the phasing out of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, and the scuttling of a proposal to create a Radio Free China on the same model.
Proposals that the United States begin beaming news and propaganda to China -- and possibly to Vietnam and North Korea -- are now being considered by Congress, where old alignments on the issue of foreign broadcasts have been reversed.


Ambac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


El Paso Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A.
Alfred Taubman's shopping mall empire plans to go public to raise $335 million to $389 million.
Investors would get a 22 percent stake in 19 large shopping malls from California to Connecticut, and Mr.
Taubman, who also controls Sotheby's Holdings, would be freed of hundreds of millions of dollars of personal debt.  [ D1. ]  Whether he is discussing Monets or malls, Mr.
Taubman is a gifted salesman who enjoys a lavish style of living.  [ D1. ]
Carl C. Icahn would step down as T.W.A. chairman under a deal being negotiating for the carrier's unionized employees and creditors to buy him out.
Analysts saw short-term relief for the bankrupt carrier, but it would be left with an aging fleet and ill-positioned to compete.
Mr.
Icahn stands to lose up to $100 million.  [ D1. ]
Bidding escalated for LTV's missiles and aerospace unit.
Martin Marietta offered $440 million and Loral $445 million.  [ D4. ]
Borland's Quattro Pro spreadsheet is being shipped without Lotus 1-2-3-style command menus, following a copyright infringement ruling.
But any damages await a trial by jury.  [ D4. ]
Midlantic plans to raise about $113 million of additional capital from overseas investors and from a direct sale by the New Jersey bank to five American investors.  [ D4. ]
Chipwich filed for bankruptcy protection.
The New York maker of chocolate-chip-cookie ice cream sandwiches cited inventory overstatements by its Peltz Food division.  [ D4. ]
David Paul should be fined $3 million for violating a cease and desist order related to the collapse of Centrust Savings and Loan, Federal regulators said in a hearing in Miami.  [ D5. ]
New England Electric has a new approach to recaputuring the carbon dioxide that plants pump into the atmosphere.
The utility plans to pay lumber companies to work more gently.  [ D4. ] The Economy
An outlay of $550 million for the superconducting supercollider next year was voted by the Senate, weeks after the House rejected the $8.2 billion proton smasher as unaffordable.  [ A11. ]
The purchasing managers' index of economic activity rose to 54.2 in July from 52.8 in June, which economists said suggested that any economic upturn would be slow.  [ D10. ]
Construction activity in June fell 1.5 percent, to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $416.9 billion, the worst decline in 13 months, largely because of a sharp drop in government spending.  [ D10. ] International
An obscure dispute involving Canada's apparel industry has resulted in slow progress on the final details of a planned North American free-trade agreement, but talks are continuing.  [ D2. ]
Turkish business travelers are finding Central Asia has no money for the trade they would like to develop.  [ D10. ] Markets
The Dow Jones industrial average added 1.62 points, to 3,395.40, and advancing stocks outnumbered decliners.  [ D6. ]  Trading was quiet in the bond market, as traders awaited Friday's unemployment report for July and next week's Treasury auction.  [ D14. ]
Hog and pork belly futures prices shot up after President Bush offered to sell 30,000 metric tons of United States pork to the former Soviet republics at subsidized prices.  [ D15. ]  The dollar was mixed against most currencies, and gold prices dropped sharply.  [ D15. ] Today's Columns
Individual states may serve as laboratories for an eventual national program to deal with the problems of high health-care costs.
Milt Freudenheim: Business and Health.  [ D2. ]
A Prudential short-term bond fund has performed very well, and yet its assets have plunged.
The apparent reason: Brokers are not promoting it.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]
Philosophers may debate illusion and reality, but to Madison Avenue a faux Olympian can be as good as a gold medal winner.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D16. ]


Shuttle Moves Lower For Key Experiment
The space shuttle Atlantis dropped into a lower orbit today to get in position for the mission's most critical operation, flying a half-ton Italian satellite on the end of a 12-mile cable.
The international crew of astronauts spent the day checking equipment for the complex experiment, and flight controllers said everything appeared ready to reel out the satellite from the shuttle, beginning at 2:20 P.M. on Tuesday.


Vernitron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cigna Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Observer; Mister Iron Pants
"Life at the Top," scenarios on a single theme: Scenario One: Bird Feathers
Summoned to the Oval Office, Dan Quayle sees a big dead bird on the President's desk.
Bush: "Do you know what this is, Dan?"
Sensing that the President wants to tell him, Quayle stifles the impulse to say, "Could it be a big dead bird?" and, instead, says, "No, sir. What is it?"


Bridge
One of the most exciting finals in the 58-year history of the Spingold Knockout Team Championship ended here in the small hours of this morning, concluding the Summer Nationals of the American Contract Bridge League.
The winners were Ron Rubin of Manhattan, Michael Becker of Teaneck, N.J., Peter Weichsel of Encinitas, Calif., Bob Levin of Aventura, Fla., Ron Sukoneck of Annandale, Va., and Russ Ekeblad of Providence, R.I., who thus qualify for playoffs next June that will determine the United States representatives in the subsequent world championships in Chile.


BARCELONA: Basketball; This Time, U.S. Women Pummel Spain
Minutes from the conclusion of a 55-point rout of the home country, the United States women's basketball team still would not let the ballhandler out of the backcourt without facing a trap.
Why?
Because, as point guard Suzie McConnell explained, Coach Theresa Grentz tends to repeat herself at practices and during timeouts.
"Her slogan is, 'Take no prisoners,' " McConnell said after a 114-59 trouncing of Spain set a United States women's scoring record for the second time in five days and sent the 3-0 Americans into the Olympic semifinals Wednesday against the Unified Team, with Cuba meeting China in the other bracket.


New Tool Is Developed for Manipulating Genes of Organisms
BY selectively breeding molecules, a California laboratory has created a new tool for manipulating the genes of living organisms.
The achievement, which is reported in the current issue of the journal Science, might one day yield new weapons against a variety of human diseases, including AIDS.
The technique developed at the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif., by Dr.
Gerald F. Joyce and his colleagues mimics natural evolutionary processes by subjecting test-tube solutions of genetic molecules to the same kinds of conditions that produce new animal species.


Mutual Assurance Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CREDIT MARKETS;
Among the relatively few tax-exempt bond issues priced yesterday was a $51.7 million regional airport revenue bond issue by Dallas-Fort Worth, through underwriters led by Apex Securities.
The bonds were tentatively priced with a maximum yield of 6.2 percent for an issue due to mature in 2024, while another long-maturity bond, due 2012, was priced to yield 6.15 percent.


Notch Babies Threaten Real Babies
This is a sordid tale of two babies.
The first is abused and neglected, living in poverty.
The second is a "notch" baby, a retiree born between 1917 and 1921 who claims that Congress has cheated on Social Security benefits.
Today, notch babies turn viciously on real babies in an unconscionable attempt to get what's unrightfully theirs.
The battleground is the House floor.
At stake is a laudable children's initiative that would provide funds for troubled families, foster care and adoption.
Standing in the way are supporters of the notch babies, who plan to propose that the children's bill be amended to increase Social Security benefits.
But if the notch babies win, real babies lose: The expensive amendments would make eventual passage virtually impossible.


Summer Books for Computer Nerds
TANNING on the beach with a cheap novel has joined the list of fun things that are considered hazardous to your health.
This is good news for hard-core computer users, since it is now considered fashionable to maintain a pasty pallor and to wear socks with sandals.
In other words, looking like a computer nerd is hip.
Bill Blass is out, Bill Gates is in.
A good computer book can enhance the image when you are sitting under the beach umbrella, sipping a Jolt cola and poking your toes into the sand, which is, after all, the raw material for silicon chips.
Luckily, this summer's array of computer books is quite good.


Venturian Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Bistro Owner, a Long Day's Journey Into Dinner
IT makes Jean-Francois Fraysse discombobulated when it's already 9 in the morning and he hasn't bought one radish.
Imagine now.
It was almost 10 and no item of food had been bought.
"O.K., O.K., O.K.," he muttered with an incisory smile.
"What is wrong with me? We must buy, buy, buy."
Settled into his metallic blue van, Mr.
Fraysse -- the owner, chef and moving spirit of La Lunchonette, a small French bistro in Chelsea -- pulled up outside Akiyama Inc. on Little West 12th Street in Greenwich Village on a recent Wednesday to begin his shopping for a few hundred people.
Mostly catering to Korean restaurants and groceries, Akiyama makes an exception and sells to one French chef.


Statehood Would Make Capital Overprivileged; Ultimate Welfare State
To the Editor:
"The State of Misgovernment" (editorial, July 21) pleads the case for District of Columbia statehood based on autonomy and population density.
Autonomy for a municipality is one thing, but statehood for a city equal in area to Brooklyn but with only one-quarter its population is another.


The Pop Life; Good Things Happen to Lollapalooza
Seven bands, 10 political and environmental booths, a circus sideshow, 22,000 tickets sold in one hour, loads of police officers and two nine-hour shows: It's the second round of the Lollapalooza tour, called Lollapalooza '92, and it's rumbling into Jones Beach Theater on Sunday and Tuesday.
Don't bother trying to get tickets.
They've been gone since June 11, the day they went on sale.
The tour, the offspring of last year's Lollapalooza, is meant, like its predecessor, to expose the world to the sounds of alternative music, of bands that aren't usually heard on radio.
The difference this year is that two of the bands, Pearl Jam and Red Hot Chili Peppers, have top-10 albums.
Where last year's tour, with Jane's Addiction as the headliners, sold about a half-million tickets, this one, featuring Lush, Pearl Jam, Jesus and the Mary Chain, Soundgarden, Ice Cube, Ministry and the Red Hot Chili Peppers, is meant to sell 750,000.


Los Angeles Journal; Riot Leveled a Font of Black Culture
Fifty years of accumulated wisdom burned with the Aquarian Bookshop, one of the nation's oldest black-owned bookstores, and its owner, considering its loss, has come to the conclusion that there is no lesson to be learned from the Los Angeles riot.
On a final visit to the ashes of his bookstore in search of some memento of his half-century of labor, the owner, Dr.
Alfred Ligon, found only one water-damaged magazine to take away with him, a copy of a socialist publication he had never cared to read.


Review/Jazz; A New Voice Aspires To Sarah Vaughan's Style
One reason why so few singers are capable of carrying on the pop-jazz vocal tradition of Ella Fitzgerald, Sarah Vaughan and Billie Holiday is that there is no longer a big-band network to nurture and support them.
Yet vocalists who aspire to that lineage still keep popping up, the latest being Nnenna Freelon, a protegee of the pianist and educator Ellis Marsalis.
Ms.
Freelon recently released her debut album on Columbia Records, and on Monday she opened a series of five consecutive Monday-evening concerts at the Blue Note.
Each concert will feature a different rising young jazz performer on the Columbia roster.
Ms.
Freelon has a smooth, fairly light-textured voice that she wields with a polished self-assurance.
Her intonation is clear and even, her pitch secure and her phrasing supple.
The upper register of her voice is unusually bright and sunny.


Griffin Lands Blows But Loses His Bout
Montell Griffin seemed so terribly close to fulfilling his dream.
After being held at bay by an opponent who was nearly 7 inches taller, Griffin finally got inside Torsten May's defense early in the third and final round.
With 2 minute 28 seconds left, he rocked May with a hard left to the head, then snapped May's head back with a short uppercut.
With 2:06 left, he opened a gash over the German fighter's right eye.
When the referee halted the light-heavyweight quarterfinal fight to have a doctor examine May's eye, Griffin shouted, "Yeah, Yeah," anticipating that the fight would be stopped.


Reducing Casualties in the Abortion Battle
The struggle over when and whether abortion should remain a legal choice for American women seems likely to rage on for years, and while people of good will struggle over their polarized views, what should be a vital common ground may continue to be neglected.
Whatever else the abortion adversaries believe, most of them would also agree that there are entirely too many abortions in this country.
Of the six million pregnancies in the United States every year, more than half are unplanned; more than a quarter -- 1.5 million -- end in abortion.
That's a rate higher than for any other industrialized Western nation.


Too-Bitter Medicine; White House's Rebuff of Oregon Plan Shows Uneasiness on Rationing Care
The Bush Administration's surprising rejection this week of Oregon's innovative proposal to set priorities for health-care spending strongly suggests that Americans are not ready to ration care systematically.
Rather, they still prefer to ration care case by case, through myriad decisions made by thousands of individuals, employers, insurers and Federal and state legislators.


Music in Review
Mostly Mozart
Avery Fisher Hall
Friday's Mostly Mozart concert offered the festival's namesake in his noble and easy-listening modes, and then threw in an item of curiosity to knock this otherwise predictable program off its rails.
The last was a symphony by Haydn, nicknamed "Il Distratto," and, at No. 60, standing somewhere in the middle of his symphonic output.
In this six-movement piece, Haydn the extravagant Sturm-und-Dranger and Haydn the humorist collide.
The wit of "Il Distratto" originated in incidental music for a popular comedy by Jean Francois Regnard.
Haydn has created a rococo approximation of slapstick, one far different from the sly surprises he plants throughout the later symphonies.
The beginnings of "Il Distratto" are notable for their violent alternation of very loud and very soft and also for phrases and sequential patterns that go on too long.


Statehood Would Make Capital Overprivileged
To the Editor:
In "The State of Misgovernment" (editorial, July 21), you endorse statehood for the District of Columbia without examining the constitutional, legal and practical problems.
Every Justice Department since the Kennedy Administration to testify on the issue has maintained that statehood for the nation's capital requires a constitutional amendment.
Robert Kennedy and Patricia Wald (a Carter appointee to the Federal Court of Appeals) have testified that statehood requires a constitutional amendment.
The plea for democracy by statehood proponents does not include the right of 250 million Americans to participate in the democratic process of amending the Constitution.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  MEDIATION SOUGHT IN SCHOOL TALKS
Trying to accelerate contract talks that have been stalled for almost a year, Sandra Feldman, the president of the New York City schoolteachers' union, formally declared that the negotiations were at an impasse and asked a mediator to step in.
Her move is aimed at putting pressure on Mayor Dinkins and the Board of Education to offer more substantial wage proposals.
B3.
QUESTIONS ON ABORTED TAKEOFF
Pilots are usually trained to continue flying, not to abort a takeoff, in conditions like those that led to the fiery accident at Kennedy International Airport last week, and many aviation experts are puzzled by the decision of the pilot to abort the takeoff of Trans World Airlines Flight 848.
B3.
PROSECUTOR QUITS CASE


Cuomo Is Urged to Remove Nassau Clerk Over Backlog
Estimating that his town was $4 million to $5 million short in mortgage-tax revenues because of backlogs at the Nassau County Clerk's office, a town supervisor today called on the Governor to remove the County Clerk, Harold W. McConnell, from office.
"The time it takes to get mortgages, deeds and judgments recorded is rapidly getting worse and worse instead of better," said Ben Zwirn, a Democrat and the Supervisor of North Hempstead.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the real estate developer A. Alfred Taubman misstated the name of a former co-owner of a building at 712 Fifth Avenue in Manhattan in some editions.
It is Solomon Equities.
The article also described the company's financial condition incorrectly.
It has never declared bankruptcy.


Governors Find School Improvements Hard to Sell
Education improvements and the extra money they often require have never been an easy sell to the public.
But the task has become much tougher.
Gov.
Roy Romer of Colorado, who is campaigning for a $300 million tax increase for education in the face of stiff opposition, knows that.
So does Gov.
John Ashcroft of Missouri, where a proposition calling for changes in schools and $385 million in new taxes to initiate them was defeated by voters last November.
So do governors in Oklahoma and Nebraska, where citizen-led initiatives on the ballot the last two years tried to rescind education legislation.


Bridge
A rare back-to-back double was recorded during the weekend in the closing stages of the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals in Toronto.
Juanita Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., and Marinesa Letizia of Bloomington, Ind., won the Women's Knockout Teams Friday night, then captured the Master Mixed Team title 48 hours later.
In the Mixed Teams the other winners were Beth Palmer of Silver Spring, Md., Dennis Clerkin of Bloomington, Ind., Michael Lawrence of Berkeley, Calif., and Gabriel Chagas of Brazil.
Five Grueling Days
The winning Women's Knockout team, which included Janice Seamon of North Miami and Cheri Bjerkan of Elmhurst, Ill., played 64 deals a day for five days without alternates, a grueling test of stamina.
On the diagramed deal Chambers as South landed in four hearts after an auction in which she and her partner, Letizia, kept attempting to defer to the other.
The two doubles were attempts to persuade partner to choose a major-suit contract.
The cue-bid of four diamonds finally prevailed.


INSIDE
Hard Choices on Police Post
The role of community policing and the reality of political pressure confront Mayor David N. Dinkins as he looks for a successor to Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown.
Page B1.
Executives Accused of Theft
Officers of a major discount drug chain, Phar-Mor, were accused of embezzling funds and lying in financial reports.
Page D1.
House Calls Are Back
Pushed by insurers to trim expensive hospital stays, doctors are returning to one of the oldest forms of medical care: house calls.
Page B1.
Czechoslovak Cardinal Dies
Frantisek Cardinal Tomasek, who led a cautious Roman Catholic Church in Czechoslovakia and backed the move to democracy, is dead at 93.
Page B7.


Corrections
A picture on the first page of the The Metro Section yesterday, with an article about Caribbean New Yorkers' summer visits to their homelands, appeared without a caption in some copies.
It showed Juan Gomez, a Dominican native, with his parents in Washington Heights.


New Leaders For Ross Cosmetics
Ross Cosmetics Distribution Centers Inc., a distributor of imitation designer-label perfumes, announced yesterday that its chairman and president, Eugene Derry, had retired and that Michael E. Emery, chief operating officer had resigned.
The company appointed Richard P. Rifenburgh as chairman and said Daniel R. Carter would assume the duties of chief executive and president.


RUSSIANS DEBATING BIG COMPANY DEBT
A plan from the new chairman of the Russian Central Bank to reduce the enormous debt burden carried by state industries has deepened the dispute inside the Government over how sharply to curb deficit spending.
The plan, proposed last week by the chairman, Viktor Gerashchenko, was reportedly the subject of a heated discussion today by top economic officials, the news agency Interfax said.


Sometimes It's Tales That Make The Man
WHO is Kees Eckland-Emerson? A long story.
On June 20 at 4 A.M., a gunman strode into his former home, the Longacre Hotel at 317 West 45th Street, and fired three point-blank shots into the face of Faisel Khanis, the night clerk.
The recent arrival from Kenya left three wives and seven children back home.


Colleges Seeing More Students but Less Money
American higher education is experiencing a boom in demand for its services and a bust in its finances, according to a report from the American Council of Education made public on Monday.
Though a record number of students are enrolled in colleges and universities across the country -- 14.2 million in 1991 -- higher education institutions are having the toughest financial time in a decade.


Drug War's Billions
To the Editor:
Ernest Drucker and Peter Arno, in their July 1 letter, placed the drug war's cost over the last 20 years at $500 billion.
According to Representative Charles B. Rangel, chairman of the House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, the Administration estimates the cost per year at $500 billion, a sum arrived at by adding in the cost of drug-related crime, lost productivity, homelessness, drug-related disease and similar factors.
ROLAND A. PAUL Westport, Conn., July 16, 1992


From an Eagle Scout To Persona Non Grata
In June 1990, James Dale, a former Eagle Scout, was an assistant Scoutmaster and self-described scouting "poster boy," with 30 merit badges and uncounted hours of service to his name.
By that July, Mr. Dale was an ex-Boy Scout.


Executive Changes
ALEX.
BROWN KLEINWORT BENSON REALTY ADVISORS, Baltimore, a joint venture of Alex.
Brown Inc. and Kleinwort Benson Group P.L.C., named Lynn C. Thurber managing director and chief operating officer.
ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA NORTH AMERICA, Chicago, a unit of Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc., named David Van Tosh executive vice president for advertising and marketing.


Feeling Relief at Continental Air
A 1967 Corvette, stripped of its paint and many of its parts, has been gathering dust in a garage at the Houston home of Robert R. Ferguson 3d since late 1990, when Continental Airlines, where Mr.
Ferguson is vice chairman and chief executive, sought bankruptcy protection.
"It looks like a lifetime project," he said referring to his beloved car.


Phar-Mor Says Profit Was Faked
Phar-Mor Inc., a high-flying discount drug chain that recently opened its 301st store, said yesterday that senior executives had embezzled company funds and reported $350 million in nonexistent profits to Phar-Mor's owners, banks and other creditors over the last three years.
Phar-Mor said that Michael I. Monus, 43 years old, a company co-founder and professional sports team executive who was dismissed as president last week, had also "diverted company funds for his own use."


New York City Unit Prices $1.24 Billion Bond Offering
New York City's Municipal Water Finance Authority dominated the tax-exempt bond market yesterday.
It tentatively priced $1.24 billion of water and sewer system revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.3 percent for an issue due in 2017 through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
The bond offering consists of $919.6 million of series A uninsured bonds priced to yield from 3.1 percent in 1993 to 6.15 percent in 2011, with a term bond due in 2020 priced to yield 6.25 percent.


U.S. Women Conquer Overconfidence and the Dutch
The American women's volleyball team went into tonight's Olympic quarterfinals against the Netherlands already thinking about its next game against Cuba and its chances of a medal.
After the first hour, the United States team realized it still had to beat the Dutch team.
With the score tied, 1-1 in sets, however, the American team showed it could turn up the heat at the right moment, with Caren Kemner, the powerful 27-year-old hitter from Quincy, Ill., literally punching holes through the Dutch defense until the result was no longer in doubt.


Honors
*
Robert A. Frankel, managing partner of Robert A. Frankel Management Consultants, Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., was elected to the Fulfillment Hall of Fame by the Fulfillment Management Association Inc., New York.


Chinese Woman First to Test Positive at Games
The first positive drug test of the Olympics, that of a female volleyball player from China, was reported today, with the head of the International Olympic Committee's medical commission suggesting that it was a problem of education rather than intentional cheating.
Prince Alexandre de Merode, chairman of the I.O.C. medical commission, reported that the athlete, Wu Dan, had tested positive for strychnine, which acts as a stimulant when taken in small dosages.
De Merode said Wu's test was done after China's loss to the Netherlands last Friday.
The Chinese were already eliminated from medal contention, but were allowed to play -- without Wu -- against Spain today, a match the Chinese won, 15-1, 15-3, 15-3.


Lenin and the Search for Jewish Roots
To the Editor:
A Russian archival journal and the Lenin Museum recently publicized that Lenin's maternal grandfather was a Jew, while acknowledging that this ancestry of the founder of the Soviet state had been suppressed.
Accordingly, there is already an answer to one question posed in your "Soviet Archives: What Answers Lurk in the Billions of Uncatalogued Pages?" (The Week in Review, July 19).
In the spring 1992 edition of the journal Native Land Archives, a longtime Soviet archivist, V. V. Tsapleen, reports on precise findings in czarist records still held by archives in Russia and Ukraine.


Adventure, Nature and Technology: All for a Quarter
One month after New York City began a test of six new sidewalk toilets, going to the bathroom has become New York's latest tourist attraction.
In an experiment to address the city's severe shortage of public restrooms, the JCDecaux company of Paris opened three of its computer-automated, coin-operated, self-cleaning toilets at sidewalk locations in Manhattan on June 30.
At each site there is also a larger bathroom, intended solely for people in wheelchairs or leg braces.


Dangerous Stalling on Russian Aid
The U.S. wants to propel Russia toward democracy, markets and disarmament.
But you'd never guess that by watching the House toy with the Administration's bill to assist the former Soviet republics.
Proposed in April, the House bill -- whose Senate version passed in early July -- has remained bottled up in committee.
The Russian economy is collapsing, and opposition is mounting to President Boris Yeltsin's pro-market reforms.
Yet the House dallies.
If it delays much longer, there might be no reform Government left to help.


Dinkins Faces Hard Choices On Police Post
As Mayor David N. Dinkins began assembling a panel of experts yesterday to help him search for a new police commissioner, he confronted important questions about the future direction of policing in New York.
First and most significant was whether the idea of putting more officers on the street through community policing, which was the brainchild of the departing Commissioner, Lee P. Brown, would be embraced with the same enthusiasm by Mr.
Brown's successor.


Stop Dreaming, Grentz Tells NBC
While an oversupply of attention envelops the United States men's basketball team, the coach of the United States women's team was seething today after she learned that NBC would not show her squad's gold-medal game in prime-time Friday night.
"I can't believe it," said Theresa Grentz, whose team routed its three opponents by an average of 49 points in the preliminary round and will face the Unified Team in the semifinals on Wednesday with Cuba facing China in the other bracket.


IRAQ FOOD IMPORTS ARE SAID TO DROP
Iraq's imports of basic foods like rice, sugar, cooking oil and tea have fallen sharply in recent weeks, say Government officials here and private traders in the Jordanian capital who traditionally handle most of that country's import needs.
Iraqi merchants have virtually ceased placing new orders here for some weeks now, their Jordanian counterparts say, apparently because of the disruption caused by a more than 50 percent fall in the value of the Iraqi dinar last month and after Baghdad executed some 40 merchants it had accused of profiteering.


Water Bonds By California
The Southern California Metropolitan Water District tentatively priced $550 million of water revenue bonds yesterday through Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, to yield a maximum 6.03 percent for an issue due in 2018.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities were priced to yield from 4 percent in 1995 to 4.6 percent in 1997, 5.3 percent in 2002 and 5.8 percent in 2007.


3 Countries Move Closer to Free-Trade Pact
Canada, Mexico and the United States made steady progress today toward agreement on a North American free-trade accord, pushing to fashion a single broad compromise on a short list of small but politically touchy differences.
The final step is likely to come this week, possibly as soon as Wednesday morning but more likely on Thursday or Friday, people involved in the negotiations said.
Differences on all of the remaining sticking points in the negotiations, including the contentious issues of trade in automobiles, energy and textiles, were narrowing.


Food Notes
A World of Fancy Food
This summer's Fancy Food and Confection Show, a trade show held last week in Washington, was testimony to the continuing interest in salsas, spicy foods, olive oils, biscotti, foods that suggest the Mediterranean and so-called sugar-free preserves that are sweetened with fruit sugar instead of cane sugar.
But there was also some news.
Condiments are chunkier this year.
Olive and other oils are showing up with flavorings like garlic, chili and herbs.
Olives themselves appear in increasing abundance, in wide varieties and as ingredients in condiments.
And Greek foods were more evident than before.


Cardinal Tomasek Is Dead; Cautious Prague Prelate, 93
Frantisek Cardinal Tomasek, who crowned three decades of resolute but cautious leadership of the Roman Catholic Church in Czechoslovakia by publicly encouraging the "Velvet Revolution," died yesterday.
He was 93 years old.
Cardinal Tomasek died of heart failure complicated by pneumonia, the state news agency reported.


Rafe Blasi, 55, Writer And Movie Executive
Rafe Blasi, a writer, an editor and a motion picture executive, died on Sunday at the Terence Cardinal Cooke Health Care Center in Manhattan.
He was 55 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Public &amp; Private; Smoking And Politics
It is both quite simple and somehow difficult to write about cigarette smoking.
The simple part is this: Smoking kills.
Cigarettes are, as Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, once said, "the only legal product that when used as intended cause death." It is lung cancer, not breast cancer, that is now the number one cancer killer of American women.
"Smoking is associated with more death and illness than drugs, alcohol, automobile accidents and AIDS combined."
That last is from the memoirs of C. Everett Koop, who as Surgeon General did more to promote a smoke-free America than anyone.


Dream Team Defended, Victorious
The war of words between the United States Olympic Committee and its basketball team escalated tonight with a bit of international intrigue.
Boris Stankovic, the executive director of the international basketball association, the world's governing basketball body, defended the Dream Team and said its critics were "jealous of the attention" it has received at the Games.


Honda Roof Can Go Topless Without Taxing One's Back
Since the earliest days of driving, automotive engineers have tried to enhance driving pleasure by finding devices that let fair weather into a vehicle and keep foul weather out.
Some of the latest innovations in open-air driving are incorporated in the Honda Civic del Sol two-seat roadster, which is being introduced in the United States on Wednesday.
The 1993 del Sol, a successor to the CRX hatchback, features a removable roof panel that stores in the car's trunk.


Mets' Act III Of Season Is Panned In Pittsburgh
The manager set the scene before the game started.
"We have to make a stand," said Jeff Torborg, the manager of the Mets.


Fighter Jet Project Suspended
The defense ministers of Britain, Germany, Italy, and Spain agreed today to suspend development of a European fighter aircraft pending a three-month technical and military study.
The countries had indicated that they would withdraw from the joint venture to build the plane, which was designed for combat against a Soviet enemy, unless costs could be cut by as much as 30 percent.
The countries agreed to halt all new contracts until after the study.


SATELLITE'S TETHER JAMS IN LAUNCHING BY SHUTTLE CREW
Stymied first by one thing and then by another, the astronauts of the space shuttle Atlantis finally deployed a half-ton satellite yesterday on the end of a long, thin cable, only to watch in frustration as the cable snagged three times.
Attempts to unsnag the cable were unsuccessful, and operations were suspended for the night at 11:45.
The problems prompted the extension of the mission by a day, until Saturday.


In Chicago, a Model Farm School
Jason Zeigler's summer school assignments include breeding fish, learning to groom a dog and raising vegetables in a small garden set in one of the fields surrounding his high school.
Jason, who is 15 years old and lives on Chicago's South Side, had not spent much time around animals, much less in a vegetable garden, until he started high school two years ago.


July Vehicle Sales Off a Bit After Slump Late in Month
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks fell 3.9 percent in late July, but sales for the entire month stayed close to the gradual rate of recovery that began in the spring, according to statistics released today.
In late July, 397,546 domestically built vehicles were sold, based on the daily selling rate.
Cars were down 5.1 percent, to 248,053; light trucks were off 2 percent, to 149,493.
There were 10 selling days in the latest period, compared with 9 last year; percentage changes are based on the daily selling rate.


Dr. Zalmen Arlin, 47, Specialist in Leukemia
Dr.
Zalmen A. Arlin, a specialist in the treatment of leukemia and lymphoma, died on Monday at Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y.
He was 47 years old and lived in Pleasantville, N.Y.
A spokeswoman at New York Medical College in Valhalla, where Dr.
Arlin was a professor of medicine, said he died of a brain tumor.


Akwana Journal; Dawn Brings Death: One More Day of Ethnic War
They came at dawn, summoning the villagers from their huts, the old man said.
Some used bows and arrows, some machetes and spears, and others automatic weapons, which they fired at point-blank range.
They killed and wounded dozens.
But the old man managed to escape into the bush, and for a moment, despite the devastation, thought himself lucky.


BARCELONA
GOLD MEDAL RESTORED
Khalid Skah of Morocco, disqualified Monday, was restored as 10,000-meter gold medalist.
EXPORTER OF COACHES
Long an importer of athletic advisers, Cuba is now sending coaches to other countries.
PERFECT, AND PAINFUL
China's Sun Shuwei earned several 10's in diving, but a failed plunge drew most of the gasps.
SportsWednesday, page B11.


Corrections
A chart in some editions yesterday listing New York City officials who have left the Dinkins administration, and others who remain, referred incorrectly to three appointees.
Sally B. Hernandez-Pinero is now chairwoman of the Housing Authority, not Housing Commissioner.


No Headline
"This office regards President Reagan as simply a witness and not as a subject or target." -- LAWRENCE E. WALSH, the Iran-contra prosecutor.  [ A1:4. ]


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press yesterday about French policy toward the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty misstated the latest action.
France formally submitted its adherence to the treaty; it was signed by President Francois Mitterrand on July 1, and France has long pledged to abide by it.


Novel Math Workshops Boost Minority Students
Calculus classes would not seem to be a likely remedy for confusion or alienation, but they could be providing exactly that, a study recently completed in California has found.
Workshops that were started to help minority students with their college calculus not only helped raise their grade-point averages by almost a full grade but also helped keep them in college, the study found.


Review/Music; 2 Ways With Chicago Jazz: Updated and by the Book
There was a surprising amount of variety in the program of Chicago jazz that concluded the eighth annual Jazz in July festival at the 92d Street Y on Thursday.
The term Chicago jazz basically refers to the music played by teen-age white musicians inspired by the black musicians from New Orleans who strutted into Chicago in the 1920's.
A 1927 recording session organized by Eddie Condon provided the first permanent display of the raw, nervous energy of these young musicians, most of whom had more enthusiasm than polish.
A group led by the clarinetist Kenny Davern gave a contemporary treatment in the Chicago manner to tunes favored by the Chicago jazzmen of more than 60 years ago, tunes like "Jazz Me Blues," "Baby, Won't You Please Come Home" and "There'll Be Some Changes Made." As a contrast, the Frank Teschemacher Celebration Band, organized by Dick Hyman, played Mr.
Hyman's note-by-note transcriptions of 1927 and 1928 records that established Chicago jazz.


Statehood Would Make Capital Overprivileged; Oz on the Potomac
To the Editor:
"The State of Misgovernment" (editorial, July 21) reaches a conclusion that is arguable.
Statehood for the District of Columbia could produce a state of Oz on the Potomac.
"Representative" Eleanor Holmes Norton did not speak to the Demo cratic Convention.
Delegate Norton did so.
She is the third (and the second in this century) from the District to hold that post in the House of Representatives.
She can vote in committees, but not on the floor.


U.S. PLAN FOR IRAQ IN 1990 REVEALED
The United States Central Command, which led the military effort to evict Iraqi forces from Kuwait, proposed a military training and exchange program with Iraqi forces eight months before they invaded the Persian Gulf emirate, according to Government documents.
Under the modest plan, President Saddam Hussein's personal aircraft would have been outfitted with equipment designed to make it less vulnerable to attack by heat-seeking missiles and the Iraqi military would have been trained in disabling mines and in aerial reconnaissance.


Books of The Times; Living, and Then Dying, for His Work
Driven Patriot The Life and Times of James Forrestal By Townsend Hoopes and Douglas Brinkley Illustrated. 587 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


What America Owes the Ex-Soviet Union
Twice before in this century, America was summoned to international leadership.
After World War I, we ignored the summons, and we and the world paid dearly.
After World War II, wiser from experience with depression and dictatorship, we heeded the call to leadership and created the democratic coalition that won the cold war.
Today, America is summoned again, this time to secure a democratic peace with Russia, Ukraine and the other new independent states of the former Soviet Union.
As President Bush said, "Democrats in the Kremlin can assure our security in a way nuclear missiles never could." The House of Representatives, by passing the Freedom Support Act, can help those democrats -- and help America, too.


Smog-Plagued States Sign Ozone Agreement
The governors of 12 Northeastern and mid-Atlantic states and the Mayor of the District of Columbia agreed today to a regional plan to help their governments meet new Federal laws on ozone pollution.
"The failure to deal with these environmental concerns is going to result in economic chaos," said Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey.


If Hidden Depression Is Halted, Patients May Get Better Faster
CITING new studies showing that depression in medical patients can make their illnesses worse, psychiatrists are calling for a special effort by physicians to identify and treat depression.
That is difficult, the psychiatrists say, because many symptoms of depression, like loss of appetite and lethargy, can be mistaken for signs of other disease, and most physicians are not well trained in diagnosing depression.


Metropolitan Diary
BOYHOOD BASEBALL (CIRCA 1959)
At bat, in bed, beneath the sandlot sky, I would be anyone I could imagine in pinstripes, not pajamas.
At times it might be Mantle knocking one deep into the Bronx or Mays stealing third just a second after Koufax strikes out the side.
And never noticing curfews, only curveballs, I wait for one more hanging knuckler, to hit one last homer, to be a summer star far into the night. -- ROGER GRANET
. . .
Think of music.
Think of Ravel, Beethoven, Dvorak floating on a moonlit night in early August.
Of trembling trees and the truly Great Lawn in Central Park.
Of hand-holding and humming along while Kurt Masur conducts the New York Philharmonic for its first free concert of the summer.
No, better scratch that one.
Think, alas, of forecasts of rain and soggy sighs of disappointment.
Indeed, Monday night's concert came dangerously close to being washed out.
Though the skies cleared by 8 P.M., the threatening hours before then brought a deluge of calls to the Philharmonic's office.
Among the questions thrown its way: "What should I wear if it rains?" "Will there be mosquitoes?" "Will there be more mosquitoes during the first half or second half?"
And this: "Is it raining in Manhattan?"
"No."
"Well, then, why is it raining in Westchester?"
. . .
Dear Diary:
The other day when my express train arrived at the Jackson Heights station, the conductor announced, "This train is now a local, and the local on the other side of the platform is now an express and will leave first."
All the passengers in my car jumped up and dashed across the platform and into the other train.
When we were all aboard, the conductor of the second train shouted to the conductor of the first train: "No! No! You are wrong.
"You
are an express.
You
go first." The two conductors continued arguing over their loudspeakers. Eventually the second one won. "You leave right now!" he commanded triumphantly.
We rushed back into the first train, returning to our reading, dozing, staring.
Once it began moving, I noticed that we had all come back to the same spots we had had: the heavyset fellow standing near the door, the woman sitting beside me.
Everything was exactly the same, as if we hadn't moved.
Others noticed this, too.
"It's like we all had reserved seats," the woman sitting beside me said.
It was too early in the day to try the unfamiliar. -- MINEKO HOJO
. . .
Pumpkin update.
A fortnight ago, a Diary entry noted that would-be tenants in an Upper East Side condo were asked by the board to submit references for their dog, Pumpkin.
Herewith, the board's response to Pumpkin's application.
"Dear Pumpkin:
"While we missed a personal appearance at the transfer committee meeting, we did see your picture and read your impressive references. This resulted in your immediate acceptance, along with your owners.
"Because of your high standard of behavior and pet education, we should like to invite you to be a consultant to the Board on K-9 and other pet matters and problems that may occur from time to time. Unfortunately, a few of your fellow pets are not as well-behaved as you.
"We welcome you and look forward to your acceptance and trust you will contribute meaningful leadership in our building.
"Sincerely, Daniel Collier and Mark Goldsmith, Co-Presidents of the Board."
. . .
Dear Diary:
Most mornings on my way to work I stop at a deli for a large cup of black coffee.
There is a new cashier working there, and she is quite delighted with herself that she remembers what I want before I say anything.
She has also remembered that I do not take sugar.
Consequently, she now says "black and straight" when she places the cup on the counter.
This makes me want to burst into laughter and respond with "No, dear. Just the opposite." -- W. FERRI
. . .
Dear Diary:
I grew up in the early 1930's and never developed a taste for games that required a ball.
Instead, my love was bicycle riding, and when I came to the States in 1934, I brought my passion with me.
Today, almost 60 years later, I still bicycle, now with my wife in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, the site of the 1939 and 1964 World's Fairs.
Our route winds over a bridge that crosses the Long Island Expressway and leads to the crumbled facade of what was once the magnificent Gertrude Ederle pool.
How many people remember Gertrude Ederle?
I think back to the 1939 fair, when the pool featured Billy Rose's Aquacade with Eleanor Holm (or was it Esther Williams?) and her Water Ballet Rockettes.
You had to get to the pool early and wait on a long line if you hoped to get a ticket for the show.
Now it's merely a shell at the edge of a lagoon visited only by pigeons.
Bicycling around the lagoon I recall the Parachute Jump, which was the talk of the town.
People would sit in a gondola and slowly be lifted up to the top of what was the tallest tower at the fair.
The view was spectacular.
Suddenly a parachute would open; slowly, heart-stoppingly, you descended.
To the east is a giant cement hole, formerly a magnificent reflecting pool where after sunset there was a breathtaking fountain display with multicolored floodlights synchronized to music.
The General Motors exhibit, the World of Tomorrow, showed well-laid-out superhighways and parks.
It was grand, but they forgot to include bumper-to-bumper traffic, potholes and graffiti.
At the far end of the park they buried a space capsule that was not to be unearthed for 200 years.
They've got a treat in store.
I wouldn't have missed that summer for the world. -- ERNEST GRAFF


How Escobar, a Rare Jailbird, Lined His Nest
The image of Pablo Escobar lounging on his prison water bed while coordinating shipments of tons of cocaine to the United States on his cellular telephone is not quite accurate, say lawyers who visited the trafficker in his hillside jail here.
First of all, Colombia's wealthiest citizen had to make do with a foam mattress until his water bed was installed last year.
Second, until he received his cellular phone he had only the rustic services of the 50 carrier pigeons in his personal prison aviary.


Saberhagen Not Optimistic
Bret Saberhagen said that if the Mets were not clearly in the hunt in the National League East when he is eligible to come off the disabled list, the team should consider ending his 1992 season.
"It all depends how we are situated when I'm capable of coming back," said Saberhagen.
"It well might be in the club's best interest for me not to push it."


Wang Hongwen Dies in Beijing; A Member of the 'Gang of Four'
Wang Hongwen, a former deputy chairman of the Chinese Communist Party and one of the "Gang of Four" who presided over the frenzied Cultural Revolution, died on Monday, the official New China News Agency reported today.
The report said he was 58 years old, but other accounts suggest he may have been 56 or 57.
The agency said he died of a liver ailment.


The Sleaze Factor
Mary Matalin's snarling press release attacking Gov.
Bill Clinton -- it referred, among other things, to "bimbo eruptions" plaguing the Clinton campaign -- is said to have embarrassed President Bush.
As well it should.
Ms.
Matalin's broadside defied Mr.
Bush's admonition to his staff to avoid personal invective.
And it deflected public attention from his effort to start talking aggressively about issues.
Despite Mr.
Bush's disavowal of Ms.
Matalin's comments, issued through an aide, questions linger.
Was Ms.
Matalin engaging in the political tactic known as "surrogate sleaze" -- carrying out an authorized attack for which Mr.
Bush could later deny responsibility?
After all, Ms.
Matalin, as deputy campaign manager, is no small potato in the Bush re-election effort and is presumably in regular consultation with the White House.


China and U.S. Divers Make Different Splashes
The men's 10-meter platform diving competition teetered today between moments of sublime perfection and frightening failure.
A disastrous plunge that will make the year's highlight films showed the possibility of what happens to a dive out of control from three stories up.


Baseball Team Is Not Affected
The Colorado Rockies said yesterday that the withdrawal of Michael I. Monus and his father, Nathan, as owners of the new Major League Baseball franchise in Denver would not affect the club's plans to begin playing next year.
Michael Monus withdrew as an owner Monday after charges that he and another senior executive had embezzled funds and falsified profits at Phar-Mor Inc., a drugstore chain based in Youngstown, Ohio, he helped found.
He and his father and three other general partners had put up $26 million of the Rockies' $95 million franchise fee.
Much of the rest came from eight limited partners.


Book Notes
Reversal on Rushdie
Naguib Mahfouz, the Egyptian novelist who won the 1988 Nobel Prize in Literature, sharply criticizes Salman Rushdie in an interview in the current issue of The Paris Review, saying that he found parts of "The Satanic Verses" to be unacceptable and that Mr.
Rushdie invited the wrath of Islamic believers by insulting their prophet in his novel.
The pointed attack was surprising because Mr.
Mahfouz at first defended Mr.
Rushdie when Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini condemned "The Satanic Verses" as blasphemous to Islam in February 1989 and offered a multi-million-dollar reward for its author's execution.
Mr.
Rushdie has been living in hiding under elaborate and heavy security ever since, rarely venturing into public.


U.N. Is Assailed As Slow to Stop Iraqi Defiance
The official charged with disarming Iraq under the terms of the Persian Gulf war cease-fire criticized the Security Council today for a "somewhat slow" response to Iraq's treatment of arms inspectors in Baghdad last month.
Rolf Ekeus, executive chairman of the United Nations committee responsible for scrapping Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, said the Iraqis may have made off with valuable information on their missile program during the 17 days in which they barred United Nations inspectors from the Ministry of Agriculture in Baghdad.


One Healthy Average For Ailing Van Slyke
The way Andy Van Slyke sees it, the only way the Pirates lost control of first place in the National League East was alphabetically.
When Montreal pulled even with Pittsburgh for one day last week, it was the first time this season -- the first time, really, since the Mets challenged the Pirates in midseason of 1990 -- that Van Slyke picked up a newspaper and didn't see the word "Pittsburgh" at the top of the division listings.


Papers Woo Long-Term Subscribers
For newspapers, keeping subscribers has proved even more frustrating than getting them, and a budding trend within the industry is to reward customers for buying long-term subscriptions by giving them cards entitling them to discounts at a wide array of local businesses.
In Tucson, The Arizona Daily Star and The Tucson Citizen call their version the Extra Card, which is a credit-card-sized piece of plastic that can be presented for a discount at restaurants and other participating businesses.


CHRONICLE
Once again the mystery surrounding the filming of a WOODY ALLEN movie has been punctured, with the disclosure yesterday that Mr.
Allen's 22d production is entitled "Husbands and Wives."
Actually, the mythology about how Allen movies acquire their titles exceeds the reality, said ROBERT GREENHUT, producer of "Husbands and Wives," who has been involved in 17 other Allen movies.


Security Council Demands Access for Red Cross to Yugoslav Camps
Prodded by the United States and other members, the Security Council demanded today that the International Red Cross and other neutral agencies be granted access to camps, prisons and detention centers throughout the former territory of Yugoslavia.
The council's demands were made in the form of a Presidential Statement and came after reports that both sides in the civil war, but particularly the Serbs, are mistreating, even torturing and killing detainees.


Pasta With Potatoes Is Filling, Not Fattening
THIS one-dish meal is heavy on the carbohydrates, but for anyone who still thinks potatoes, bread, pasta and the like are fattening, this is as good a time as any to say that carbohydrates and protein contain an equal number of calories per gram -- four.
Fat contains nine calories per gram.


Japanese-Americans: Justice Delayed
Two years ago Japanese-Americans started to receive checks for $20,000 to compensate for their internment in United States relocation camps during World War II.
So far 50,000 have been paid.
Some of the remaining 25,000 may never receive checks unless Congress steps in to remedy an actuarial mistake.
In 1942 President Roosevelt shamefully incarcerated 120,000 Japanese-Americans in the mistaken belief that they posed a security threat.
It was not until 1988, after many had died, that Congress authorized a formal apology and payment for each living victim.


D'Amato Questions Rockefeller Petitions
Supporters of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato charged yesterday that more than half the 10,774 petition signatures filed by his would-be rival, Larry Rockefeller, were invalid, which would leave Mr.
Rockefeller far short of the 10,000 signatures needed to force a Republican primary.
At the same time, Mr.
Rockefeller's lawyers prepared a Federal civil-rights suit, to be filed in District Court in Manhattan today, alleging that the state's truncated petition-gathering period this year -- due to delays in reapportionment -- had infringed Rockefeller supporters' constitutional rights in promoting a candidate of their choice.


Cubans Show U.S. How to Play the Game
Cuba and the United States tonight made up for the inartistic stinker of a ball game they played in a preliminary-round match last week.
This time Cuba turned in a 6-1 victory in the semifinal round of the Summer Games tournament.
On Wednesday, in the first official gold-medal baseball game ever held in the Olympic Games, Cuba will play Taiwan, which defeated Japan, 5-2, earlier today.
The United States will play Japan for third place.


Clash of the Titans: Kurlovich Takes On Alekseyev
The world's strongest man, Aleksandr Kurlovich, had opinions tonight to match his biceps.
Minutes after receiving his Olympic gold medal for lifting a total of 992 pounds in the snatch (452 pounds) and jerk (540), super heavyweight Kurlovich called the legendary Vasily Alekseyev "a dictator," charging that the head of the Unified Team Weightlifting Federation had excluded top athletes on a whim.


Shellfire Hits Sarajevo Funeral for Slain Children
At 10 A.M. today, Ruza Glavas put a wreath of white daisies on the grave of her 2-year-old granddaughter, Vedrana, who was one of two children killed when Serbian gunners opened fire on Saturday evening on a bus evacuating children from a Sarajevo orphanage.
Moments after Mrs.
Glavas settled the flowers on the fresh earth, the Serbian forces struck again.
This time it was with a mortar shell, and Mrs.
Glavas, who is 55 years old, fell to the grassy slope beside the grave.
She was rushed to the trauma clinic of the Kosevo Hospital, where doctors were unsure whether her severely wounded right arm would have to be amputated.


More Doctors Go Where the Patients Are: Home; With Hospital Stays Reduced, Many Physicians See Renewed Need for House Calls
Doctors in the New York region and throughout the nation are once again turning to one of the oldest forms of medical care: house calls.
Pushed by insurance companies looking for ways to cut down on expensive hospital stays, they are climbing stairs to take the blood pressure of elderly patients too weak to make office visits, or dropping in on mentally ill patients who might not keep a regular appointment.


Experts Puzzled by Decision to Abort T.W.A. Takeoff
Pilots are usually trained to continue flying, not to abort a takeoff, in conditions like those that led to a fiery accident at Kennedy International Airport last week, and many aviation experts are puzzled by the decision to abort the takeoff of Trans World Airlines Flight 848.
William Kinkead, the veteran pilot of the T.W.A. jet that burned on the runway last Thursday, decided to abort the flight when the plane's instruments warned that it might be about to lose the aerodynamic lift needed to remain airborne.
He and others in the cockpit have also said they had a vague feeling that the plane was not flying properly.


Shifting a Bike With Centrifugal Force
For every would-be cyclist who has fought a losing battle to master shifting a user-hostile 10-speed, a Canadian company has an answer: an automatic transmission.
Instead of requiring the rider to use a shift lever to operate the derailleur that moves the chain from gear to gear, the Dugil Automatic Derailleur uses the reliable principle of centrifugal force to shift among its speeds.


Don't Like the Sponsor? Just Zip It
All members of the Dream Team will be there on the medal podium after all, apparently, if the Dream Team is fortunate enough to win medals.
Another controversy has been resolved with the compromise that anyone (Michael Jordan) who has a personal corporate sponsor (Nike) who objects to the team sponsor's name (Reebok) showing on the standard-issue uniform (United States) has the right to obscure what he does not want to show (logo).


Change Is Seen For Mastercard
Mastercard International has declined to comment on a front-page report this week in Adweek that the company would move the creative portion of its $60 million account to Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis from Lintas New York, where it has been since 1987.
Steve Apesos, vice president of marketing and public relations for Mastercard in New York, said on Monday that an announcement was likely today or tomorrow, after a meeting of Mastercard's marketing committee in San Francisco.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, Washington, is offering through various securities dealers $1.7 billion in debentures divided into three maturities.
The 5-year debenture is priced to yield 5.95 percent, or about 18 basis points more than comparable Treasury securities; the 7-year is priced to yield 6.361 percent, or 12 basis points over Treasuries, and the 10-year issue is priced to yield 7.04 percent, or 35 basis points over Treasuries. *
Las Vegas, Nev., is offering $77 million in tax-exempt water improvement and refunding limited-tax general-obligation bonds through Dean Witter Reynolds.
Yields on serial bonds range from 2.8 percent in 1993 to 5.95 percent in 2009, with a term bond due in 2012 priced to yield 6.05 percent.
The bonds are insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corporation.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Weakness in a G.O.P. Citadel Threatens Bush in California
The sunny, deeply conservative political terrain of Orange County has served as the staging ground of Nixonism and the Reagan Revolution.
Now it may prove the Waterloo of the Republican heir of those two Presidents, George Bush.
A deep disaffection over President Bush, from both his right and left, is spreading through this traditional bastion of Republican strength.
The Republican leadership has been shaken by recent polls showing the President trailing the Democratic nominee, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas -- and this in a county where Mr.
Bush whipped Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis four years ago by a 69-to-31-percent margin.
A Change of Heart
The disaffected include Patricia Cox, a longtime resident active in social and charitable affairs who says she has voted Republican since she went for Thomas E. Dewey in his losing race against Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1944.
But as she peered out over Upper Newport Bay from the shady lawn of her large home she declared herself a Clinton backer.


After Long Battle, Cuomo's Jobs Plan Faces Hurdles
Although the state Legislature has passed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's $800 million bond plan to create jobs and improve the state's infrastructure, debate over the proposal is far from over.
Two of the biggest hurdles remain: deciding how the money should be spent and persuading voters to approve the plan in the November election.
The passage of the bond act was a big victory for Mr.
Cuomo, who had made it the centerpiece of his economic development program this legislative session and who had feared just a month ago that the measure was dead.
Its passage last week prompted the Governor to call the session, which has ended for the summer, "extraordinary." Mr.
Cuomo signed the bill on Monday, so the proposal will be put on the ballot in November.


Salaries Increase In Public Relations
The median salary for public relations practitioners has risen 6.5 percent, to $46,556, from $43,718 last year, according to the seventh annual salary survey by The Public Relations Journal, which is published by the Public Relations Society of America in New York.


Step Right Up and Look Inside


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.37
5.70
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.16
3.20
5.42
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.30
5.47
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.16
6.26
7.80
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.42
7.44
8.17
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.45
9.15
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.15
6.15
7.06
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In Lieu of Satisfaction's Lure, A Threat of Consumer Peril
SINCE nicotine patches were introduced, their makers have wooed worried smokers with ads emphasizing the benefits of kicking the habit.
Now a giant drug company entering the intensely competitive market is taking a different tack by subtly reminding smokers of the hazards of refusing to quit.
Tonight in Manhattan, the Parke-Davis division of the Warner-Lambert Company, which is bringing out a patch called Nicotrol, is sponsoring a benefit premiere of "Mistress," a film by the actor and director Barry Primus.
The movie, produced by TriBeCa Productions, Robert De Niro's film company, has been dedicated to Mr.
Primus's sister, Ronnie Francesca Primus, a heavy smoker who died of lung cancer.


Ex-C.I.A. Officer Testifies About Arming Contras
Felix Rodriguez, a retired Central Intelligence Agency officer who spent most of his career on the shadowy side of the espionage business, appeared today in Federal District Court to testify in the trial of the agency's former chief of covert operations.
It was the first court appearance for Mr.
Rodriguez, who, under the alias of Max Gomez, helped the Reagan Administration make clandestine shipments of arms by way of El Salvador to the contras, or rebels, who fought the Sandinista Government of Nicaragua in the mid 1980's.
In 1987 he testified before a joint Congressional committee that investigated the arms supplies shipped to the rebels in defiance of a law passed by Congress.


British Runner Is a Hero Even Without a Medal
Derek Redmond could remember trying to get up, trying to break away from the stretcher bearers in some crazy effort to qualify on Monday night in a 400-meter semifinal with a torn right hamstring.
"It was all animal instinct," Redmond said today, at the Olympic Village.
"I kept thinking I could still catch the other runners. I didn't want to quit. I'm a very selfish person."


Judge Weighs Citing Reporter for Contempt
A Vermont newspaper reporter remained free today after a judge said he would consider whether to hold her in contempt of court.
After an hourlong hearing here, the judge, George F. Ellison of Vermont District Court, promised a written decision "in the near future."


Topics of The Times; Intercepted Mail
Congress has finally been shamed into repealing one of the worst abuses of the Congressional free-mailing privilege.
A bill headed for final passage wisely stops the flood of free promotional literature that incumbents send to voters in portions of newly created districts where an incumbent must run for the first time.
But this good deed takes effect in the future, not in 1992.
Now the Federal appeals court in Washington has completed the job, holding this one-sided subsidy unconstitutional in this election year as well.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Signed Elbert Shelley, cornerback, to a one-year contract.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed John Bosa, defensive end, and Kent Wells, nose tackle.
Waived Mike Wise, defensive end, and Keithen McCant, quarterback.


Rossini's Town Celebrates His Bicentenary
Gioacchino Rossini was born in 1792, which is why -- with a lesser tonnage of performances than the 1991 Mozart year but with ample enthusiasm and affection -- the world is now celebrating the 200th anniversary of his birth.
When he died in 1868, Rossini left his fortune to his native city of Pesaro, on the Adriatic coast, for the establishment of a foundation and a music conservatory bearing his name.
It was not until 1974, however, that the foundation managed to inaugurate a critical edition, projected for 80 volumes, of its namesake's works, in association with the Riccordi music publishers of Milan.
And it was not until 1980 that citizens of Pesaro, led by a Rossini-loving gynecologist named Gianfranco Mariotti, got around to organizing a festival devoted to Rossini's music.


Music Is Mandatory With the Popcorn
Those moviegoers who are already uncomfortable when commercials appear on screen may want to cover their ears as well the next time they visit the local Bijou.
Movie Tunes and the AMC Theaters chain are creating an advertising vehicle that combines an on-screen slide presentation, running before the feature film begins, and a selection of contemporary music.
The presentation is to change every two weeks.
The songs will be identified by artist, label and title.
And if the artist will be in concert locally, for example, a slide could advertise that.


CHRONICLE
When LINDA GOTTLIEB, the producer of the ABC soap opera "One Life to Live," called the Names Project Foundation in San Francisco, which has custody of the AIDS memorial quilt, asking if she could borrow some panels for the show, "I thought they would be delighted," she said.
"Instead they turned us down cold.
"We were doing a serious drama about homophobia and about how a town is gripped by fear," Ms.
Gottlieb said, "so I began to campaign with each member of the board of the foundation, explaining the power of our story line and the fact that we can reach eight million viewers a week."


Lovers of Tomatoes Fear Dr. Frankenstein's Garden
THERE is fear and loathing among tomatophiles.
Genetic jockeys are riding roughshod over their gastronomic Eden.
They've inserted a gene into some tomatoes to thwart the ripening enzyme and slow rot.
They've spliced an antifreeze gene from Arctic flounder into other tomatoes.
"Yuck," the writer Calvin Trillin said. "This sounds a little fishy."


Republicans Halt for Breath As They Undo Florio's Efforts
What Jim Florio, a Democrat, did in his first six months as Governor with the rubber-stamp backing of a Democratic Legislature, the Republicans who now control the Senate and Assembly have tried to undo with similar dispatch.
Ending a furiously busy period with votes in both chambers to repeal the state's ban on assault weapons, the Legislature recessed for a month on Monday.
It is the longest break since the Republicans assumed the majority in January and the battle with the Governor was joined.


Chinese Beam With Pride
If bicyclists are swerving even more than usual these days, if factory workers are nodding over the assembly lines, if Government officials are excusing themselves from evening banquets, the problems have less to do with the sultry weather than with collective pride at the leaps and plunges of a few pint-sized teen-agers 7,200 miles away.
Many Chinese, who can barely tell a shot-put from a discus, have been transfixed by the Olympics -- and that makes them insomniacs.
Because of the seven-hour time difference from Barcelona, Spain, the live television coverage lasts well into the night, but many are alternately delighted and impatient to watch the triumphs of their Olympic athletes.


Accounts
*
Milady Corp., New York, to Christopher Thomas Associates, Garden City, L.I., to handle the apparel company's trade and consumer advertising and public relations accounts, previously handled by various freelance agencies and design studios.
Christopher Thomas won the account, with billings estimated at $2 million, without a review.


Giants' Young Stresses Continuity
George Young, the Giants' general manager, testified today that the National Football League's free-agency system works because it provides continuity.
"One of the most important things any organization can have is continuity from coach to player to personnel," said Young, a witness for the league in an antitrust trial brought by eight players.
"Players have to relate to each other as a unity because it's a team sport. They make a team, not play on a team. You have to keep players as long as you can. You can't have a bus station where players are coming and going."


REAGAN IS NOTIFIED HE ISN'T A TARGET IN CONTRA INQUIRY
After more than five years of work, the Iran-contra independent prosecutor has told Ronald Reagan in a letter that he is not under investigation for his role in the scandal that stained the final years of his Presidency.
The letter strongly suggests that the prosecutors have concluded that the evidence does not warrant criminal charges against Mr.
Reagan.
It was sent to the former President's lawyers last Thursday by Lawrence E. Walsh, the Iran-contra prosecutor.
In it, Mr.
Walsh said in part, "This office regards President Reagan as simply a witness and not as a subject or target." Problems With Prosecuting
For prosecutors, who began their work in late 1986, Mr.
Walsh's letter amounted to a final acknowledgement that the exhaustive inquiry had unearthed no clear-cut evidence directly tying Mr.
Reagan to any wrongdoing.
Some lawyers who have followed the investigation said that even if Mr.
Walsh had amassed evidence against Mr.
Reagan, he would have been extremely reluctant to charge a former President with a criminal offense unless he had compiled an airtight case, something that failed to materialize in other public inquiries into the affair.


34th Precinct Is Expanding Police Force
A month after Washington Heights erupted in violent protests aimed at the police, New York City Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown returned to the community yesterday to announce a wide-ranging plan to put more officers into upper Manhattan and make them more sensitive to the local Dominican community.
Coming the day after Mr.
Brown announced his resignation, the plan for the 34th Precinct is one of the most ambitious examples to date of community policing, the put-the-police-back-on-the-streets policy that will no doubt stand as his most significant contribution to the largest police department in the nation.


Yields Fall at Slower Pace For Bank Funds and C.D.'s
Nearly a month after the last cut in the Federal discount rate and cuts in the prime lending rates by most leading banks, yields of bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit have continued to slip, but the decline in the week that ended today was less pronounced than in previous weeks.
Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Bank Rate Monitor, a bank-interest-rate publication, says that bank rates have tumbled 40 basis points since the cut and that he thinks a new bottom may be in sight.
But, he says, the Federal Reserve may yet take another hard look at the economy and see if another easing is in order.
"The odds are even money on another rate cut," Mr.
Heady said.
"It could happen this month or in September.".


Emerson to Buy Fisher For Nearly $1.28 Billion
The Emerson Electric Company will buy Fisher Controls International Inc., a leading valve and industrial process control maker, from the Monsanto Company for nearly $1.28 billion, the two St.
Louis-based companies announced yesterday.
Fisher's products measure and control the flow, temperature and pressure of liquids for the chemical, oil and gas, paper and food processing industries.
The deal is the latest in a string of deals broadening Emerson's base as provider of a wide variety of industrial and commercial equipment and narrowing Monsanto's focus.


Two Hands and Lingering Questions
The hands.
It had to be the hands.
What other reason could explain Notre Dame's reluctance to throw to Derek Brown?
He will soon have an opportunity to show that his limited role in his college team's passing game was just the plan.
As he starts his National Football League career, with the size and ability to make an impact at tight end for the Giants, Brown is in a position to make use of skills that were never fully developed in college.


John D. Appel; Professor, 59
John D. Appel, a professor at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law of Yeshiva University in Manhattan, died on Monday at Tisch Hospital of New York University Medical Center.
He was 59 years old and lived in Manhattan.
His family said he died of cancer.


Utility Bonds From San Antonio
Taking advantage of low interest rates, San Antonio tentatively priced a $690.4 million refunding issue yesterday through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The Municipal Electric and Gas System refunding bonds were priced to yield a maximum of 6.073 percent for a bond due in 2013, with other term bonds yielding about 6.067 percent for an issue due in 2017, 6 percent in 2009 and 5.85 percent for a noncallable bond due in 2007.


Personal Health
A RECENT report warning heavy drinkers against taking supplements of beta-carotene prompted several queries from perplexed readers.
One man asked whether having two or three drinks over a weekend constituted "heavy drinking." Another wanted to know if half a bottle of wine a day, which he described as "light drinking" compared with his friends, was heavy drinking in my view.
The confusion is common, according to experts at the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
As the institute pointed out in a recent health alert: "Moderate drinking is difficult to define because it means different things to different people. The term is often confused with 'social drinking,' which refers to drinking patterns that are accepted by the society in which they occur."


Music in Review
'La Traviata'
New York City Opera New York State Theater
New singers took over the principal roles in the New York City Opera's quirkily updated production of "La Traviata" on Sunday afternoon.
Perhaps they were bewildered by the settings in which they found themselves, or by the actions they were directed to undertake, but none of the newcomers brought either vocal or dramatic consistency to the performance.
With little in the way of compelling characterization to hold the attention, a listener had no choice but to try, however fruitlessly, to rationalize Nicholas Muni's directorial conceits.
It is tempting to believe that the society of 19th-century pleasure seekers described in the Dumas novel and Piave's libretto can be shifted to modern times.
But the world Mr.
Muni gives us is so much more souless and brutal than the one Dumas and Piave describe that it clashes with the impulses of Verdi's opera at every turn.
Verdi's music sounds absurdly innocent, bubbly and antique in this setting.
And although Germont's quaint notion of family honor must prevail in this work, there is no place for it in this production's world.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COMMERCE BANCSHARES INC., Kansas City, Mo. definitively agreed to acquire Union Financial Corp. of Manhattan, Kan., the parent of Union National Bank and Trust Co., for stock.
COMPUTER HORIZONS CORP., New York, said it had closed the purchase of Worldwide Computer Services Inc., Wayne, N.J., for 330,000 shares.


Campus Journal; Teaching Ex-Communists Capitalism
Until this summer, Mihaly Kopanyi had only one textbook about capitalism for his business school students in Budapest, a recent Hungarian translation of Paul Heyne's "The Economic Way of Thinking."
Now Mr.
Kopanyi has a treasure trove of materials -- case studies, professorial bon mots and jottings from dormitory bull sessions -- to take home to the Budapest University of Economic Sciences when he resumes teaching after seven weeks at the Stanford Business School.


Israeli Publisher Issues Parts Of 'Mein Kampf' in Hebrew
For the first time since he wrote it seven decades ago, Hitler's "Mein Kampf" has been published in the language and in the country of the people he tried to exterminate.
The existence of a Hebrew version of the Hitler autobiography is so sensitive here that its publication was carried out quietly.


Ballesteros Frustrated
SEVE BALLESTEROS is so unhappy about his recent play, he may skip next week's P.G.A.
Championship in St.
Louis, one of the two major tournaments he has never won, according to his brother, BALDOMERO.
Ballesteros failed to make the cut in three of his last five tournaments.


Port Authority In Financing
In competitive bidding yesterday, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey priced $219.35 million in revenue bonds through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The financing includes a bond due in 2014 priced to yield a maximum of 5.975 percent, with another term bond due in 2013 priced to yield 5.983 percent.


Review/Music; Masur Takes His Players Outdoors For the Philharmonic's Park Series
If one judged the concert season in the old-fashioned way, Kurt Masur's first season as music director of the New York Philharmonic ended in May.
But at the time, there remained a few items on the unofficial checklist of a director's official duties that Mr.
Masur had not yet performed, and since then he and his musicians have been attending to them.
Last month, he observed the Philharmonic's version of old home week by taking the players to Carnegie Hall for a series of concerts.
He then took the orchestra on its first foreign tour during his reign, a visit to Argentina and Brazil.
This week he is polishing off another of his responsibilities, making his first appearances at the orchestra's free concerts in the parks.
On Monday evening, Mr.
Masur opened the 28th season of his orchestra's outdoor concerts with a Dvorak, Ravel and Beethoven program on the Great Lawn of Central Park.
A crowd estimated by the police at 70,000 was on hand.


U.S. JUDGE SELECTS MONITOR FOR UNION
Overriding union opposition, a Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday appointed William H. Webster, the former head of the Central Intelligence Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as the independent member of an review board created to protect the International Brotherhood of Teamsters from corruption.
The appointment was made by Judge David N. Edelstein over the objections of the union, which argued that Mr.
Webster was too strongly identified with law enforcement to be regarded as the independent member of the three-member board.


U.S. Backs Off Report on Serbian Abuses
The Bush Administration backed away from an assertion that Serbian forces were torturing and killing civilians at detention centers in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and said there was little it could do immediately to investigate reports of atrocities.
Some Democratic lawmakers pushed for a tougher stand and suggested that the State Department was backing off because the White House believed that voters opposed a more aggressive policy.


Yankee Nightmare Is Put On Hold
The Yankees had a whole night to sleep on it.
An evening of restless hours to ponder what it would be like to displace the Cleveland Indians from last place in the American League East.
Obviously, they did not want the nightmarish event to occur.
With the gap between themselves and Cleveland trimmed to a frightening two and a half games, the Yankees woke up and subdued the Indians, 4-3, last night at Yankee Stadium.


Daughter Killed in Queens
A 68-year-old Queens woman shot and killed her 48-year-old daughter yesterday when a longstanding dispute erupted into violence, the police said.
The mother, Daisy Hutson, shot her daughter Renee once in the chest at 5:30 P.M. outside the daughter's home at 120-29 Farmer's Boulevard in St.
Albans, said Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman.
Ms.
Hutson was pronounced dead on arrival at Mary Immaculate Hospital, Sergeant Wrensen said.
Sergeant Wrensen said it was not known last night what had fueled the ongoing dispute between the two women.


New York Can Find Better Solution to Waste Than Incineration
To the Editor:
"The Council's Garbage Test" (editorial, July 10), on New York City's incineration plan, contains several inaccuracies.
First, you state that rejecting incineration will jeopardize the city's health and future.
Not even the Department of Sanitation -- the principal proponent of incineration -- would say that aggressive recycling creates more pollution than incineration.
Sanitation's own health expert has stated that incinerators should not be situated near sensitive populations, such as the elderly, children, pregnant women and people with respiratory problems.


Chess Moves Are Planned. Birthdays Happen.
IT was a surprise party, a sweet 16.
The guest of honor, Judit Polgar, who is the highest-ranking woman in the chess world right now, and probably ever, was told that the elevator at the Beekman Tower Hotel on East 49th Street was malfunctioning and couldn't stop at her floor.
She'd have to ride to the top and walk down a flight.
It was one gambit she didn't anticipate.
When the elevator opened onto the Top of the Tower cocktail lounge, flashbulbs popped and confetti flew and Ms.
Polgar, a pale, pretty girl with long red hair whose expression in repose is normally one of diffidence, convulsed in embarrassed giggles.
She cut the cake -- frosted in black and white squares -- and the guests, among them maybe a dozen of the world's finest chess players, cheered.


Details Set for Avery Fisher Renovation
Lincoln Center and the New York Philharmonic announced the final details yesterday of their collaborative plan to renovate the stage of Avery Fisher Hall.
The renovation is to take place from Aug. 23 to Sept. 12.
It is to cost $3 million, and will involve no alterations to the hall itself.
The announcement was made at a news conference by Nathan Leventhal, the president of Lincoln Center, and Deborah Borda, the general manager of the Philharmonic.
Also present were Kurt Masur, the orchestra's music director; Russell Johnson, the chairman of Artec Consultants and the project's acoustician, and John Burgee, the architect who oversaw the hall's last renovation, in 1976, and who is overseeing the visual aspects of the current renovation.


Moroccan Is Awarded 10,000 Title After All
Khalid Skah, the Moroccan who was disqualified after winning the 10,000-meter final Monday night, regained his gold medal today when officials could find no reason for taking it away.
The second finisher, Richard Chelimo of Kenya, had been declared the winner following protests that another Moroccan, Hammou Boutayeb, had interfered with him in the final laps by not moving aside after being lapped.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues -- Health Care; G.O.P. Tries to Seize a Democratic Issue
After a series of tentative jabs, the 1992 Presidential campaign moved today toward a major battle over health care, politically fertile ground long controlled by Democrats but now a central part of the Republicans' electoral strategy.
Brandishing thick policy proposals, politicians from both parties produced a flurry of press releases, announcements and news conferences, accusing each other of callously abandoning millions of Americans to inferior medical treatment.


Bear Stearns Net Income Jumps 56.6%
Riding a wave of revenues from strong trading markets, the Bear Stearns Companies Inc. reported yesterday that earnings rose 56.6 percent in its fourth quarter, to $78.8 million, or 75 cents a share, the second-highest quarterly showing by the firm.
The results were in line with those of many Wall Street firms, which have almost all posted strong year-over-year gains in the latest quarter.
But as with other firms, Bear Stearns's results were below those of the immediately previous quarter.
In that quarter, the firm posted record earnings of $91.3 million.


Sports of The Times; From Thorpe To Jenner . . . To Jordan!
THE most succinct conversation in Olympic history occurred in 1912 at Stockholm, when King Gustav V told Jim Thorpe, the decathlon gold medalist, "Sir, you are the greatest athlete in the world."
"Thanks, King," the American said shyly.
Ever since, the Olympic decathlon champion has been hailed as "the world's greatest athlete." Thanks again, King, on behalf of all the Olympic decathlon champions who have basked in that title.


Entrepreneur Makes Bid for Braniff Assets
A supermarket entrepreneur, John A. Catsimatidis, said yesterday that he had bid for the remaining assets of Braniff International Airlines to speed the assembly of his new airline, Capitol Air Express Inc.
Capitol Air, which Mr.
Catsimatidis said he hoped would begin operating within months, bid $750,000 for Braniff's assets on Monday in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Hauppauge, L.I.


Help Wanted? Call Havana
One of the first things you notice about Ireland's Olympic boxing team is Nicolas Hernandez Cruz.
He doesn't look Irish, and his name certainly doesn't imply that he is.


Abortion Is but One Of Women's Issues
To the Editor:
On July 13, 5,000 men and women rallied outside the Democratic National Convention in Madison Square Garden.
You reported the event July 14 as an abortion rights rally.
In reality the event was about stopping violence against women.
It was organized and sponsored by the Coalition to End Violence Against Women.
Women of all ages, ethnicities, classes and sexual preferences spoke out about the violence they have witnessed against themselves or someone in their lives such as rape, incest and domestic violence.
Many shared their experiences for the first time, and were angry at how silenced they felt by the judicial and political systems.
But these voices were silenced again because the news media did not listen to what was being said.


U.S. Prosecutor Declines Case Against Operation Rescue Chief
The United States Attorney in Manhattan asked yesterday to be excused from prosecuting the head of Operation Rescue on charges that he had ordered an aborted fetus thrust at Gov.
Bill Clinton during the Democratic National Convention.
Otto G. Obermaier, the Federal prosecutor for the Southern District of New York, said his request was based on the Justice Department position that Federal judges did not have the authority to order anti-abortion advocates to limit their protests under a Reconstruction-era law intended to protect blacks from intimidation by Ku Klux Klan members.


Teachers Ask Mediator To Aid in Contract Talks
Trying to accelerate contract talks that have been stalled for almost a year, Sandra Feldman, the president of the New York City teachers' union, formally declared yesterday that the negotiations were at an impasse and asked a state mediator to step in.
The unexpected action, announced at a crowded news conference at the United Federation of Teachers headquarters in Manhattan, will produce an effort by the State Public Employment Relations Board to settle the dispute.
If that fails, then a fact-finder will determine whether any money exists to pay for a raise for the teachers.


Whistle. Spike. TD? Oops, Not Quite Yet.
When the highlight videos are edited after the season, Rob Carpenter's first great Jet moment will rate consideration for both the skill cassette and the blooper reel.
After adjusting his route and catching a long pass from Browning Nagle in last Saturday's exhibition opener against the Philadelphia Eagles, Carpenter celebrated by spiking the ball to the ground as an official signaled a touchdown and blew his whistle to stop play.


People
*
Carla Hendra, a partner, executive vice president and general manager at Barry Blau &amp; Partners Inc., was promoted to the new position of executive director of marketing.
David Finkel, a partner, senior vice president and director of client services, was promoted to executive vice president and general manager, succeeding Ms.
Hendra. *
David Sackey, executive vice president at W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Baltimore, was promoted to director of account services.
Howe Burch, group account director, was promoted to senior vice president.


Sir Robert Muldoon Is Dead at 70; Ex-New Zealand Prime Minister
Sir Robert Muldoon, who was Prime Minister of New Zealand from 1975 to 1984 and was for years a powerful figure in New Zealand politics, died early today in a hospital in Auckland.
He was 70 years old and lived in Auckland.
The immediate cause of his death was not clear, said Stephen Rowe, senior press secretary to Prime Minister Jim Bolger.
Mr.
Rowe said from his office in Wellington that Sir Robert had been in ill health after heart-valve surgery and had been admitted to the hospital for tests.


CHRONICLE
BRYANT GUMBEL broke his wrist on Friday in pursuit of a hippopotamus in Kenya, a "Today" spokeswoman said yesterday.
The co-host of the NBC News program has been in Africa since July 25 taping segments for a series on Africa that will be broadcast live from Zimbabwe in November.


60-Minute Gourmet
TURKEY breast, which in my opinion is still an underused product among home cooks, is often the centerpiece of summer lunches around my house.
It is every bit as lean and light as chicken breast, even less expensive, and always appreciated by those who think of turkey as only a holiday staple.
When preparing turkey breast, as in the recipe below, it is always a good idea to slice the meat and then pound it lightly to insure even cooking.
Turkey, like chicken breast, can dry out in a flash.
Thus, the recipe here calls for sauteeing the turkey slices in oil and a little butter for only about five minutes total, so that they are barely cooked through.


Airlines Cut Their Overseas Fares
The bruising domestic air-fare war may be over, but the skirmishes continue over the Atlantic and the Caribbean.
Yesterday, Delta Air Lines announced that it would discount tourist fares for the fall and winter to 33 European cities and Israel.
The sale, with savings that average 25 to 35 percent, was immediately matched by Continental Airlines.
United Airlines and American Airlines pledged they would be competitive with Delta's special, and Northwest said it was studying Delta's announcement.


Topics of The Times; Landslide Newt's Bankroll
Representative Newt Gingrich's narrow victory in the Republican primary in Georgia's new Sixth District shows how badly the nation's system for financing Congressional campaigns needs reform.
Mr.
Gingrich, the quarrelsome House minority whip, beat back the anti-incumbent campaign waged by his G.O.P. challenger, former State Representative Herman Clark, by 980 votes -- for a slim 51-to-49 percent victory.


N.F.L. Training Camp Report
Green Bay Packers
In his heart he may think he is worth every bit as much as the $2.2 million a year that Quentin Coryatt, a rookie linebacker from Texas A&amp;M, is averaging under his contract with Indianapolis.
But in the end, Mark D'Onofrio had to recognize the difference between a No. 2 draft choice (Coryatt) and a No. 34 pick (D'Onofrio).
So the linebacker from Penn State settled with the Packers on a three-year deal that will pay him an average of a reported $540,000 a season.
Cleveland Browns


Wine Talk
ALL is not well in the wine world.
The wine market in the United States declined last year for the seventh year in a row.
Domestic wine shipments were down 1.5 percent, to 147.4 million cases while imports fell 8.7 percent to 25.8 million cases.
The persistent economic recession, a widespread and growing concern about alcohol abuse, heightened public indignation over drunken driving and the consequent stiffer penalties, plus steeper Federal excise taxes all combined in 1991 to deliver yet another blow to the already troubled industry.


Plight of Haiti's Poor Brings Calls to Loosen the Embargo
On the battered roads that lead from this city to the hardscrabble countryside where most Haitians live, there are harrowing scenes of the desperation caused for many by the nine-month hemisphere-wide embargo aimed at restoring this country's elected President.
On hill after hill in the rugged terrain northeast of the capital, gaunt villagers whose eroded farm plots can no longer sustain them gather at the roadside under a blazing sun with arms outstretched in hopes of receiving alms from vehicles that zoom by in the dust.


Heart Death Rate Fell 24% in 1980's, But the Explanation Is Uncertain
HEART attack deaths declined 24 percent in the United States in the 1980's, a Federal health agency says, but medical experts cannot say whether the drop was due to healthier behavior or better medical treatment.
In its weekly report on disease and health, the Federal Centers for Disease Control, based in Atlanta, said the death rate from heart attacks and heart failure declined 24 percent from 1980 to 1988, the most recent year for which statistics are available.
In 1980, 588.3 of every 100,000 Americans died from heart attacks, the agency said.
That rate was 448.8 for 1988.


A Rally in the Treasury Market
The bond market rallied gently yesterday, with prices rising across the board.
Traders said retail buyers were back in the market, concentrating especially on the 5-, 7- and 10-year Treasury notes, which had dropped sharply in the last several days of trading, making them attractive again.
But the 30-year bond was also up.
The rally came the day before the Treasury is scheduled to announce the size of its big quarterly auctions next week.
Often before such an event the bond market might sell off a little, but that was not the case yesterday.
The expectation is that the Treasury today will announce a total of $36 billion of borrowing, with $15 billion in 3-year notes, $11 billion in 10-year notes and $10 billion in 30-year bonds.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 31
July 24
Aug. 2
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
7.2
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
3.0
Gasoline stocks
219.1
219.2
210.6
Distillate stocks
114.6
112.9
121.8
Crude imports, daily
6.8
6.5
5.6
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.4
2.3
Crude stocks
330.2
323.9
345.7
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
90.2
91.1
87.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Illegal Chilean Shellfish Retains Its Appeal
Almost every day in this quiet fishing village 300 miles north of Santiago, Manuel Cuevas puts on his wet suit and dives for Chile's most prized maritime delicacy, the loco, a fist-size shellfish found solely off Chile and southern Peru.
Mr.
Cuevas sells his catch to a middleman, "and then we don't know where it goes, but probably across the Peruvian border or directly to Japan," he said.
He concedes that the trade is illegal.


BASEBALL;
Charlie Sheen, who starred in baseball movies "Major League" and "Eight Men Out," shelled out $85,000 last night for the baseball hit by Mookie Wilson of the Mets that rolled between Bill Buckner's legs in Game 6 of the 1986 World Series with the Boston Red Sox.
Sheen purchased "The Mookie Ball" by telephone in Leland's Hall of Fame Live Auction at the Southgate Tower Hotel in Manhattan.
A 10 percent premium charged by Leland's raised the ball's final cost to $93,500, far exceeding the expected price of $8,000-$10,000.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Phar-Mor said top executives had embezzled company funds and reported $350 million in nonexistent profits for the high-flying discount drug chain.
Phar-Mor said that Michael I. Monus, 43, a company co-founder and executive in the Colorado Rockies baseball expansion team, who was dismissed as president last week, had also "diverted company funds for his own use."  [ Page D1. ]
Delta Air Lines discounted its tourist fares to Europe and Israel for the fall and winter.
Continental matched the discounts of 25 to 35 percent, while United and American said they would be competitive.
Northwest is studying the matter.  [ D1. ]


Braves Pad Lead By Beating Reds
Braves 7, Reds 5
ATLANTA, Aug. 4 (AP) -- Terry Pendleton hit a two-run homer with two out in the ninth inning tonight to give the Atlanta Braves a 7-5 victory against the Cincinnati Reds and a one-and-a-half-game lead in the National League West.
Pendleton hit his 15th home run of the season following a two-out walk to Otis Nixon, who then stole second.
The drive over the left-field fence came off reliever Norm Charlton (3-1).
Pendleton has 10 hits in his last 13 times at bat with runners in scoring position.


How European Films Have Treated Blacks Through the Years
"Eurobeat: Blacks in European Cinema," a series at Lincoln Center at the Walter Reade Theater that explores the presence of black characters in European films from the 1920's to the present, opens today with the only surviving fragment of Josephine Baker's first feature and a movie starring Paul Robeson in one of the few nonstereotyped roles of his acting career.
The series, which runs through Aug. 20, is presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center.
It includes the New York premiere on Friday of "No Fear, No Die," by the French director Claire Denis, whose first feature was the acclaimed "Chocolat" in 1988.


U.S. Backs Away From Charge of Atrocities in Bosnia Camps
The Administration today backed away from an assertion on Monday that Serbian forces were torturing and killing civilians at detention centers in Bosnia, and said there was little it could do immediately to investigate reports of atrocities.
Apparently caught by surprise by reports about the camps, and seemingly uncertain as to how to respond, Administration representatives have provided conflicting accounts.
Administration officials said they had few options beyond urging Serbian forces to grant the International Red Cross access to the camps.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  SERBS FIRE ON VICTIMS' FUNERAL
Serbs shelled a graveyard in Sarajevo during the burial of two children killed in an evacuation attempt.
One child's grandmother was struck and rushed to a hospital, and there, on the last day of the fourth month of the city's siege, she was entered as the 4,484th person wounded by Serbs to be treated.
A1  BUSH BACKS DOWN ON CAMPS
The Bush Administration backed away from an assertion that Serbian forces were torturing and killing civilians at detention centers in Bosnia, and said there was little it could do immediately to investigate reports of atrocities.
A12
The Security Council demanded Red Cross access to camps.  A12  COMFORTS FOR TRAFFICKER
The image of Pablo Escobar lounging on his prison water bed while coordinating cocaine shipments on his cellular telephone is not quite accurate, lawyers say.
First of all, Colombia's wealthiest citizen had to make do with a foam mattress until his water bed was installed.
Second, until he received cellular privileges, he had to make do with the rustic services of carrier pigeons.
A1  IN A TOWNSHIP, TWO CLASSES
Both banks of the Jukskei River represent vital constituencies for Nelson Mandela's African National Congress -- the angry masses and the anxious middle class.
On the second day of a two-day general strike, both sides joined much of black South Africa in heeding the congress's call to withhold their labor and send the white minority Government an impatient message.
A3  U.S.
TRAINING PLAN FOR IRAQIS
The United States Central Command, which led the military effort to evict Iraqi forces from Kuwait, proposed a military training and exchange program with Iraqi forces eight months before they invaded the Persian Gulf emirate, according to Government documents.
A9  IRAQI FOOD IMPORTS FALL SHARPLY
Iraq's imports of basic foods like rice, sugar, cooking oil and tea have fallen sharply in recent weeks, say Government officials in Amman and private traders in the Jordanian capital who traditionally handle most of that country's import needs.
A8  Security Council criticized over inspections.
A9  By cutting settlements, Israel hurts a booming sector.
A2  Israeli publisher issues "Mein Kampf" in Hebrew.
A2  Russians debate how to repay state companies' debt.
A13  Akwana Journal: A remote Nigerian region is hit by violence.
A4  National A14-21  SATELLITE'S CABLE JAMS
The astronauts of the space shuttle Atlantis started to deploy a satellite on the end of a 12-mile-long cable, beginning the first major test of tethered space flight, but the cable jammed three times, leaving the satellite stuck several hundred feet from the shuttle.
A1  REAGAN WILL NOT BE CHARGED
After more than five years of work, the Iran-contra independent prosecutor told Ronald Reagan in a letter that he was not under investigation for his role in the scandal that stained the end of his Presidency.
A1  HOW THEY ARMED THE CONTRAS
Felix Rodriguez, a retired Central Intelligence Agency officer who spent years on the shadowy side of the espionage business, testified in the trial of the former chief of covert operations.
A16  SUNNY BATTLEGROUND FOR BUSH
Deeply conservative Orange County nurtured Nixonism and the Reagan Revolution, but now it may be the place where President Bush's political future withers and dies.
A1  DEBATE MOVES TO HEALTH CARE
The Presidential candidates joined a major battle over health care, politically fertile ground long controlled by Democrats but now a central part of the Republicans' electoral strategy.
A20  RELUCTANCE TO RATION CARE
News analysis: The Bush Administration's surprising rejection of Oregon's plan to set priorities for health-care spending suggests that Americans are not ready to ration care explicitly and systematically.
A14  REGION TO FIGHT OZONE
The Governors of 12 northeastern and mid-Atlantic states and the Mayor of the District of Columbia agreed to a regional plan to help their governments meet tough new Federal laws on ozone pollution.
A18  PAGES OF BLACK HISTORY LOST
Los Angeles Journal: The riots' fires claimed 50 years of accumulated wisdom at the Aquarian Bookshop, one of the nation's oldest black-owned bookstores.
A14  RAISE TAXES, OR ELSE
After spending four days in jail, three officials in an Appalachian county grudgingly agreed to raise taxes to balance the budget.
A21  Fires in the West burned across more than 230,000 acres.
A14  A white supremacist will stand trial in the Medgar Evers killing.
A15  A Federal panel assailed states' child support collection.
A19  Education Page B8-9  The nation's governors are worried about how to "sell" school reform.
B9  Chicago has a high school on a farm.
B9  Metro Digest B1  PAROLEE HELD IN 6 SLAYINGS
A man paroled from prison three months ago was charged yesterday with the murders of five young women and a 14-year-old girl in Orange and Dutchess Counties, N.Y.A1  Business Digest D1  Living Section C1-10  Health Page C12  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Obituaries B6-7  Sports B11-20  Olympics: China wins another diving title.
B11  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  The sleaze factor.
Dangerous stalling on Russian aid.
Japanese-American internment.
Topics: Intercepted mail.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: Smoking and politics.
James A. Baker 3d: What America owes the ex-Soviet Union.
Mario M. Cuomo: Reducing casualties in the abortion battle.
Ellen R. Malcolm: Female candidates and the "credibility" gap.


Twins' Loss Gets Oakland Even in West
White Sox 19, Twins 11
CHICAGO, Aug. 4 (AP) -- George Bell hit a two-run homer and had five runs batted in and the Chicago White Sox scored nine runs in the third inning tonight to beat Minnesota, 19-11, dropping the Twins into a first-place tie with Oakland in the American League West.
Esteban Beltre hit his first major-league homer and Carlton Fisk hit his 374th as Chicago won its third straight game and sixth in its last seven while snapping Minnesota's three-game winning streak.


Duva May Finance Holyfield Bout
Through marketing research TVKO has concluded that the Nov. 13 heavyweight title match between the champion, Evander Holyfield, and Riddick Bowe, will not attract 750,000 pay-per-view buyers.
That figure was the total TVKO drew for the Holyfield-Larry Holmes bout in June, and sources at TVKO say the pay-per-view entity lost between $2.5 million and $3 million on that fight.


In a South African Township, 2 Views of a Strike
Twentieth Avenue, which runs along the west bank of the Jukskei River in this black township abutting Johannesburg, is a seething camp of crude brick huts and plywood shacks.
Viewed from the other side of the Jukskei's sluggish trickle, it calls to mind the slums of Calcutta.
Springbok Crescent, which runs above the river on the east bank, is a narrow lane of trim bungalows on tiny, manicured plots.
Viewed from the other side, it calls to mind the starter homes of Levittown.


Parolee Charged With the Killing Of 6 in New York
A man who had been paroled from prison three months ago was charged yesterday with the murders of five young women and a 14-year-old girl in the Hudson Valley.
Police officials described the suspect, Nathaniel White, 32 years old, as an "out-and-out vicious killer" who had slain five people this summer.
They said Mr.
White apparently met some of his victims in bars and that he knew the family of the 14-year-old girl.


Israel Threads the Maze Toward U.S. Loan Pact
Here is Israel's economic Catch-22 as its pursuit of billions of dollars in United States loan guarantees moves into high gear this week:
To get the aid, as well as to assert its spending priorities, the new Government has canceled plans for 12,000 publicly financed apartments, nearly half of them for Jewish settlers in the occupied territories.


Low-Weight Infants
Women who smoke during pregnancy are more than twice as likely to deliver underweight babies as others, the Federal Centers for Disease Control says.
The C.D.C. reported in its Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report that the women who smoked during pregnancy had been more likely to deliver underweight babies regardless of their race or other risk factors.
Babies weighing less than 5 1/2 pounds at birth are regarded by experts as being at a greater risk than babies of normal weight for a host of infant health problems, including respiratory problems and sudden infant death syndrome.


Corrections
A sports picture caption yesterday about Derek Redmond of Britain, who was helped by his father after pulling a hamstring at the Olympics, misidentified his event in some copies.
It was the 400-meter race, not the 200-meter.


Drugs and the Elderly
The unnecessary use of sedatives in nursing homes can be sharply reduced by teaching doctors and nurses about the proper use of the medicines, a study concludes.
A team of doctors set up an experimental education program for nursing home personnel and found that the use of sedatives dropped 27 percent without causing serious problems for patients.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Medicaid changes proposed by the nation's governors referred incorrectly to Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut.
He was chairman of a group that developed a policy paper on the issue but is not chairman of the governors' Committee on Human Resources.


Like the Little Train That Could, Two Painters Who Will


Sylvio R. Gilbert, 95, A Catholic Missionary
The Rev.
Sylvio Roderique Gilbert, the oldest living member of Maryknoll, the popular name for the Catholic Foreign Mission Society of America, died on Monday at the Maryknoll residence in Maryknoll, N.Y.
He was 95 years old.
Father Gilbert died of cancer of the colon and liver, said Joseph Ferguson, a spokesman for the society.


Milton H. Stern, 68; Lawyer Specialized In Estate Planning
Milton H. Stern, a nationally known tax lawyer and a founding partner in one of New Jersey's biggest law firms, died on Monday at his home in Livingston, N.J.
He was 68 years old.
He died of leukemia, said a spokeswoman for the firm, Nancy Lasersohn.


Refunding Issue Of Illinois Agency
The Illinois Health Facilities Authority tentatively priced $70.08 million in revenue refunding bonds yesterday with a maximum yield of 6.2 percent for an issue due in 2018.
John Nuveen &amp; Company, the lead underwriter for the negotiated offering, said another term bond due in 2012 was priced to yield 6.15 percent, while shorter-maturity serial bonds yield from 2.95 percent in 1993 to 4.75 percent in 1997, 5.6 percent in 2002 and 5.9 percent in 2007.


MBIA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Waste Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Health O Meter Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Astronauts Abandon Test of Tethered Satellite
Like fishermen at the end of a luckless day, the Atlantis astronauts yesterday abandoned their fruitless efforts to cast a satellite out into space on a 12-mile line and slowly reeled it back into the space shuttle's cargo bay, disappointed by the failure of the first large-scale test of tethered space flight.
The astronauts contended with a stuck cable that delayed release of the satellite on Tuesday.
Their reel mechanism had stalled and the line became badly snarled.
Four times over two days they tried to reel out the line to its full extent, but the satellite never went farther than 845 feet above the shuttle.
Hopelessly Stuck for Hours
For a few frustrating hours yesterday the tether, only one-tenth of an inch thick, appeared to be stuck hopelessly.
The astronauts could neither reel it out beyond 750 feet nor reel it in.


Events: Art, Architecture, Antiques
New Jersey Waterfront  Urban Center Galleries of the Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 935-3960.
"On the Waterfront: Plans for Hoboken and the Hudson River," a display of photographs, drawings and an architectural model, runs through Sept. 2.
Hours: 8 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Monday through Friday; 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Saturday.
No charge.


Raycomm Transworld Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Microsemi Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Selectronics Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Quaker Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Official's Wife Loses Assembly-Aide Post
The wife of a Buffalo Republican election official who had supported Larry Rockefeller's bid to force a primary against Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato was dismissed yesterday from her job as an aide in the Buffalo office of the State Assembly minority leader, Clarence D. Rappleyea Jr.
A spokesman for Mr.
Rappleyea, Dick Mathieu, said that all four workers in the regional office had been dismissed, including the Buffalo official's wife, Mary Ellen Smolinksi, and that the office was being closed to save money.
But Mrs.
Smolinski's husband, Philip, said that "the timing is a surprise" and that he thought his work a petition-gatherer for Mr.
Rockefeller was "part of it."


Banks Cite Expense in Refusing State I.O.U.'s
Bank of America was not the first bank in California to stop accepting the state government's i.o.u.'s, but because of its huge network of 1,435 branches, the decision by the largest bank in the state was a particularly inconvenient to state workers, creditors and local governments.
"To say that banks stopped accepting the i.o.u.'s to put pressure on the political process is an overstatement," said Greg Wilhelm, legislative director at the California State Bankers Association.
He pointed out that the expense of handling the i.o.u.'s was a frequent complaint of banks and that some bankers had been stung by newspaper editorials claiming that continued acceptance of them was prolonging the problem.


Paul D. Butcher, 62; Leader in the Gulf War
Vice Adm.
Paul D. Butcher, retired, who capped 43 years in the Navy by helping to organize the movement of American forces to the Persian Gulf region, died on Monday at his home in Tampa, Fla.
He was 62 years old.
A Navy spokeswoman at the Pentagon, Lieut.
Karen Jeffries, said she did not know the cause of death.


UNSL Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Zam's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BP Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SkyWest Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Molson Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Optelecom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Times Square, A Reprieve and Hope Of a Livelier Day
Times Square Center, the cluster of blockbuster skyscrapers by Philip Johnson and John Burgee that would have been the centerpiece of the $2.5 billion Times Square redevelopment project, was the apotheosis of architecture as entertainment for the star-struck.
The project's apparent collapse turns a symbolic page on an era when architecture became the all-too-willing servant of high-powered public relations.
And it creates an opportunity to write a new and more buoyant chapter in the life of this troubled district.


Corrections
An article last Thursday about a California airport where scores of airliners are idled misidentified a company that buys planes in large numbers and leases them to carriers.
It is GATX Capital, a subsidiary of the GATX Corporation.
The company says it has only one plane at the field.


Patrick Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sierra On-Line Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Numbers Are Getting Grim for the Mets
"Imperative is imperative," Manager Jeff Torborg said before tonight's game against the Pirates.
Three hours and nine innings later, it had to be asked: Is out of it out of it?


U.S. Can't Abandon El Salvador Now
To the Editor:
I agree with "El Salvador's Moment of Truth" (editorial, July 13), that our State Department must cooperate fully with the Salvadoran civilian commission's efforts to evaluate the army's officer corps.
It is to be hoped that President Alfredo Cristiani, acting on the commission's report, will demand the purging of war criminals from the military's ranks.
Gen.
Mauricio Vargas, the Chief of Staff of the Salvadoran Army, met with our university delegation in San Salvador on June 17 and at that time said: "The peace accords restrict the armed forces, giving them a new mission. We are much smaller, and answerable to civilian authority." After Aug. 15 the world will know if General Vargas means what he says.


Sysco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Metricom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Campaigns
*
New varieties of Nabisco's Ritz Bits, cheese pizza and nacho cheese come to life in animated commercials created by McCann-Erickson, New York.
The spots, produced by Will Vinton Studios, Portland, Ore., show tiny crackers dancing to ethnic tunes like "The Mexican Hat Dance" and "Funiculi-Funicula." *
Cushman &amp; Wakefield, the commercial real estate company, compares itself to legends like Babe Ruth, Marilyn Monroe and Albert Einstein in a print campaign created by Poppe Tyson Advertising and Public Relations, New York.
The ads carry the theme "There are legends. And those that try to be."


North Carolina Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


If You Play With Heroin, It's Going to Get You
To the Editor:
I am disturbed that there appears to be a double message in "Executive's Secret Struggle With Heroin's Powerful Grip" (front page, July 22).
On the one hand, there is the message that heroin use is wrong or harmful and addicting.
On the other hand, you imply that maybe heroin use is not so bad after all.
You describe a "successful" businessman who has been using heroin for years.
Twenty years after his initiation into the drug scene, he is still ambivalent about his drug use.
He demonstrates all the typical attributes of addiction.


Moog Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


XTRA Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brown Says Community Policing Will Endure
Imperturbable, guarded, at times wistful, and above all jovially confident, Lee P. Brown took stock yesterday of the New York City Police Department that he will be leaving at month's end and pronounced himself satisfied that the new wave of local-based policing he sponsored would outlive his abrupt departure.
He said the executive staff he put in place -- including his interim successor, First Deputy Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly -- combined with new systems set in place and the strong commitment of Mayor David N. Dinkins to community policing would preserve his legacy, which he called the only option for the department.


Fortis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


O.I. Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dickenson Mines Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Philadelphia Suburban reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Galoob (Lewis) Toys (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; Athletic Shoes Without the Fads
WHILE the rest of the world is watching the Olympics, Steven Nichols has his sights on the United States Open tennis tournament later this summer.
As president and chief executive of K-Swiss Inc., maker of classic white-on-white leather tennis shoes favored by preppies and college freshmen, Mr.
Nichols is sitting the Olympics out, determined not to stage a footwear industry version of the basketball game between the United States Dream Team and Angola.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
The Mobil Oil Corporation was in the corporate debt market yesterday with a $250 million debenture offering through Merrill Lynch.
Underwriters said the 8 percent debentures due in 2032 were priced at 99.510 to yield 8.041 percent, or about 63 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Noma Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Money Store Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Computer Maker in Dip
Sun Microsystems Inc. today reported record revenues for its fourth quarter and fiscal year, but lower earnings, reflecting price pressures in the work station market and the company's transition to new products.
Sun's earnings, announced after the stock market's close, were below analysts' expectation.
In over-the-counter trading today, Sun's shares fell 75 cents, to $27.50.


WATCHING TELEVISION WITH: Anthea Disney; The Zapper in Chief at TV Guide
ANTHEA DISNEY thought a picket fence would be a nice touch to the grounds of her restored 1750 barn a few miles west of Litchfield, Conn., where she spends weekends.
But the local gendarmes of landmarks -- "these old ladies," in Ms.
Disney's withering phrase -- objected to her choice of fencing.
Down it came.
But so far, the editor of TV Guide has got away with a seemingly graver affront.
Behind the pond, which is behind the barn, is a grove of evergreens.
In the grove is a satellite dish to receive the television signals on which Ms.
Disney has focused since taking over at the magazine last September.


Check Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Anacomp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Houston Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AGCO Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SCOR U.S. Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pittway Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
No World Improvisations  The Knitting Factory
Only three continents -- Australia, Asia and North America -- were represented when No World Improvisations performed on Tuesday night.
Mor Thiam, the group's West African drummer, was delayed in transit, leaving Adam Plack on Australian didjeridoo (a hollowed-out tree trunk horn), Jin-Hi Kim on Korean komungo (a zither akin to the Japanese koto) and changgo (drum), and Joseph Celli playing an English horn without reeds and a Yamaha WX-7 breath-controlled synthesizer.
The musicians played solos, duets and trios, and although the pieces were improvisational, most of them shared a general contour, from tentative and sustained to firmly rhythmic, up to a peak, then back to a hushed coda.
The common ground was somewhere in the Pacific, between the didjeridoo's deep drone and the bent and quivering notes of the komungo.


Consolidated Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to June 50


Seeking Revival in No Man's Land of the Drug War
On a block of South Jamaica, Queens, that was once thronged with drug dealers but now stands in quiet testimony to the decline of the crack trade, the Rev.
Thomas E. Burns is preparing to convert a jailed drug kingpin's headquarters into a church annex.
But six blocks away, Lillian Mighty still picks heroin spoons and bloody syringes from beneath her roses, sweet potatoes and corn in the vacant lot that she wrested from drug dealers and turned into a lush garden.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
The Mayor's Voluntary Action Center, New York, to Goldberg Fossa Seid Advertising, New York, to promote projects and activities in connection with the center's 25th anniversary.


Syncor International reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


NTN Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


LSB Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Imcera Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sun Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Utility Faces Payout Cuts
The Illinois Power Company said yesterday that it might have to eliminate dividends on common and preferred stock if state regulators followed through on a preliminary decision and disallowed some costs on the company's new Clinton nuclear plant.
Shares in the company closed down $4.75, at $20.25, after the announcement.
Trading was suspended for three hours at the company's request so that the announcement could be made, and at one point the share price dropped to $19.75.
The company said that the Illinois Commerce Commission, which regulates rates, had taken preliminary action late Tuesday that would deny the company the ability to charge customers for part of the cost of Clinton.
The decision "indicated" by the commission would result in a rate reduction of $23 million a year and a write-off of about $200 million, net of income taxes, the company said.


Treasury Plans $36 Billion Auction
The Treasury as expected announced yesterday that it would auction $36 billion of Treasury notes and bonds next week, including $10 billion of 30-year bonds.
But this decision appeared to surprise some investors in the bond market, who were apparently looking for some unexpected twist.
The consensus forecast for the auction announcement was exactly what the Treasury announced: $15 billion of 3-year notes, $11 billion of 10-year notes and the $10 billion of 30-year bonds.
But traders and analysts said there was speculation in the morning as the bond market rose that the size of the entire auction might be cut and that the 30-year bond auction would be reduced or even suspended.


Stop the Excuses. Help Bosnia Now.
Terrible events are happening in Bosnia; worse ones are threatened.
Sarajevo is under constant bombardment.
Gorazde is besieged and likely to fall.
If it does, a large massacre is feared and thousands of Serbian troops will be free to move on Sarajevo, itself swollen with refugees from other areas.
The victims and losers in this conflict suffer more than the usual penalties of defeat.
Some are herded into concentration camps where, even if the worst reports of atrocities are untrue, they nonetheless suffer appalling privation and can be shot for insignificant offenses.
Others are driven from their homes and obliged to give up their property.
Children and passers-by are shot at and killed.


Agnico-Egale Mines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


It's Out of the Realm From Out of Nowhere
Racing's house of upsets produced its biggest one of the Saratoga season today when the 38-1 long shot Out of the Realm outran the favored Montreal Marty to win the $119,000 Albany Handicap for 3-year-olds bred in New York State.
To make matters worse for Montreal Marty and his rider, Julie Krone, the colt then was disqualified for initiating a chain-reaction bumping incident near the end of the race, and he was dropped to sixth in the order of finish.
It was the second time in two summers at Saratoga that Montreal Marty had been disqualified for interfering with other horses.


Chase Shifts 2 Executives At the Top
The Chase Manhattan Corporation said yesterday that its chief financial officer, Michael P. Esposito Jr., had been named to the new position of chief corporate compliance, control and administration officer.
The bank also announced that E. Michel Kruse, an executive vice president, would replace Mr.
Esposito.
Thomas G. Labrecque, Chase's chairman, said yesterday that Mr.
Esposito's position had been created to oversee the bank's efforts to comply with an expanding web of regulations affecting Chase, which operates in 55 countries.
Mr.
Esposito will report directly to Mr.
Labrecque, who said the appointment was in no way a demotion from the chief financial officer role.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; There They Go Again: Clinton and Gore Climb Back on Bus for a 3-Day Trip
Having their act together, Bill Clinton and Al Gore are taking it on the road again.
No Presidential ticket has ever put together anything like the political stage show of Mr.
Clinton and Mr.
Gore, which is so mutually supportive that it sometimes resembles an old vaudeville act -- "Absolutely, Mr. Clinton. Positively, Mr. Gore" -- as each man relentlessly complements and compliments the other.


A Break for Poor Children
America is the land of the Big Mac, the stupendous pizza, the foot-long hot dog -- and five million children who go to bed hungry.
It is also the land where happy families are the stuff of TV sitcoms -- and dysfunctional families the stuff of countless childhoods.
Today the House of Representatives has an extraordinary chance to help these kids by playing Robin Hood.
Only this won't be robbery.
This will be fairness.
The plan, the Children's Initiative, is simple.
A surtax on the taxable incomes of the richest Americans -- incomes exceeding $1 million yearly -- will give this country $7 billion over five years to spend on its poorest.


Thiokol Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Capital Re reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Johnson Gets Break In the Decathlon
The remaining half of the Dan and Dave Show was saved from virtual elimination for a decathlon medal today by a bizarre turn of events that left Spanish fans fuming, three nations protesting and Dave Johnson counting his blessings.
Johnson, favored to win the gold medal, was given a fourth opportunity in the shot-put after initially being disqualified for fouling on all three allowed throws.
He achieved a personal best, but even with that effort Johnson was in ninth place after the first day with 4,154 points.
His best events are among the five contested on the second day.


CHRONICLE
The 827-seat theater in Washington known as the Arena Stage is being renamed the Fichandler Stage to honor two of its founders, ZELDA and THOMAS C. FICHANDLER.
The dedication ceremony will be in October.
The theater, founded in 1950 by the Fichandlers and Edward Mangum, was one of the first theaters-in-the round in the country.
As the years passed, it thrived sufficiently to require new and larger space.
Mrs.
Fichandler, who is now artistic director of both the Acting Company, in New York, and of the graduate acting program at the New York University Tisch School of the Arts, was the producing director of the Arena Stage for 40 years.
Mr.
Fichandler, who retired in 1986, was executive director.
The couple are now separated.


Robert Peak, Designer of Stamps And Film Posters, Is Dead at 64
Robert Peak, an award-winning illustrator known for his many movie posters, national magazine covers and postage-stamp designs, died on Friday at Scottsdale Memorial North Hospital in Arizona.
He was 64 years old and lived in nearby Carefree.
He suffered a brain hemorrhage in a fall, said his agent, Harvey Kahn.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  U.S. WANTS INQUIRY ON CAMPS
Saying reports of atrocities at Serbian-run camps in Bosnia and Herzegovina were "profoundly disturbing," Deputy Secretary of State Eagleburger called for a war crimes investigation.
A1  NEW EFFORT IN SARAJEVO
A French general working for the United Nations arrived in the Bosnian capital to talk to Serbian nationalists and the Government about re-establishing a cease-fire to let the relief airlift resume.
A8  SURVIVING THE SIEGE
One man powers his television with electricity he generates with a stationary bicycle.
One of his neighbors makes cigarettes by rolling herbs in pages torn from "War and Peace." In a city turned upside down, Sarajevans cope with war.
A8
Seeing orphans caught in the war, Americans try to help.
A8  KNOCKING ON DE KLERK'S DOOR
The flag of the African National Congress was raised on the front porch of South Africa's white minority Government as Nelson Mandela led a huge throng of black protesters to the capital of apartheid.
A1  BY ANY NAME, DIVISION IN ZAIRE
In a move likely to deepen the rift between the opposition and President Mobutu, delegates to a national political conference have voted to change Zaire's name back to the Republic of the Congo.
A3
Mozambique's President and rebel leader meet for the first time.
A3  VOTE SET ON AID TO RUSSIA
Democratic leaders in the House agreed to bring President Bush's plan for aid to Russia and other former Soviet republics to a vote today or tomorrow.
The agreement came after the Administration said it would consider appeals for more domestic spending on housing and transportation.
A10  Russia and Japan end talks on a territorial dispute.
A11  The U.S. says Hanoi blocks progress on missing servicemen.
A13  Addis Ababa Journal: A new head of an ancient faith.
A4  National A14-20, B8-11, D20  4 LOS ANGELES OFFICERS INDICTED
Three months after a state jury acquitted four Los Angeles policemen on nearly all charges in the beating of Rodney G. King, a Federal grand jury indicted the officers.
A1  BIG DISAPPOINTMENT FOR SHUTTLE
It was a luckless day for the Atlantis astronauts, who abandoned their efforts to cast a satellite out into space and slowly reeled the satellite back into the space shuttle.
A1  REDUCED SENTENCE FOR MILKEN
A Federal judge in Manhattan reduced Michael R. Milken's prison sentence on insider trading so that he will have to serve only two years in prison, meaning he will be released in seven months.
A1  NEW SMOG CULPRIT: MOWERS
To most people, it is a lawn mower, but to the Environmental Protection Agency it is an "uncontrolled mobile source" that adds measurably to smog on a summer's day.
A1  36 DAYS AND COUNTING
On the 36th day of the worst state fiscal crisis in American history, budget negotiations in Sacramento, Calif., are moving sluggishly.
A14
How California banks are dealing with the budget troubles.
A14  DEBATE ON CENSUS, REDUX
A battle is brewing over how to adjust the population updates used by Congress to distribute aid to state and local governments.
A15  ANOTHER BLOW TO THE OSPREY
The Pentagon said it would ask contractors to develop a cheaper derivative of the V-22 Osprey.
The announcement set off a new debate about the tilt-rotor aircraft.
A16  NEEDLESS DEATHS FROM ALLERGIES
A study of children who suffered fatal or near-fatal allergic reactions to foods suggested many foods contain hidden ingredients and because adults fail to react quickly.
A17  BUSH'S SOUNDS MORALITY THEME
President Bush put religion and morality at the heart of his effort to undermine public trust in Gov.
Bill Clinton, suggesting that the Democratic nominee lacks the moral fiber to be President.
A20  ON THE ROAD AGAIN
Bill Clinton and Al Gore are taking their act back on the road.
Their three-day bus trip began in St.
Louis, then headed north through towns and small cities in Illinois, Missouri, Wisconsin and Minnesota.
A20  IN MARYLAND, NOT THE GULAG
"This is very weird to me to know that I am missing," said Aldona Marshall Simanavichus, who left the Soviet Union 30 years ago and was astonished last week to see her name on a list of Americans Moscow said were lost in the prison system.
B11  Federal indictment of a Phillips Exeter Academy teacher.
B9  Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-13  Ameriflora: An old hybrid struggles.
C1  Watching television with Anthea Disney.
C1  Violence at home: "They don't want anyone to know." C1  Parent &amp; Child C12  Arts/Entertainment C15-22  For Times Square, a reprieve.
C15  Clint Eastwood on the verge.
C15  Film: "Dream Deceivers." C15  Music: The marginalia of Mostly Mozart.
C15  Obituaries B11-12  Ralph Cooper, Apollo Theater master of ceremonies.
B11  Robert Peak, an illustrator.
B12  William W. Watson, physicist who helped develop atom bomb.
B12  William M. McCord, an author and sociology professor.
B12 Sports B13-21  A DAY TO FORGET
There were upsets and upsetting news in Barcelona, as the United States baseball team and women's basketball squad lost in the medal round and an American athlete was disqualified for drug use.
A1  Olympics: Hammer thrower fails drug test.
B13  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  A bold medical plan, derailed.
New Jersey's surrender on guns.
A break for poor children.
The Senate's language barrier.
Letters  Leslie H. Gelb: False Humanitarianism.
Margaret Thatcher: Stop the excuses.
Help Bosnia now.
Terence Moran: Mr.
Walsh, pack up your tent.
Stanley Fischer: A strong hand for aid to Russia.


Paint-Your-Own Pottery
LAST November, when Emily Goodman opened Pull Cart, a studio where people can paint their own decorations on bisque bowls, mugs, plates and tiles and have them glazed and fired in her kiln, she rented a 400-square-foot space.
Since then, 700 customers have come to paint assorted pieces, sometimes with the help of the manager, Cynthia Higgins, left.
Six weeks ago, Ms.
Goodman moved to 31 West 21st Street in Chelsea, a space that is 2,000 square feet.
She has 200 objects to choose from.


370th Start for Andretti
When MARIO ANDRETTI takes the green flag this Sunday in Cleveland, he will take over the lead for the most career starts in Indy-car racing.
It will be his 370th start since his first Indy-car race, in Trenton in April 1964, putting him one ahead of the total recorded by A. J. FOYT, who is now all but officially retired.


Sports of The Times; In Defense Of the Ugly Americans
YOU have got to be kidding.
People back in the States are saying we're a bunch of spoiled whiners and losers?
Get serious, man.
Just because the women lost in basketball to a country that's falling apart, and the men couldn't win a baseball medal, and Dave Johnson needed a cheesy do-over to stay alive in the decathlon, and one hammer-thrower tests positive, they want to dump on all of us?
Anybody can have a bad day.


Getting By in Sarajevo: Villains Even Get Rich
Shortly before 7:30 P.M. every day, a middle-aged man in the Sarajevo suburb of Dobrinja climbs on a stationary bicycle in an upper-floor apartment and starts pedaling furiously.
The dynamo-rigged bicycle generates a flow of electricity to a television set, and the man, legs still pumping, watches the catalogue of miseries that constitutes the evening news.
Sarajevo under siege is a city where those who wish to enjoy an approximation of their normal comforts must resort to unusual expedients.


American Women Stunned By Loss
With every advancement by the Unified Team against its pressure defense, with every uncontested shot, with every passing second, it became all too clear today that the United States women's basketball team was not what it was cracked up to be.
It was not in a league of its own.
In its four-team pool, in the preliminary round, it had been a powerhouse of Dream Team-like proportions, shredding all three opponents with full-court pressure and unrelenting depth.


Executive Changes
BIPOLAR INTEGRATED TECHNOLOGY INC., Beaverton, Ore., appointed Steve Hubbard president and chief executive.
CNG PRODUCING CO., New Orleans, a unit of Consolidated Natural Gas Co., named Thomas H. Neel senior vice president of exploration and production and chief operating officer.


Reliance Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
Seeking Smaller Schools
The New York City Schools Chancellor wants to create at least 30 smaller, more thematic high schools in the next three years.
Page B1. 2,700 Layoffs in Trenton
New Jersey officials say they will lay off nearly 2,700 state workers because of $1.1 billion in budget cuts voted by the Legislature.
Page B7. 36 Days and Still No Budget
On California's 36th day without a budget, what is most striking in the state capital is the sense of business as usual.
Page A14.
Reprieve for Times Square
The apparent collapse of a $2.5 billion redevelopment project may ultimately mean a more buoyant architecture for the area.
News analysis, page C15.


Miller Building Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Allied Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


United Healthcare Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Meredith Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Allied Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gulfmark International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reliance Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Partners Preferred Yield II reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Raised Eyebrow On the Street
IN the Fairmount Park neighborhood of San Francisco, there is a house whose pediment looks like eyebrows.
One of the brows is arched, as if to ask its neighbor a question.
"The house has an anthropomorphic quality," said Jeremy Kotas, its co-designer with Skip Shaffer.
At 40 feet, the house is one of the tallest on the block.
"Because it is tall, we wanted to make it friendly, to fit in," Mr.
Kotas said.
Dick Ingraham, a retired professor of human genetics, who shares the house with Bill Gregory, an audiometrist, said the children of the neighborhood call it the Owl House.


Miscellany
*
The Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising pages in July rose 8.2 percent from July 1991.
For the year to date, pages have risen 2.3 percent, to 88,933. *
Banana Republic, San Francisco, has bought advertising pages in the second issue of Out magazine, New York, due out Sept. 29.
It is the first time the clothing retailer purchased ad space in a publication aimed at gay and lesbian readers.


Atkinson (Guy F.) Co. (O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ralph Cooper, Who Found Stars At Apollo's Amateur Nights, Dies
Ralph Cooper, the originator and master of ceremonies of Amateur Night at the Apollo Theater in Harlem, died on Tuesday at his home in Harlem.
His age was not known, but his associates at the theater said they believed that he was in his mid- to late 80's.
He died of cancer, said Percy Sutton, a friend and business associate.


Personal Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Editor of Spy Is Moving To New York Observer
The New York Observer said yesterday that Susan Morrison, the executive editor of Spy magazine, would become its editor.
Joe Conason, a former political columnist and staff writer at The Village Voice, was named the executive editor.
The Observer, a weekly newspaper, said they would assume their positions in the next few weeks.
Ms.
Morrison, who has also been an editor at Vanity Fair and The Times of London, will replace Graydon Carter, who left The Observer last month to become the editor in chief of Vanity Fair.


No Headline
"Comrades, the day when we will install our true president is very near. We are just at the door of the Union Buildings. Next time, next time, F. W. de Klerk, we are going to be inside, inside your office." -- CYRIL RAMAPHOSA, Secretary General of the African National Congress.  [ A1:5. ]


Tellus Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Birminghman Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY NEWS
ALLIANT TECHSYSTEMS INC., Edina, Minn., a military and marine systems supplier, said it had signed a definitive agreement to buy two OlinCorp. military units in an exchange of debt and stock valued at about $120 million.
ASEA BROWN BOVERI A.B., Vasteras, Sweden, announced that one of its units had received a turnkey contract to engineer and build a $270 million linear polyethylene plant in Venezuela.


Aon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jan Bell Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dinkins Aide to Join the Clinton Campaign
Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch Jr., Mayor David N. Dinkins's chief political aide, will take a leave of absence to serve as deputy director of the state Presidential campaign of Gov.
Bill Clinton, having received the Mayor's blessing.
Mr.
Lynch, who currently serves as Deputy Mayor for Intergovernmental Affairs and is the Mayor's closest adviser, will leave his post on Aug. 24 and plans to return to City Hall in early November, the Mayor said.
At the Clinton campaign, Mr.
Lynch will oversee voter registration and coalition building in New York City and the surrounding area.


Telephone &amp; Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.28
5.60
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.16
5.38
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.24
5.44
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.12
6.16
7.79
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.42
7.42
8.18
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.38
8.40
9.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.14
6.15
7.05
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Hush Comes Over the Court As U.S. Squad Moves On
The stubble has become fuzz, which has become full-grown volleyball.
With those wild, bald, preliminary days behind it, the United States volleyball team tonight showed some real resilience and maturity in a 12-15, 15-10, 15-4, 15-11 victory over the Unified Team in the quarterfinals of the Olympic tournament.


G.M. Subsidiaries Report Mixed Results for 2d Period
The General Motors Corporation's three nonautomotive subsidiaries posted mixed second-quarter financial results today.
But their cumulative performance was sharply lower than last year's because of a $749.4 million restructuring charge reported six weeks ago by G.M.'s Hughes Aircraft unit.
G.M. will report overall second-quarter results Thursday.
Analysts expect Hughes's one-time write-off to leave the auto maker with a loss of several hundred million dollars in the quarter.


People
*
Joseph P. Durrett, 46 years old, was named president and chief operating officer at Advo Inc., Windsor, Conn., succeeding John Birk, who left.
Mr.
Durrett was previously a senior vice president of sales at Kraft General Foods, Glenview, Ill.


Mixed Yields Are Shown For Money Market Funds
Yields offered by money market funds were mixed in the latest week, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
Analysts said the yield situation appeared to be stabilizing as the funds caught up to the Federal Reserve's lowering of short-term interest rates a month ago.
Walter S. Frank, IBC/Donoghue's chief economist, does not think the Fed is likely to take further action, unless the unemployment numbers released tomorrow compel it to do so.
Otherwise, he said, the monetary officials will hold the line until next month.
"The Fed doesn't like to take action so close to its quarterly refunding," Mr.
Frank said.
Varied Directions
Yields on tax-exempt money funds posted their first gains in weeks, as investors moved toward the longer end of the market and locked into higher-yielding longer-term securities.
Among taxable money market funds, yields were down, but the speed of the decline eased.


If You Play With Heroin, It's Going to Get You; Thriving in Denial
To the Editor:
Having had firsthand experience battling a longtime addiction, I can tell you the damage that an article like "Executive's Secret Struggle With Heroin's Powerful Grip" (front page, July 22) can do.
I've yet to meet anyone who can shoot drugs on the weekend and then leave them alone.
My own attempts at controlled use were a disaster.


Liberty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Says Hanoi Is Blocking Progress on Missing
The Pentagon said today that Hanoi had begun to put new obstacles in the way of resolving more quickly the cases of American servicemen still unaccounted for from the Vietnam War.
The two countries had just begun to make significant progress on the issue, which is blocking the normalization of relations and the lifting of an American economic embargo.
Joint American-Vietnamese teams have been excavating crash sites and conducting interviews in wide areas of Vietnam.


Overpricing of Olympics' Triplecast Service Is Acknowledged
With sales for the beleaguered Olympics Triplecast drastically below the anticipated level, Chuck Dolan, the chairman of Cablevision, said yesterday that he and his partners at NBC misinterpreted research that convinced them that more people would buy the pay-per-view venture.
He said that the faulty projection caused them to overprice the product.
"We were wrong," he said.
"The public didn't find enough incremental value for the Triplecast over what they could get on NBC."


Corrections
A sports article on Tuesday about Olympic gymnasts from the former Soviet Union referred incorrectly to Tatyana Gutsu's homeland.
She is from Ukraine.


Chinese Ex-Official Gets a 4-Year Sentence
A Chinese court sentenced a 36-year-old Government official and advocate of political restructuring to four years in prison today for leaking state secrets during the Tiananmen Square democracy movement.
The trial of the official, Gao Shan, was closed to the public, and apparently to family members as well, because it involved state secrets.
But a spokesman for the Beijing Intermediate People's Court confirmed that Mr.
Gao had received the four-year sentence.


Emerson Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pirates Rookie Revived by Knuckler
There are some things that never change.
Laundry, for instance.
Clothes get dirty, the wash piles up.
Pitch a whopper of a game in your major league debut -- complete game, no earned runs, 10 strikeouts -- get your mug on national television, and still the smelly socks don't disappear miraculously.
That is why, on the day he was to start his second major league game for the Pittsburgh Pirates, 26-year-old Tim Wakefield arrived at Three Rivers Stadium six and a half hours early.
He wanted to run his socks and underwear through the spin cycle for free.


Plant a Tree and Start a Revolution
To the Editor:
In the 11 months since you reported on the desperate condition of New York City's street trees ("A Silent Budget Victim: New York's Dying Trees," news article, Aug. 27, 1991), our block has undergone a remarkable change.
After reading your article, we felt something had to be done if we were to have any vegetation left on West 93d Street.
In January we formed an association to plant and care for our trees.
Money was raised, the city bureaucracy was navigated, and contractors were hired.
The older trees on our block are much fuller and greener because of the increased care they receive.


A Compromise on Radio Station Ownership
The Federal Communications Commission took the middle road today on radio ownership, bowing to opposition from Congress and the radio industry itself.
The agency raised the number of radio stations that a single company may control, to 18 AM and 18 FM stations from the current 12 each, but it retreated from the new rules that it issued earlier this year that would have allowed a company to own 30 AM stations and 30 FM stations.


Addis Ababa Journal; From Academe, a Shepherd for a Withered Flock
In an elaborate ceremony replete with gilt and velvet crown and brocade robes, an Ethiopian doctor of theology from Princeton Theological Seminary was installed recently as Patriarch of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, one of Christianity's most ancient branches.
The ascendancy of the Patriarch, Abuna Paulos, in July comes as Ethiopia emerges from 17 years of hard-line Marxism, during which the church, traditionally the most powerful force in Ethiopian society, was weakened, but not abolished.


Eastwood In Another Change Of Pace
He is one of Hollywood's few icons, an actor who has remained a major box-office star for more than two decades, a film maker who has taken some unusual risks and managed to endure even as he ages.
"Why am I a star?" said Clint Eastwood with a smile.
"It can't be because of looks. I'm 62. Who knows why? I suppose I was always trying to reach out, even when I was much younger. It's so easy to repeat yourself, to fall into complacency. I could have done westerns forever. I have done cop dramas. But somewhere in the scheme of things it would get kind of boring. And if I was bored it would show to the public and if I don't look interested there's no reason
they
should be."


Corrections
An article on Friday about the appointment of a district attorney for Suffolk County, Mass., referred incorrectly to Edward W. Brooke.
He was the first black elected to the United States Senate.
But the first black to serve in the Senate was Hiram Revels of Mississippi, appointed in 1870 to fill the term of Jefferson Davis, which expired in March 1871.


U.S. Jury Indicts 4 Police Officers In King Beating
Three months after a state jury acquitted four Los Angeles police officers on nearly all charges in the beating of Rodney G. King, a verdict that set off deadly riots, a Federal grand jury here has indicted the same four men on Federal charges of violating Mr.
King's civil rights.
The indictment, returned Tuesday afternoon and unsealed today, charges the three officers who beat Mr.
King during an arrest in March 1991 with violating his Fourth Amendment protection against unreasonable arrest.
It charges their sergeant with depriving Mr.
King of his 14th Amendment due-process rights for failing to restrain the officers.
King Could Testify
In announcing the indictments, Lourdes G. Baird, the United States Attorney here, hinted that other police officers at the scene may yet be charged under Federal laws.
"The investigation is still open," she said.
"I cannot comment on what charges we might be looking at or what witnesses we might be looking at."


The Living Room as Museum: Don't Touch
JOSEPH SOSPENSO, an investment-company executive, frequently suggests to his wife, Elizabeth, that they cordon off the living room of their house in Northport, L.I.
You know -- cordon, as in with a silken rope barrier that keeps tourists from sitting on chairs and sofas, or fingering treasures, in historic homes and palaces.
Mr.
Sospenso is jesting, of course.
He would not mind in the least that his living room was sat in, touched and enjoyed.
It just never -- well, rarely -- works out that way.
He and Mrs.
Sospenso do not use the room from one year to the next.
And even when they have guests, the room, elegant with Persian rugs, antique furniture and a piano, seems to be a refuge of last choice.


Midwest Grain Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
RICHARD MARTIN, executive director of the Fashion Institute of Technology's Shirley Goodman Resource Center, has been elected curator of the Metropolitan Museum of Art Costume Institute.
A colleague at F.I.T., HAROLD KODA, director of the design laboratory, has been named associate curator.
In the 1970's and 1980's, during the heady reign of the late Diana Vreeland, who staged spectacular annual theme exhibitions, the Costume Institute was a center of fashion excitement in New York.


Matrix Pharmaceutical Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thomas B. Nolan Is Dead at 91; A Shaper of U.S. Geologic Survey
Thomas B. Nolan, who is credited with shaping the modern missions of the United States Geologic Survey in his 68-year career at the Federal agency, died on Sunday at the George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
He was 91 years old and lived in Washington.
He died of a pulmonary embolism, the agency said yesterday.


Healthsource Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Big Pine Key Journal; A Place for Children? Or for the Deer?
A battle that pits the well-being of schoolchildren against the survival of a herd of endangered deer has divided residents on this small island 120 miles down the Florida Keys from Miami.
Parents want to build a school so their children must no longer be bused to a crowded school 45 minutes away on Sugarloaf Key.
But the proposed site is near federally protected areas that are the last home of the Key deer, animals that conservationists say have been disappearing at an alarming rate as this town of 4,500 people continues to be developed.


New Way To Store More Data
A team of researchers at American Telephone and Telegraph's Bell Laboratories said today that they had demonstrated a new computer data-storage technique that can hold nearly 100 times more data than a compact disk and 300 times more data than current magnetic storage systems.
The data-storage technology could help make possible a variety of new products, ranging from high-definition television to entertainment systems that combine computer graphics, video images and sound.


Universal Hospital Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cedar Fair L.P.  reports earnings for 12mo June 28


Gaining a Perspective on Binoculars
BINOCULARS played a leading role in the Alfred Hitchcock movie "Rear Window," in which a convalescing photographer spies on a neighbor whom he suspects of murder.
Most people use them for more conventional pursuits, like looking at birds, football games and even stars.
"You can actually see nebulae with binoculars if you know how to use them," said Lloyd Malsin, the owner of Clairmont-Nichols Inc., a New York opticians' firm specializing in binocular and telescope repairs.


Coventry Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Teacher Now Faces More Charges in Sex Scandal
A Federal grand jury today indicted a teacher from Phillips Exeter Academy on charges that he distributed child pornography through the United States mail from April to December 1990.
The teacher, Larry Lane Bateman, appeared in a Federal District Court in Concord, N.H., to plead not guilty to 38 counts of interstate shipment of child pornography.
Distribution of such material through the mail is a felony, punishable by up to 10 years in prison and $250,000 in fines.


Union Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE increased life span of Americans over the last century has brought joy to many families.
But while many older people are healthy and productive to the end, those who fall ill tend either to recover quickly or to stay sick for longer periods than they would have a generation or two ago.
In 1900, only 1 in 10 couples between the ages of 40 and 60 had 1 or more of their parents still alive.
Ninety years later, 56 percent of couples that age had at least 2 parents alive.
"I estimate that half the 35-year-olds today will have a dependent parent alive for at least 20 years before that parent dies," said Dr.
Vern L. Bengtson, a professor of sociology and director of research at the Andrus Gerontology Center at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles.


Catalina Lighting Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Capriati's Gain Is a Loss for the Fans
They came to center court at Vall d'Hebron to wave their flags, call out "vamos" and put together a deafening Olympic moment.
But by the time the first set was over and Jennifer Capriati was racing toward the Olympic gold-medal match, the only sound coming from the crowd of 8,500 was that of a soul escaping into the blue Mediterranean sky.
Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, a daughter of Spain and a transplanted Catalan, unraveled like a ball of yarn on a hot, red hearth today in a 6-3, 3-6, 6-1 victory by Capriati that deflated and dismayed the crowd.
The biggest stir came in the second set, when King Juan Carlos, Prince Felipe and the rest of the royal family of Spain took their seats.


Cauthen's Ban Is Extended
The American jockey STEVE CAUTHEN went to British Jockey Club headquarters yesterday in London to fight a controversial whip rule that had already landed him a four-day riding ban.
He failed, and was given an extra six days for a second offense.
Cauthen, one of Europe's leading jockeys and a winner of the Triple Crown in the United States in 1978, was banned for four days last Thursday for misuse of the whip during the Goodwood Cup.


Crystal Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


House Democrats Agree to a Vote on Russian Aid
House Democratic leaders agreed today to bring President Bush's plan for aid to Russia and other former Soviet republics to a vote Thursday or Friday after the Administration agreed to consider their appeals for more domestic spending on housing and transportation.
The legislation, whose centerpiece is a $12 billion increase in the United States commitment to the International Monetary Fund, was passed in the Senate in June.
Despite a range of opposition over everything from Soviet troops in the Baltic to Moscow's aid to Cuba to domestic issues, the bill is expected to pass in the House with majority support from Republicans and Democrats.


Violence at Home: 'They Don't Want Anyone to Know'
SHE is young, beautiful and successful, with a wealthy husband and an executive-level job of her own that pays nearly $100,000 a year.
She is also scared.
She lives in unrelenting terror, always on alert for the strong fist that threatens at any moment to knock her to the ground or pound her face and body black and blue.


Negotiators Hope to Finish Free Trade Pact Today
American, Canadian and Mexican negotiators hope to complete a North American free trade agreement by late Thursday afternoon or Friday, people involved in the talks said today.
The negotiators finished the broad outlines of the planned agreement on Tuesday evening and labored over many of the remaining details today.


Hampton Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Kansas City Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Disparity Is Cited In Free Agency
Even though the Giants would thrive in a more liberal free-agency system, the National Football League as a whole would not, General Manager George Young of the Giants testified today in the N.F.L. trial over free agency.
"New York is where it's at," Young said in his second day of testimony at the trial, which is in its sixth week.
"It's the commercial and media capital of the world. Our players go to various functions and say Howdy-do and get $5,000. We all need to remain on the same playing field. Is anybody getting a great deal of enjoyment out of the Dream Team? Maybe somebody is, but I'm not. Free agency would give us a league of haves and have-nots."


Candela Laser Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


SPI Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gaylord Container reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oxford Health Plans reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Escalade Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 11


CHRONICLE
Some people may have theaters named for them, others have streets or avenues or buildings, but MURIEL SIEBERT is soon to have her name bestowed upon a vine in France.
A pioneer in finance -- as the first woman to have a seat on the New York Stock Exchange and the first woman to be superintendent of banking for New York State -- she has been chosen as a 1992 Veuve Clicquot Business Woman of the Year.


Derlan Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Americans, A Day to Forget At the Olympics
It was not merely that the United States lost today on the world's Olympic stage in two sports it invented -- baseball and basketball -- or that it was defeated twice by athletes from the splintered remains of the Soviet Union.
American athletes found themselves in controversy as well.
There was a failed drug test for a hammer thrower, who became the first United States track and field athlete to be disqualified from an Olympics for drug use, and booing for a onetime darling of Madison Avenue.
And a runner missed a world record because he coasted in the final meters.


Electronic Data Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nerco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Warehouse Club Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; WPP Gets a Second Chance As Holders Clear Debt Plan
SHAREHOLDERS of WPP Group P.L.C. voted overwhelmingly yesterday at a special meeting in London to approve a plan that extensively restructures its crushing debt.
The approval, by holders of 99.7 percent of the shares voted, offers the agency holding company time to try to ride out the industry's seemingly endless recession.


State Auto Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Atwood Oceanics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Suspect's Parole Questioned
The man charged with six Hudson Valley deaths was on parole at the time.
Critics say the case points up a troubled system.
Article, page B7.


New Jersey's Surrender on Guns
It's hard to overstate the cynicism of New Jersey's Republican lawmakers.
This week they cast aside crime control and public safety by repealing a ban on assault weapons in response to a vocal, well-financed gun lobby.
Gov.
Jim Florio, who vows to veto the repeal, deserves support for his campaign against an override.
Assault weapons, designed for military combat, fire rapidly from large magazines.
Though they account for only 1 percent of civilian-owned firearms, they are used in 10 percent of crimes involving guns.
In 1990 New Jersey's legislature passed a sensible law restricting sale and possession of assault weapons, with exceptions only for contestants in certain target matches and collectors willing to disable their guns.


Focus of Knights of Columbus Is Abortion
A proposal to erect a "tomb of the unborn child" in every Roman Catholic diocese in the country has become a symbol of the anti-abortion mood at this week's convention of the Knights of Columbus, the 1.5 million-member Catholic fraternal organization.
At a Mass opening the meeting on Tuesday, John Cardinal O'Connor, the Archbishop of New York, spoke about such a monument he had seen two weeks ago at Franciscan University in Steubenville, Ohio.
He suggested that the Knights erect and maintain similar memorials to the "countless victims" of abortion in at least one Catholic cemetery in each diocese across the nation.


Westbridge Capital reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Central Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Board of Trade In Chicago Tries TV
For the first time, the Chicago Board of Trade is presenting a corporate image message on television.
A 30-second spot, which began running yesterday, depicts traders at work in the soybean pit, flashing their hand signals, and it calls them "the most efficient, high-speed communications system around."
The spot, created by Tower Productions in Chicago, will run for a year on "Chicago Tonight," a public-affairs program on WTTW-TV, the PBS station in Chicago.
It publicizes the C.B.O.T.'s role as an underwriter of the program.


Books of The Times; New and Kinder Conclusion for a Twice-Told Tale
This Crazy Thing Called Love  The Golden World and Fatal Marriage of Ann and Billy Woodward  By Susan Braudy  Illustrated. 484 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
Although the press coverage was sensational when Ann Woodward shot her wealthy socialite husband, William (Billy) Woodward Jr., early in the morning of Oct. 30, 1955, the case is probably best known through two novels, "Answered Prayers," by Truman Capote, and "The Two Mrs. Grenvilles," by Dominick Dunne, both of which argue that what a grand jury judged to be an accident was actually a premeditated murder.


Playboy Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Water Works reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Accounts
*
Corestates Financial Corp., Philadelphia, to Gray Kirk/VanSant Advertising Inc., Baltimore, to handle the bank holding company's retail image advertising, previously handled by Earle Palmer Brown Spiro , Philadelphia, which said the account had been dormant for the last two years.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million.


First Marathon reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bear Stearns Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Phar-Mor and Its Ex-Auditor Clash on Fraud Case
Coopers &amp; Lybrand, a Big Six auditing firm, blamed its former client, Phar-Mor Inc., and Phar-Mor blamed Coopers yesterday for not uncovering more promptly $350 million in fraudulent profit reports and a multimillion-dollar embezzlement that the discount drug chain says it found.
As Phar-Mor executives disclosed further details yesterday, several members of Congress said the company's charges bolstered the case for tighter Federal auditing regulations.
The House Energy and Commerce Committee unanimously approved a bill last week that would provide civil penalties for auditors who fail to alert company executives, board members and Federal regulators when there is evidence of fraud.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Julian Joseph Quartet  Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, Above Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village Through Sunday
Jazz musicians often spend their careers intoxicated by the musical line, with the traces of their improvisatory imagination highlighted against the rhythm section.
Julian Joseph, the 26-year-old English pianist making a rare visit to the United States, would rather turn his band into his instrument instead, using his piano improvisations as a way of spontaneously arranging the music.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Gov.
Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore
MONDAY: 7-9 A.M., CBS, "CBS This Morning," question-and-answer session with viewers and studio audience.
(Channel 2 in New York) Vice President Quayle
FRIDAY: 5 P.M., C-Span, tape of speeches at campaign stops in Ohio.


Eastex Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Concord EFS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reliance Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Security Tag Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Orphans in Bosnia Tug at Hearts in U.S.
Donna Gavette used to ignore the war in the Balkans, for it seemed a tangled and confusing conflict grinding on month after month in a distant land.
But when she read the newspaper over breakfast the other day, the violence in Sarajevo was suddenly brought home.
Mrs.
Gavette felt overwhelmed by photographs of terrified young children whose bus had been attacked by Serbian snipers as it was leaving Sarajevo, the besieged capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Two children were killed in the attack.
The images were so shocking that she and her husband, Barry, vowed to try to adopt one of the children or at least send them money.


United Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


William W. Watson, 92, Physicist Who Helped Develop Atom Bomb
Dr.
William W. Watson, a former chairman of the physics department at Yale University who helped develop the atomic bomb, died on Monday in Hamden, Conn.
He was 92 years old.
The cause of death was not yet known, said his daughter, Ruth Martin, of New Haven.


Megafoods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


TRC Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Suffolk Raises Sales Tax Half a Cent
After a final round of flailing, the Suffolk County Legislature agreed today to raise the county sales tax by half a cent to 8.5 percent to close a budget deficit and avert a property-tax increase.
The new rate, which means Suffolk joins neighboring Nassau County in collecting the highest sales tax in the state and among the highest in the nation, will take effect on Sept. 1.
It automatically expires on Dec. 31, 1993, unless county officials gain state permission for an extension.
The higher rate will produce an estimated $12 million in revenue this year and about $50 million next year.


Travelers Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NFL TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Los Angeles Rams
Sure, sure, it will be his first visit to the Kingdome since he left as the Seattle coach in December, but don't expect Coach Chuck Knox to go into an emotional tizzy when the Rams open their exhibition season against the Seahawks tonight.


Pacific Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Growing
ABOUT a hundred miles south of Columbus, Ohio, not far from the village of Locust Grove, a giant snake winds along the top of a ridge overlooking Brush Creek.
It is not a real snake, not what a Western man like Columbus would have called real.
It is an effigy made of earth.
Its body, when you stand next to it, is about 5 feet high and 20 feet wide and a quarter mile long -- if you stretched out this snake in your mind.
Its tail faces the setting sun.
And its mouth, wide open, seems to be about to swallow a giant egg or circle.


Critic's Notebook; TV Images of Bosnia Ignite Passions and Politics
Once again, Washington finds itself under siege by television news.
After the Persian Gulf war, pictures of battered Kurdish refugees forced the Administration to provide them with a semblance of protection.
Now the pressure is on to put an end to the grim scenes from what used to be Yugoslavia:


Milken's Sentence Reduced by Judge; 7 Months Are Left
A Federal judge in Manhattan reduced Michael R. Milken's prison sentence yesterday so that he will have to serve only two years in prison, meaning he will be released in seven months.
Under a Federal work-release program for which he will be eligible next month, weekends at home could begin soon for Mr.
Milken, who made a huge fortune running the leading junk bond operation of the 1980's.


Thomas Nelson Publishers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stanford Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. Seeks to End Barrage That Blocks Aid to Sarajevo
As intensive fighting continued around Sarajevo today, a French general arrived to talk to the Serbs attacking the city and the Bosnian defenders about re-establishing a cease-fire around the airport so United Nations relief flights can resume.
On a day when 20 flights would normally have landed, the French military transport carrying Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon from Zagreb, the Croatian capital, was the only flight to land at Butmir Airport.
General Morillon, commander of United Nations units monitoring a truce in parts of Croatia, was assigned here to review the airlift after commanders decided on Tuesday to suspend flights for at least 72 hours, until dawn on Saturday.


Royals Put McReynolds On 15-Day Disabled List
Kansas City left fielder KEVIN McREYNOLDS, one of three players acquired from the Mets in the deal for BRET SABERHAGEN and BILL PECOTA, has been put on the 15-day disabled list with a slight separation of his right shoulder.
McReynolds was injured Tuesday night in a collision with California second baseman LUIS SOJO.
He was hitting .239 with 13 home runs and 47 runs batted in.


Teagle Is Headed for Italy
TERRY TEAGLE, a 10-year veteran of four National Basketball Association teams, yesterday signed with the Italian champion, Benetton Treviso.


U.S. Cellular Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NAVY ALTERS PLAN FOR NOVEL PLANE
Touching off a new debate over the V-22 Osprey, the tilt-rotor aircraft, the Pentagon said today that it would ask contractors to develop a cheaper derivative of the plane.
The announcement that the Pentagon was seeking to pare back the range and speed requirements for the Osprey, which takes off like a helicopter and flies like a plane, brought criticism from some of its supporters.
They expressed fears that the Pentagon was reneging on a compromise over its development that was reached last month.


Theragenics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Consumers Water reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Northwestern Public Service Co.  reports earnings for 12mos June 30


Turn West at the Pillow
MAPS usually go on walls. Now they can go on furniture.
To commemorate the 500th anniversary of Columbus's first voyage to America, a new upholstery design, Voyage of Columbus, below, depicts ships sailing around the world.
Another, with several charts, is called the Map of Explorers, and a third, a chintz, shows old compass designs.


Astrotech International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Heist (C.H.) Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Parks Dept. Weighs Beaches With Areas for Topless Women
Concerned that topless sunbathing by women will offend the general public, New York State's parks department is considering restricting the activity to designated areas on its beaches.
The concerns emerged after the New York State Court of Appeals dismissed criminal charges last month against two women who bared their breasts in a Rochester park to protest the state's nudity laws.


Fujitsu Expects Its First Deficit Ever
In another sign of Japan's deepening economic slump, Fujitsu Ltd., the nation's largest computer company, said today that it would lose money for the first time in its history in first half of this fiscal year.
Company officials and analysts say the loss, expected to be about $80 million, stems from severe pricing pressures in the semiconductor business and sluggishness in the computer business.
In addition, analysts say, Fujitsu, which is heavily dependent on large mainframe computers, is facing some of the same pressures as its archrival, the International Business Machines Corporation, which has gone through wrenching pain as computers have become smaller and less expensive.


Corrections
A front-page article last Thursday about the indictment of Clark M. Clifford in New York misstated his relationship with the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau.
Both men worked for President John F. Kennedy, but they do not know each other.


U.S. Holds New Maneuvers in Kuwait


Allegre, Jets' Kicker, Keeps Job Quest in Sober Perspective
Raul Allegre doesn't know what the ultimate pressure is, but he doesn't think a last-second field goal with a chance to win a game is it.
"I don't think football is a life and death situation at any point," Allegre said.
"You are under pressure, sure. But policemen, firemen, airline pilots are under a lot more pressure than you are. There is pressure in football, but that's not the ultimate pressure. I'm sure that everybody in their own life faces difficult situations."


F.B.I. Takes Second Look At Evidence In Conviction
The Justice Department has ordered the F.B.I. to take a new look at evidence used to convict a former immigration official imprisoned for conducting illegal searches of Hispanic-owned businesses in Washington Heights, senior law-enforcement officials in New York said.
The order, to reinterview at least a dozen witnesses, is the latest twist in an unusual legal case involving the former official, Joseph Occhipinti, who was convicted in June 1991 of violating the rights of shopkeepers during searches for illegal aliens who might be involved in the drug trade.


Wharf Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Falconbridge Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Remove the Senate's Language Barrier
After restoring voting rights that had been stolen from black Americans, Congress realized that others had also been disenfranchised -- not by slavery and segregation but by language deficiency.
In 1975 it required localities to provide language assistance, helping primarily Hispanic-Americans to understand and cast their ballots.
Those provisions expire today, but they need renewal so they can run their course, along with the rest of the 1965 Voting Rights Act, until the year 2007.
The House passed the extension last month on a bipartisan vote of 237 to 135.
But the bill, despite strong Bush Administration support, is being obstructed by a handful of senators.


Riders Grab Medals, But Horses Steal Show
There is a little-known event in the Olympics where stars with names like Chevalier and Gigolo show their class by performing piaffes, pirouettes and flying changes.
And when they triumph, they stand by, nodding -- occasionally even dribbling -- as others collect the medals.
Welcome to individual dressage, where the real heroes are of course horses, mighty stallions who, like muscle-bound dancers, carry out a nine-minute ballet of highly controlled exercises to a background of classical music.
Then their riders -- invariably Germans, it seems -- walk away with the honors.


Osteotech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


General Motors Acceptance Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Watts and Marsh Blaze to Glory on the Track
In another dazzling night of track and field at the Barcelona Olympics, Quincy Watts and Mike Marsh of the United States set Olympic records in their events by running the second-fastest times in history.
Watts won the 400-meter final in 43.50 seconds, the second time in three days he lowered Lee Evans's 24-year-old Olympic record of 43.86.
Marsh won his 200-meter semifinal in 19.73 seconds, missing the 13-year-old world record held by Pietro Mennea of Italy by 1-hundredth of a second.
Equal Billing
Yet maybe more astonishing than either achievement on a night that also included Carl Lewis reaching 28 feet 5 3/4 inches to lead a dozen into the long jump final and Dave Johnson's near disaster in the decathlon, was Michael Johnson's performance.
The leading 200-meter runner in the world the last two years and the clear favorite to win the gold medal, he failed to advance to the final by finishing sixth in his semifinal race.


Caretenders Healthcorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cascades Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Serving Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Harry L. Hansen, 80, Professor of Business
Harry L. Hansen, a retired professor at Harvard Business School who was a major figure in the development of advanced business programs throughout the world, died on Monday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 80 years old and lived in Cambridge.
Professor Hansen died of cancer, said James Aisner, a Harvard Business School spokesman.


Partners Preferred Yield III reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ragen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jenny Craig reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Victoria Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lewis and Powell Qualify
Carl Lewis might be having his troubles as a sprinter, but there is nothing wrong with his long jumping.
In his first and only attempt in the qualification round of the Summer Olympics tonight, he jumped 28 feet 5 3/4 inches, more than two feet beyond the automatic qualifying distance to gain the final Thursday night.
Mike Powell, who beat Lewis with a world-record effort last year in Tokyo and again last month in New Orleans, also moved on with one jump, 26-8 1/2.


Japan and Russia End Talks on Disputed Isles
Senior Russian and Japanese officials ended talks today showing new flexibility in their attempts to resolve a last major cold-war issue, Russia's grip on four bleak northern islands seized from Japan in the waning days of World War II.
The Russian official added a new element to the delicate talks, however, by saying the United States should participate and consider reducing its heavy military presence in the region if Russia gives up some of the islands, where it maintains military bases.


Philip Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Officials Revive Issue of Adjusting '90 Census
A year after the Bush Administration decided against adjusting the 1990 census to compensate for an undercount in the inner cities, the adjustment issue is back.
The question this time is how to adjust the biennial population updates that Congress uses to distribute tens of billions of dollars to state and local governments annually.


For 50 Years a Home, a Real Home
A SWAMPLAND that separated the Clason Point Gardens housing development from the Bronx River 50 years ago has long been drained, and the nearby mom-and-pop stores are also long gone -- replaced by the sort of high-rises that have given public housing a bad name.
But Clason Point Gardens, the first public housing project built in the Bronx, remains to this day, remarkably, what it was meant to be a half-century ago: a good place to raise a family, and something of an oasis from the hubbub that surrounds it.
With its low-slung structures that provided every family with a tiny plot of land, Clason Point Gardens was a piece of the suburbs in the city.


Thomas J. King; Architect, 35
Thomas J. King, an architect who worked on the renovation of the Museum of Modern Art and other projects in New York and elsewhere, died last Thursday at his home in Nantucket, Mass.
He was 35 years old.
He died of AIDS, his stepfather, Robert J. Harbaugh Sr., said yesterday.


Smithfield Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Value Health Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Plum Creek Timber L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wajax Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cubs Dismiss Executives
The Chicago Cubs yesterday dismissed DICK BALDERSON as vice president for scouting and player development, and BILL HARFORD as director of minor league operations.


Shades Of Havana On 5th Ave.
MR.
FUJI may or may not have existed.
"We had read in a travel brochure that he was a Japanese singer who performed in nightclubs in Cuba in the late 40's and early 50's," said Michele Savoia, the designer of Mr.
Fuji's Tropicana, a 40's-style restaurant that will open this month at 61 Fifth Avenue, at 13th Street, in what used to be the Lone Star Cafe.
Mr.
Savoia and the restaurant's owners spent a futile day in the New York Public Library trying to find evidence that Mr.
Fuji was real.
The tropical theme is apparent in the 14-foot high palm trees on the second floor and the fronds on the brocade that upholsters banquettes.
The flash of old-time


Mandela Takes His Message to Apartheid's Citadel
Nelson Mandela led a huge and orderly throng of black protesters to the capital of apartheid today to raise the flag of the African National Congress on the front porch of the white Government and demand that President F. W. de Klerk make way for majority rule.
Mr.
Mandela, president of the congress, told supporters who marched to a park beneath the Union Buildings, the seat of the South African executive branch, that he hoped to resume negotiations on the country's future but that South African blacks would make peace "standing on our feet, not kneeling on our knees."


Marten Transport Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


MC Shipping Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Restored I.R.A.'s Make Fiscal Sense
To the Editor:
You say my proposal to restore and expand the individual retirement account is too expensive (editorial, July 28).
I say we can't afford not to take this action.
Most Americans, including leading economists, think that a restored I.R.A. would give a healthy boost to savings in this country.
When fully deductible I.R.A.'s were curtailed, contributions plummeted from $38 billion to $14 billion, and the country's savings rate dropped one-fourth, to the lowest level since the Depression.


Calendar: Gardening And Saving Water
Save Water  Room 201, 280 Broadway at Chambers Street; (212) 566-0945.
The city's Department of Environmental Protection and Department of Housing Preservation and Development will offer a seminar for co-op, condo and building owners on water conservation tomorrow from 10 A.M. to 1 P.M.
Topics will include plumbing fixtures, detecting leaks and tenant cooperation.
Every building in New York City will be fitted with water meters by 1996.
The seminar will be repeated Aug. 20 from 5:30 to 8:30 P.M.
No charge, but reservations are required.


Winpak Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


If You Play With Heroin, It's Going to Get You; Legalize, Regulate
To the Editor:
The escape of Pablo Escobar, the leader of one of the world's most powerful cocaine cartels, from the plush prison he designed and built is disturbing because it indicates the depth of corruption that accompanies Colombia's war on drugs (news article, July 24).
However, neither his escape nor his possible recapture will have any impact on the availability of cocaine in the United States or on the number of cocaine users.


Plan Seeks Small Schools With Themes
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez has embraced an effort to create smaller, more thematic high schools and is committing his administration to establishing at least 30 of them over the next three years.
The plan would represent a significant attempt by the New York City school system to create schools that are easier to manage and tailored more to individual student needs.
The School Board has already approved four of the schools, one of which opened in February.
Another is scheduled to open next month.


Albert Tavares; Casting Director, 39
Albert Tavares, a stage and casting director, died on July 28 in Taunton, Mass.
He was 39 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, said Les Ribaudo, a friend.


ERO Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sun Electric Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


International Semi-Tech Microelectronics reports earnings for Year to April 30


National Western Life Insurance Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Merisel Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Norcen Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Century Telephone Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chiron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Foodmaker Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Trenton Budget-Cut Layoffs to Total 2,700
New Jersey officials said today that they would lay off nearly 2,700 state workers beginning in October because of $1.1 billion in budget cuts voted by the Legislature.
The number of layoffs was more than twice what the Republicans, who control the Legislature, had predicted would be necessary but only half of what the administration had forecasted.


Trottier Rejoining Islanders?
Bryan Trottier, who earned four Stanley Cup rings with the Islanders and two more with the Pittsburgh Penguins, may soon be working again at Nassau Coliseum.
His return could be one of many significant changes possible for an Islander organization expected to be under new management before the start of the 1992-93 season.
Trottier, who is 36 years old and lives on Long Island, had hoped to play a third season for the two-time champion Penguins, but he said yesterday, "It doesn't look good." When asked about talk linking him to the team with which he spent the first 15 years of his National Hockey League career, the future Hall of Famer replied:


America West Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In 3-Book Deal, Koontz Changes Publishers
Alfred A. Knopf and Ballantine Books have jointly signed a contract to publish three novels by Dean Koontz, the author of such best-selling thrillers as "Hideaway," "Cold Fire" and "Bad Place." The deal gives the two Random House imprints North American hard-cover and paperback rights to the books.


St. Joe Paper Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Economic Scene; Trade-Pact Fears Seem Overstated
NOW that a North American Free Trade Agreement looks imminent, some Democrats are worried that it will make America's working poor even poorer.
The most dire predictions, from the liberal Economic Policy Institute, are that low-wage Mexican workers will steal $1,000 from the paychecks of most American workers each year and rob them of half a million jobs.
Though legitimate, such fears -- which the Canadians also share -- seem overstated.
A comprehensive review by the middle-of-the-road Brookings Institution recently found that all but one of 15 studies of the effect of freer trade with Mexico and Canada concluded that pay would get a small increase.
The single exception, and the one cited by the Economic Policy Institute, fails to take into account the pay-raising effects of greater competitiveness and bigger market size.


Harris Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


International Dismay In National Pastime
Not even a bronze.
With an 8-3 loss to Japan today, the United States baseball team, representing the nation where the game began and featuring 14 first-round choices in the June major league draft, finished fourth in the first official Olympic tournament.
"We felt if we won a medal, it would've been a great success," said Ron Fraser, the American coach.
"If we had another month or two, we probably would've done better, but we didn't start putting this team together until early June. The selection process has to be changed; a better system has to be installed."


Pacific International Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Electro Brain International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Green Mountain Power reports earnings for 12mo June 30


U.S. Hammer Thrower Ousted for Failing Drug Test
Jud Logan, a five-time United States champion in the hammer throw and the fourth-place finisher at the Barcelona Olympics, failed a drug test today and became the first United States athlete in track and field ever disqualifed from the Summer Games.
A 32-year-old thrower from North Canton, Ohio, who represents the New York Athletic Club, Logan was found to have Clenbuterol, a banned substance, in a urine sample taken after the competition on Sunday.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
IN addition to frequent sweeping or vacuuming, rugs and carpets need regular attention to the pile, prompt action to remove spills and thorough cleaning about once a year.
Antique, hand-knotted and other fragile rugs require special handling (for example, some are too delicate for frequent vacuuming and should be swept instead), but ordinary rugs and carpeting made of synthetics or wool are easy to maintain.
At least once a week, sweep or vacuum rugs and carpets to prevent dirt from becoming embedded.
Vacuuming against the pile direction removes the most dirt and also raises the fibers, preserving their springiness.


From Gulag in '45 to Maryland Today
More than 30 years after her release from Soviet labor camps and her arrival in the United States penniless and broken in health, Aldona Marshall Simanavichus was astonished last week to see her name on a list of 39 Americans who Moscow said had been imprisoned in World War II and then somehow lost in the system.
"This is very weird to me to know that I am missing, that my family is missing," Mrs.
Simanavichus, now 70 years old, said in an interview Tuesday in her home in Lanham, Md.


Omni Films International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bertucci's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 11


Vishay Intertechnology Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Teen-Age Suicide, Rock And Parental Deception
The unusual arrangement through which "Dream Deceivers" had a simultaneous theatrical premiere at the Film Forum and a television showing on Channel 13 this week emphasizes the importance of format for documentary film makers.
Good documentaries often go from theatrical showings to television (as Marlon Riggs's "Color Adjustment" did).
And occasionally they take the opposite route ("Heart of Darkness: A Film Maker's Apocalypse" was seen by cable viewers well before its theatrical release).
More often, the film makers must choose between television's larger audience and the keener attention that will be given a film shown in a theater.
"Dream Deceivers," directed by David Van Taylor, is an hourlong work shot on videotape, which would seem to make television its most appropriate context.
But the material is so overpowering, and the videotape creates such painful intimacy, that the coziness of the small screen may not do it justice.
In any case, at the Film Forum "Dream Deceivers" has been wittily paired with "The Red Bridge," a matter-of-fact look at a tiny village in Luxembourg that has the bad luck to be a favorite spot for suicidal jumpers.


Ameriflora: An Odd Hybrid Struggles
IT takes guts to set out in a ship when you don't know where you're going.
You may arrive at something big -- like America -- and fill your coffers with gold.
Or you may be undone by torrential storms, unconquerable natives, critics, lack of finances.
Or simply the vast unexplored territory of your own naivete.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Michael R. Milken will have to serve only two years in prison.
Federal Judge Kimba M. Wood reduced the junk bond king's 10-year sentence so that he will be released in seven months.
Under a work-release program he could spend weekends at home soon.
She cited his cooperation with Federal prosecutors.  [ Page A1. ]
The F.C.C. compromised on radio station ownership, raising the number of stations a company may control to 18 AM stations and 18 FM stations from 12 each at present.  [ D1. ]


First Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  AGENT'S CONVICTION TO BE REVIEWED
The Justice Department has ordered the F.B.I. to take a new look into the validity of evidence used to convict a former immigration official imprisoned for conducting illegal searches of Hispanic-owned businesses in Washington Heights, senior law-enforcement officials in New York said.
B3.
NEW TRANSIT STRATEGY
As part of a new strategy to deal with falling ridership on New York City's public transportation system, the Transit Authority is planning to increase the number of subway trains on certain lines and start new bus services beginning in September.
B3.
PRUDENTIAL TO STAY IN NEW YORK
Having declined to take space in the Times Square Center office complex planned by its parent company, Prudential Securities Inc. has nonetheless decided to stay in New York City, keeping its headquarters and about 5,000 jobs in lower Manhattan.
B3.
TOMBS FOR THE UNBORN?
A proposal to erect a "tomb of the unborn child" in every Roman Catholic diocese in the country has become a symbol of the anti-abortion mood at this week's convention of the Knights of Columbus, the Catholic fraternal organization.
B3.
BUSH MEETS WITH O'CONNOR
With John Cardinal O'Connor beside him, President Bush won a standing ovation from the Knights of Columbus delegates when he pledged to stand firm against abortion, in a speech that put morality at the heart of his campaign to undermine the public's trust in Gov.
Bill Clinton.
A20.
A REAL HOME FOR 50 YEARS
Clason Point Gardens, the first public housing project built in the Bronx, remains today what it was meant to be a half-century ago: a good place to raise a family, and something of an oasis from the hubbub that surrounds it.
Clason Point Journal, B2.
REGION  2,700 LAYOFFS IN NEW JERSEY
Announcing the largest layoff in New Jersey history, state officials said they would lay off almost 2,700 workers beginning in October because of $1.1 billion in budget cuts voted by the Republican Legislature.
The number was more than twice what the Republicans had predicted would be necessary but only half what the Democrats in Trenton had forecast.
B7.
TAX INCREASE FOR SUFFOLK
The Suffolk County Legislature agreed to raise the county sales tax by half a penny to 8.5 percent to close a budget deficit from last year and avert a property-tax increase.
The new rate means that Suffolk will be joining neighboring Nassau County in collecting the highest sales tax in the state and among the highest in the nation.
B6.
PRE-EMPTIVE ATTACK ON TOPLESSNESS
Concerned that topless sunbathing by women will offend the general public, New York State's parks department is considering restricting the activity to designated areas on its beaches.
B6.
EX-OFFICIAL CONVICTED OF BRIBERY
The former Albany County Executive was convicted of accepting a $30,000 bribe from an architect hired to design the Knickerbocker Arena.
B6.
Chronicle B9


Driver-Harris Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Officer Shoots Three Suspects, Killing One
A New York City police officer shot and killed an 18-year-old and wounded two other men yesterday in Inwood, L.I., after someone in the van that they were riding in pointed a gun at the officer, the police said.
The officer and a partner had followed the two-tone blue van into Nassau County from Far Rockaway, Queens, after receiving a tip yesterday afternoon that six young men, some armed with guns, were riding around in such a van, said Capt.
Joseph Hardiman of the Queens Detectives.


6 Victims and a Suspect: The Mysteries Endure
A few days after Jill Garrison learned that her niece had disappeared, her boyfriend, Nathaniel White, went with her to her family's July 4 picnic and tried to console relatives by saying the girl would turn up and be fine.
When Laurette Huggins Reviere, a close friend of Ms.
Garrison, was found stabbed in her home a week later, Ms.
Garrison said today, she and her boyfriend talked about what would happen to the woman's two children, who had slept over at their house a few weeks earlier.


Giants' Line Shuffle Is Blocked So Far
William Roberts, his recent irregular heartbeat still unexplained, watches the Giants practice and waits to resume work.
Jumbo Elliott, his injured back having failed to respond to therapy and exercise, has entered a hospital with little idea of how soon he will return.
Eric Moore, still unsigned and absent, has delayed the team's plan to move him from right guard to right tackle.
The Giants, facing their first exhibition game on Sunday night against Cincinnati, find themselves dealing with several unplanned changes at a training camp they were planning to use to complete a restructuring of the offensive line.


Needless Deaths Are Attributed To Food Allergy
A study of 13 children who suffered fatal or near-fatal allergic reactions to foods they unwittingly consumed has suggested that hundreds of youngsters die needlessly every year because many foods contain hidden ingredients and because adults, including some doctors, fail to treat the allergic crisis as the medical emergency it is.
The study, by Dr.
Hugh A. Sampson and colleagues at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, showed that most of the six deaths and seven near-deaths investigated resulted largely from a failure on the part of adults to recognize how serious the situation was and to take the proper action.
The findings point to widespread trouble in avoiding problem foods when eating away from home and in obtaining prompt emergency medical assistance, especially for children in school.


Braun's Credentials
To the Editor:
On July 29 Carol Moseley Braun was featured in a front-page article on her candidacy for the United States Senate from Illinois.
There you describe Ms.
Braun as "a den mother with a cheerleader's smile." You describe her male opponent, "by comparison," as "all business, like the corporate lawyer he is."
This "comparison" is insulting because it limits the description of Ms.
Braun's personality to a stereotype of women in two traditional female roles that are not seen as serious.


STATE DEPT. ASKS WAR CRIMES INQUIRY INTO BOSNIA CAMPS
Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger said today that reports of atrocities at detention centers in Bosnia and Herzegovina were "profoundly disturbing" and called for a war-crimes investigation.
Apparently in an attempt to rebut charges that the Bush Administration has put too low a priority on curbing the fighting in Bosnia, Mr.
Eagleburger issued a statement detailing new American efforts to increase pressure on both sides to open detention camps to Red Cross inspection.
Congressional Democrats and others, both here and abroad, have joined this week in pressing for bolder, quicker action.
Shelling Closes Airport
Among other steps, the United States called for an extraordinary session of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva, perhaps as early as next week, and Mr.
Eagleburger, a former Ambassador to Yugoslavia who is Acting Secretary during the vacation of James A. Baker 3d, said "urgent action is required to reveal the truth and to prevent any abuses that may be occurring" in the camps.


Jon Schueler, 75, Abstract Artist Whose Paintings Evoked Nature
Jon Schueler, a painter of large-scale abstractions known for their strong evocations of nature, died yesterday at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 75 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Mallaig, Scotland.
The cause of death was pneumonia complicated by Parkinson's disease, said his wife, Magda Salvesen, an art historian.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Jabs at Rival's Morals, Saying Values Are Besieged
President Bush today put religion and morality at the heart of his effort to undermine public trust in Gov.
Bill Clinton, suggesting that the Democratic nominee lacks the moral fiber to be President.
Accompanied by John Cardinal O'Connor, Mr.
Bush appeared before a wildly applauding, flag-waving crowd at a Knights of Columbus meeting in New York City to present himself as the nation's "moral compass" at a time when he said its "fundamental values" were under siege.


Awards Are Given For Package Design
Unusual, innovative packages for three products were named "best of show" in an initial competition intended as an annual awards ceremony for product package design.
Two of the three International Brand Packaging Awards, sponsored by Graphic Design U.S.A. and Murray J. Lubliner Associates, both in New York, were awarded to London-based designers.
Lewis Moberly won for its packaging for Limmits , a biscuit meant to provide a complete meal, while P. I. Design Consultants won for developing a plastic see-through container and label design for Avi paint.


In Budgetless California, a Sense of Business as Usual
On California's 36th day without a state budget, negotiations here are moving sluggishly, lawmakers are cranky, Gov.
Pete Wilson's face is etched with strain and state workers are scrambling to cash the i.o.u.'s they are getting instead of paychecks.
Today the Bank of America, the state's largest bank, stopped offering cash to its customers in exchange for the i.o.u.'s and several other banks are expected to follow suit at week's end.


Foreign Affairs; False Humanitarianism
Let me be chillingly blunt about what Western officials told me regarding the Balkan crisis.
They said that nothing they are doing or plan to do is at all likely to compel the Serbs to stop killing Bosnian Muslims.
And, as is becoming tragically clear, Western policy is merely to provide enough humanitarian relief for Bosnian Muslims to quiet Western public opinion -- and to do so without taking any military action that might suck Western forces into actually protecting the Muslims or their territory.


American Israeli Paper Mills Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


PacifiCorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


REPORTED PLAN TO BUILD STEEL MINI-MILL IS DENIED BY USX
The USX Corporation, the nation's largest steel producer, yesterday denied reports that its steel division had established definite plans to build a steel mini-mill.
An article in The Wall Street Journal yesterday reported that sites in Kentucky and Tennessee were being considered for the plant and that the operation would be built next year.
Thomas Usher, president of the company's U.S.
Steel division, said in a telephone interview that several mini-mill technologies were under consideration but that no decisions had been made about what technologies would be employed, where such a plant would be situated or what markets it would serve.


U.S. Lacks Spark, Unified Team Doesn't
Every day, officials and coaches of the former Soviet Union meet with the athletes to pump them up.
"We say they are representing the Unified Team, and we want them to demonstrate we are still a power," said Nikolai Semine, the interpreter for the head of the team's Olympic chief, Nikolai Rusak.


Berlitz International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chicago Offering Bonds for O'Hare
A $130 million bond offering by the City of Chicago for O'Hare International Airport was priced through Lazard Freres &amp; Company
The airport revenue bonds, which for some investors are subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax, offer a maximum yield of 6.395 percent for an issue due in 2018.


Elbit Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mitel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Lunar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Buoyant Wishes for the Departing Commissioner


Get Some Support, Give Some Support
THERE are beach chairs, and there are lawn chairs.
Now the audiences at major park events in New York City, like the New York Philharmonic concerts in Central Park, can buy portable, foldable 2 1/2-pound cardboard chairs for $5 each.
They keep the body (like that of Brandon Lamb, above) nicely supported and clothes off the grass.
"We call it the charity chair," said Stewart Desmond, a spokesman for the city's Parks and Recreation Department.
Proceeds from chair sales go to the City Parks Foundation, a nonprofit organization that raises money for neighborhood parks and playgrounds in the five boroughs.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Windowsill Yams
Q.
I'm intrigued by the idea of a windowsill yam or sweet potato vine.
I have heard they're easy to grow.
What do you think? -- Lewis Vicuna, Philadelphia.
A.
They are indeed.
But first of all, a yam is not a sweet potato.
Although both are tropical vines, they are not even related, despite the fact that they are often lumped together in supermarket bins.


Puerto Rico Prices Bonds In $310 Million Financing
The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico priced $310 million in general obligation bonds yesterday through competitive bidding won by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
Long-term bonds include a 5.85 percent issue due in 2015 that is priced at par and another due in 2018 that carries a 5 7/8 percent coupon and is priced to yield 6.028 percent.
For a 6 percent 30-year bond due in 2022 the yield is 6.05 percent.


Review/Music; The Marginalia and Footnotes of Mostly Mozart
The program in which Neeme Jarvi led the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra on Tuesday evening at Avery Fisher Hall was largely a matter of marginalia, footnotes and oddities, some pleasantly surprising, others almost irredeemably inconsequential.
Perhaps as a way to distract the eye, if not the ear, from this motley programming, the festival's planners gave the concert an unusually international flavor.
Mr.
Jarvi is an Estonian who directs the Detroit Symphony Orchestra.
In the program's most substantial work, Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 23, the soloist was the Portuguese pianist Maria Joao Pires.
Augustin Dumay, a Frenchman, played short works by Mozart and Beethoven.
And to close an evening otherwise given to Viennese Classicism, Mr.
Jarvi conducted a symphony by Juan Crisostomo Arriaga, a Spanish contemporary of Beethoven.


MOZAMBIQUE FOES TALK OF A TRUCE
The President of Mozambique and the leader of a rebel movement that has been fighting the Maputo Government for 16 years shook hands here today in their first face-to-face meeting, and said they wanted their ruinous civil war to end, according to an authoritative account of their meeting.
A peace agreement between President Joaquim Chissano and the rebel leader, Afonso Dhlakama of the Mozambique National Resistance, would not only end southern Africa's longest-running civil war but would also raise the hopes of millions of Mozambicans facing starvation from the region's drought, African diplomats said.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL  American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS--Placed Kevin McReynolds, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Called up Jeff Conine, outfielder-first baseman, from Omaha of the American Association.


William Maxwell McCord, 61, Author and Sociology Professor
Dr.
William Maxwell McCord, an author on social and urban issues and a sociology professor at City College of New York, died on Monday at Yale University Health Services Center in New Haven.
He was 61 years old and lived in Guilford, Conn.
His family said yesterday that he had died of injuries sustained in a car crash in Guilford on July 9.


Barry (R.G.) Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Fernandez Moves Out And Now Moves On
Add Mary Joe Fernandez to those American athletes who couldn't put up with the athletes' village in these Olympics.
But Fernandez, who moved out of the village last Wednesday, said she would not object to a rule requiring athletes to stay in the village at subsequent Games -- providing changes are made in the housing.
"I think it would be fine if the conditions were better," said Fernandez after losing in straight sets yesterday to Steffi Graf of Germany in the women's tennis semifinals.
"It was very hot and noisy and we had no shades."


GM Hughes Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Esquire Radio &amp; Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Restaurant Partners reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Morningstar Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pilgrim's Pride Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Lawn Mower Is New Target In War Against Air Pollution
To most people, it is a lawn mower, but to the Environmental Protection Agency it is an "uncontrolled mobile source" that becomes part of the suburban swarm adding measurably to smog on a summer's day.
And the time has come, the agency says, to clean it up, along with weed eaters, leaf blowers, chain saws and a lot of other off-road gas-powered machinery.
A lawn mower can easily spew as much smog-causing hydrocarbon into the air in an hour as a modern car, experts on pollution say, even though the car has 30 times as much horsepower.
Chain saws are worse: the California Air Resources Board says a chain saw operated for two hours emits as many hydrocarbons as a new car driven 3,000 miles.


Robeson Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Calprop Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Bold Medical Plan, Derailed
The Oregon legislature made a tough call.
It decided in 1989 to cut back medical coverage for 230,000 poor residents so that it could extend basic coverage to 120,000 other poor Oregonians who were shut out of the state's Medicaid program.
That trade-off might not be to everyone's liking.
But it was an honorable choice, made with astonishing harmony by Republicans and Democrats.
But before the program could get started, Oregon needed approval from Washington.
This week the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Louis Sullivan, killed the plan, declaring that it would illegally discriminate against the disabled.


Integrated Circuit System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
All Four Fun  The Ballroom 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea Through Aug. 13
Duke Ellington's best songs, like George Gershwin's, have such strong tunes and sturdy rhythmic foundations that they can withstand just about any stylistic approach, no matter how roughshod.
And in "The Elegance of Duke Ellington," a show by the Jersey City pop-soul quartet All Four Fun, more than 30 Ellington chestnuts are severely put to the test.


Chiquita Brands International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Michigan Selling 'Super Sinkers'
A $208.95 million bond offering by the Michigan State Building Authority was tentatively priced yesterday through Prudential Securities, with a maximum yield of 6.05 percent for an issue due in 2010.
Investors interested in shorter maturities are offered serial bonds priced to yield from 4.1 percent in 1995 to 4.6 percent in 1997, 5.4 percent in 2002 and 5.7 percent in 2005.
Other long bonds include an issue due in 2008 that is priced to yield 6 percent.


Ocean Bio-Chem Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Did the State Parole System Fail?
The imperfections of an overcrowded justice system produced the plea bargains and parole decisions that led to the freedom of the ex-convict now charged in the slaying of six people in the Hudson Valley.
That was the judgment of critics today as they examined the turning points of Nathaniel White's encounters with the law.
Officials said that Mr.
White, 32 years old, was a drug and alcohol abuser who had been imprisoned for robbery and then violated his parole by using an open razor to abduct a 16-year-old girl he met in a bar in 1991.
He pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor rather than going to trial on a felony count in that case.
He was eligible for parole after a year in prison.
The Public at Risk
"The bottom line is that this man was out on parole after violent crimes and that leaves the public at great risk," said Jonnie L. Wesley, a victims' counselor in the Orange County town of Goshen, in the center of the area where the bodies of five women and a girl were found.
Mr.
White was charged on Tuesday with six counts of second-degree murder.
The authorities are trying to see if he might be linked to other unsolved slayings in the area.


Heart Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Haynes International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cavco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Emco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CliniCom reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yankees Tonic for Last-Place Indians
The Cleveland Indians, the last-place Indians, the Indians who seem to have been rebuilding their club every year since 1954 strolled into Yankee Stadium this week and outplayed the struggling tenants.
Someone raise the rent.
When the Indians left the Bronx last night after their 4-3 victory in 11 innings over the Yankees, they were still the last-place Indians.
But by winning two of three games against the comatose Yanks, losers of nine of the last 11 games, Cleveland was more impressive and more intent on rising in the standing.


Damon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Handex Enviromental Recovery Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Countrywide Transport Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Chronicle column on July 27 misidentified Hodding Carter 3d, Mark Shields and David Gergen.
Mr.
Carter is a Washington journalist and was State Department spokesman during the Carter Administration; Mr.
Shields is a syndicated columnist; Mr.
Gergen is a columnist for U.S.
News &amp; World Report.
They are not panelists of "The McLaughlin Group."


MedGroup Inc. reports earnings for Year March 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about the search for a New York City police commissioner misstated the race of one person believed to be under consideration.
The potential candidate, John S. Pritchard 3d, inspector general of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, is black.


Koll Management Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TeleCom Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Real Women Are Honored in New York
To the Editor:
Your July 16 news article on statues of prominent American women soon to be installed in New York City parks states that "women, as portrayed in New York's public monuments, are legends or fantasies or allegories." I too thought that was true until I did some detective work and looked for monuments in New York that honor real women.
There are bronze busts of 11 great American women including the astronomer Maria Mitchell, the writer Harriet Beecher Stowe and the reformer Susan B. Anthony in the Hall of Fame for Great Americans at Bronx Community College, University Avenue and West 181st Street.


Loews Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Home Video
Threat of Obsolescence
This summer there is uneasiness at the video store.
Tapes rent and sell as always, but the feeling is that new formats and delivery systems are threatening the video cassette.
No one is entirely sure what will replace it or when, but the growing belief in the industry is that retailers should think about alternative products to offer consumers.


Nowsco Well Service reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Household International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Drugstore Gadgets or Objects d'Art?
A HUMANE mousetrap is among the 189 objects in "Out of the Ordinary," a show in Miami of well-designed objects that are available in places like drugstores, hardware stores and gas stations, for $20 or less.
The juried show, with objects designed within the last decade, was organized by the Arango Design Foundation in Miami and recently opened at the Center for the Fine Arts.
When the mouse enters the V-shaped plastic box, its weight tilts the trap so that the door slides down through the force of gravity and locks.
The compassionate person can release the rodent into the wild.
The trap, in red, black or blue plastic, sells for $5.
It was designed by Mel Melton for Trap-Ease USA.


Ringer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Enticed by Tax Breaks, Prudential Will Stay in New York
Having declined to take space in the Times Square Center office complex planned by its parent company, Prudential Securities Inc. has nonetheless decided to stay in New York City, keeping its headquarters and about 5,000 jobs in lower Manhattan.
The Prudential brokerage firm is to receive tax incentives and energy savings worth at least $106.2 million over 20 years.
In return, it is to sign 20-year leases for a total of 1.5 million square feet of space at One Seaport Plaza, where it now has its headquarters, and One New York Plaza.


A Top Event: NBC's Dash for Ads
It is as obvious to note the barrage of commercials inundating viewers of NBC's coverage of the 1992 Summer Olympics as it is to note the absence of the Soviet Union from the Games.
But one advocacy organization has gone to the trouble of documenting the creeping -- nay, galloping -- commercialism of an event whose original purpose had more to do with good will than good marketing.
The Center for the Study of Commercialism, which opposes increasing commercialism in communications, kept a log of an hour of Olympic coverage.


Jury Is Told Spy Questioned Reagan Secrecy Order
A retired general testified today in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George, a former chief of covert operations for the Central Intelligence Agency, that the former spy had questioned the wisdom of a Presidential order keeping the arms sales to Iran secret from Congress.
Richard V. Secord, a retired Air Force major general who has pleaded guilty to misleading Congress about the affair, said in his testimony that Mr.
George had expressed doubts about President Ronald Reagan's order at a White House meeting that Mr.
Secord had attended in January 1986.


Times Mirror Executive Shift
Newsday announced yesterday that its president and chief operating officer, Douglas B. Fox, had been named vice president for marketing for the newspaper group at the Times Mirror Company.
Also, the Long Island-based newspaper said Steven L. Isenberg, executive vice president for marketing of The Los Angeles Times, would return to Newsday as deputy publisher.


Aetna Life &amp; Casualty reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Manhattan Life Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
One of the most difficult areas of the game, difficult even for experts, is competitive bidding at the part-score and game level.
Should you bid one more?
Or should you defend?
And perhaps double?
This subject has been virtually ignored in the literature of the game, but the gap has now been filled, and filled brilliantly, by Larry Cohen, one of the best American players for more than a decade.
His first book is "To Bid or Not to Bid: The Law of Total Tricks" and is available from him at 181 Longhill Road, Building I-6, Little Falls, N.J., 07424.
The price is $14.45, including postage.


Scorpion Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FastComm Communications Corp. reports earnings for Year to April 30


Higuera to Wait Until '93
The comeback of Milwaukee left-hander TEDDY HIGUERA from rotator-cuff surgery is over until next season, team officials said yesterday.
The Brewers have decided to end Higuera's rehabilitation because he has tightness in his left shoulder and neck area.


Air Express International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Curtice-Burns Foods reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


More Buses and Trains Planned to Lure Riders
As part of a new strategy to turn around the falling ridership on New York City's public transportation system, the Transit Authority is planning to increase the number of subway trains on certain lines and start new bus service beginning in September.
The changes are the first concrete steps in the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's initiative, proposed in June, to intensify customer service and improve the transit system's infrastructure.


Moore Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Enviroq Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Zairians Debate a Return to 'Congo'
Delegates to a national political conference in Zaire have voted to change the country's name back to the Republic of the Congo, the name that it was called until October 1971.
The decision, made late Tuesday night, is likely to deepen political divisions between opposition leaders and the Government of President Mobutu Sese Seko in an increasingly tense negotiating process.


Energy Ventures reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oglebay Norton Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Napa Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Senators Say Navy Misled Congress on Radar Jammer
After being assured by the Pentagon that a controversial new weapon system would undergo stringent tests, lawmakers said today that standards for the $2 billion electronic jamming device, intended to protect fighter jets, had again been eased by the Navy.
Navy officials denied that they had intended to mislead Congress.
They acknowledged that testing standards had been adjusted but insisted that the change was routine, made at the behest of civilian officials in the Pentagon.


European Snack Venture Is Set
Pepsico Foods International and General Mills Inc. won approval yesterday from the European Commission for a joint venture, called Snack Ventures Europe, they had proposed in May.
The companies also said yesterday that the new business, to be Europe's largest snack food company, would be run by Michael J. Dolan, 45 years old, who has been senior vice president of operations for Pepsico Foods International.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
G.M. reported a second-quarter operating profit of $392 million, its most heartening in two years, reflecting strong car and truck sales.
But the company had a net loss of $357.1 million, largely because of a $749.4 million charge by its Hughes Aircraft subsidiary, and its stock fell $1.875 to $37.25 in active trading.  [ Page D1. ]
The American auto industry, despite gains in sales, market share and second-quarter earnings, has turned cautious because of the sluggish economy.
News Analysis.  [ D1. ]


COMPANY NEWS
A &amp; W BRANDS INC. will begin selling a noncarbonated drink next month designed to compete with Gatorade and similar products.
Called Everlast, it is designed to replace body fluids lost during physical exertion.
BMW MOTORRAD G.M.B.H., Munich, said the prices of its motorcycles in Germany would rise 1.8 percent on average beginning Aug. 10.


Atomic Bomb Victims Mourned at 47th Anniversary


Pomeroy Computer Resources reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Syntex Shares Off Sharply On Forecast of Soft Profits
Shares in the Syntex Corporation fell sharply today in heavy trading after the pharmaceutical company said that fourth-quarter earnings would fall below Wall Street analysts' estimates.
Analysts said the shortfall reflected disappointing sales of the company's new drugs, raising doubts about long-term growth prospects.
Syntex shares fell $2.50 to close at $30.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Almost four million shares were traded.





Few Choices, Fewer Hopes Bush, Under Pressure, Now Talks About Guns
President Bush crept reluctantly to the verge of a military commitment in the Balkans today, forced to reconsider his cautious policy by reports of Serbian atrocities, by the prodding of Democratic campaign rivals and by the opposition of senior figures in his own party.
In a rapidly changing political environment, supercharged by assertions that Serbian forces were carrying out torture and murder in detention camps that have reminded some of the Holocaust, Mr.
Bush's effort to work behind the scenes to halt the fighting through diplomacy is running out of time.


CHIPS AND TECHNOLOGIES PARES A PRODUCT LINE
Chips and Technologies Inc., a San Jose, Calif., semiconductor maker, said yesterday that it planned to stop developing future versions of stand-alone Intel-compatible microprocessors and focus instead on integrated chips that combine additional functions with the microprocessor.
Analysts said that Chips and Technologies might be the first victim of the price collapse in the market for the Intel Corporation's 386 chip since competition arose from Advanced Micro Devices Inc., the Cyrix Corporation and Chips and Technologies.
Chips and Technologies said it would continue to market its existing 386-compatible chip.


Art in Review
'Miauhaus'  Thread Waxing Space 476 Broadway (between Broome and Grand Streets) SoHo Through tomorrow
The Thread Waxing Space has large group shows coming and going like nomadic encampments in its cavernous loft space this summer.
It's a nice idea, affording an opportunity to see a lot of younger artists who basically lost this kind of rotating venue with the demise of the East Village art scene.
The current show is titled "Miauhaus," short for "Movimento Internazionale Artisti Unlimited." The organizer, Gottfried Tollmann, says it is "a laboratory for social experiments," though, truth to tell, the results look very much like a number of other group exhibitions in the last month or two.


From Aztec Dances to Chinese Martial Arts, the Joys of Cultural Confusion
Jenneth Webster, the director of the annual Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival, has mapped out a tour of the world this weekend, complete with meal breaks, that should appeal to just about every interest.
For those who would otherwise be watching the Olympics from Barcelona, there will be a pre-Columbian ball game and Chinese martial arts.
No jaunts to exotic places will be necessary, for there will be Aztec dance from Mexico and a splashy carnival from the Caribbean.
And to draw out confirmed homebodies, Jazzmobile is providing a little string music, and Brenda Bufalino and her American Tap Dance Orchestra will join forces with the Jiving Lindy Hoppers from London for some jamming, jumping and jazz.
"Let's just say that you can see Qi Shu pounding around as Lady White Snake on Sunday afternoon, have an ice cream, come back for the pre-Columbian Hulama Project, go have dinner and end the day with our Caribbean Carnival Extravaganza," Ms.
Webster said in a recent interview.
It all ought to make, she added, for happy cultural confusion.


Fingerprints Introduced in Trial of Ex-C.I.A. Man
Prosecutors in the trial of Clair E. George presented a fingerprint expert today to buttress their contention that the former Central Intelligence Agency official deleted passages from his planned testimony to Congress to mislead lawmakers about the agency's role in the Iran-contra affair.
The Government fingerpint analyst testified that Mr.
George's prints were found on the pages of a draft of a statement to Congress that was revised to eliminate several details about Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's arms supply pipeline to the contra rebels fighting the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua in the 1980's.
Colonel North, a former Marine Corps officer, was a National Security Council staff member in charge of clandestine assistance for the contras.


Pratt &amp; Lambert reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Geico Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Art in Review
'Contemporary Surfaces'  Pamela Auchincloss Gallery 558 Broadway (between Prince and Spring Streets) SoHo Through Aug. 14
Elegance is a tricky quality in art.
In judicious amounts, it enhances nearly everything it touches; overdone, or as an end in itself, there is almost nothing more enervating.
This group show of paintings and sculpture (organized by Rick Ward) demonstrates both possibilities.


CBI Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
REGION COULD GAIN MILLIONS FOR TRANSIT
The New York region would receive hundreds of millions of dollars in Federal mass-transit subsidies, along with money to upgrade its rail systems, under the transportation bill now moving toward approval in Congress.
Because of its heavy reliance on mass transit, the New York region stands to be one of the largest beneficiaries of this year's $33.8 billion bill.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY
HOW BIG SHOULD  A HIGH SCHOOL BE?
Large high schools, with their sweat-scented, echoing gymnasiums and hallways chockablock with lockers, have long been part of the nation's mythology, the cheery locale of Archie and Veronica, Our Miss Brooks and the Fonz.
But a rising chorus of American educators is arguing that they no longer work, particularly for youngsters growing up in a society of shattered families and a pervasive distrust of authority.
News Analysis, B3.
POLICE SERGEANT SHOOTS MUGGER
An off-duty police sergeant, who was assaulted by three men at an automated teller machine early yesterday morning in mid-Manhattan, chased the men a block and half and shot one of them in the abdomen, the police said.
B2.
DELIVERY MAN HELD IN SLAYING
A Staten Island delivery man was arrested yesterday in the murder of a student, and the police called the killing the culmination of his two-year obsession with the young woman, who, they said, he had lured on in the guise of a theatrical agent with rainbow promises of fame and fortune as she tried to realize her ambitions in acting and modeling.
B3.
REGION
NEW JERSEY FINDS  BIAS IN COURTS
A task force set up to study the New Jersey judicial system has found widespread bias and a lack of opportunity for racial and ethnic minorities to work in the system or receive even-handed treatment from it.
The task force said blacks were more likely to be arrested, less likely to be released on bail, and less likely to see members of their own race in the courtroom and jury box.
B5.
CLASSROOM TV GETS GO-AHEAD
The New Jersey Education Commissioner has ruled that about 300 New Jersey schools can continue showing Channel One, a classroom television program that mixes news and commercials.
But he warned that his decision does not give school boards "an unfettered right" to contract with commercial television companies and he said that school boards "must assiduously guard against the potential for abuse" of commercialism in a classroom setting.
B4.
JOBS FOR WELFARE RECIPIENTS
Seeking to increase the ranks of people who must work for their welfare grants, New York State will begin creating thousands of temporary part-time jobs for single and childless welfare recipients next month.
B5.
RELATIVES LED POLICE TO SUSPECT
In a story that could come out of a mystery novel, the critical breakthrough in the arrest of Nathaniel White, who has confessed to killing six women, came not from any of the four police departments that were investigating the slayings.
Instead, the name of the suspect was first offered to the police by the mother and two sisters of one of the victims.
B5.
Our Towns by Charles Strum B5
Chronicle B4


Why Are Russians Still Here? the Free Baltics Ask
Russia's slow and uncertain withdrawal of its troops from the three Baltic states is adding new poison to a relationship already polluted by unresolved legacies of Soviet rule.
A recent shooting outside a Russian navy depot here, where Russian paratroopers moved in to regain control of a building seized hours before by Estonian troops, has underscored fears that the tensions could veer out of control and lead to even more dangerous incidents.


EIP Microwave Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vintage Petroleum Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article and a chart on Saturday about the 1990 census gave differing rates of population growth for the New York metropolitan area during the 1980's.
The rate of 3.1 percent, cited in the article, reflects growth in the area when its boundaries are held constant.
The rate of 12.2 percent, listed in the chart, reflects growth when the area is expanded beyond its 1980 boundaries, to 1990 boundaries as defined by the Census Bureau.


Cutting the Big High School Down to Size; Fernandez Joins the Movement to More Emphasis on Individual Teen-Agers
Large high schools, with their sweat-scented, echoing gymnasiums and hallways chockablock with lockers, have long been part of the nation's mythology, the cheery locale of Archie and Veronica, Our Miss Brooks and The Fonz.
But a rising chorus of American educators is arguing that they no longer work, particularly for youngsters growing up in a society of shattered families and a pervasive distrust of authority.
With three students shot to death in the hallways of Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn, the mischief of "Happy Days" seems long ago and far away.


Athena Neurosciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bond Prices Fall; Jobs Data Awaited
The bond market fell yesterday as traders spent a day warily preparing for the release of the July unemployment figures today.
"The market is a little off because it is worried about the jobs number," said Donald Fine, chief market economist at Chase Securities Inc.
"No one wants to go into a number that is so unknown or that can influence the market so much either very long or short," he said.
This means that few traders want to bet one way or the other on the report by either buying a lot of notes or bonds or by selling them in advance.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 588 money market mutual funds decreased by $5.75 billion, to $504.55 billion, in the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 216 institutional funds decreased by $4.59 billion, to $195.81 billion.
The assets of the 282 general-purpose funds were down by $355.7 million, to $170.69 billion.
The 90 broker-dealer funds decreased by $802.0 million, to $138.05 billion, the institute said.


It's Settled: It's Robert Who Defeats Ailing Dave
Dan O'Brien was in the stadium runway, hugging anybody dressed in a track suit.
Dave Johnson was wearing an American flag around his bare chest, smiling the marketable Johnson smile while limping on a stress fracture in a right foot that he called "my bloody stump."
But the winner of the Olympic decathlon tonight was a different sort of corporate spokesman: Robert Zmelik, a shy 23-year-old Czech from the little town of Ivana in Moravia, with no coach, a Slovak girlfriend in Bratislava and the modest desire to become a millionaire.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.35
5.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.15
5.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.24
5.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.15
6.12
7.83
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.45
7.42
8.22
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.38
9.17
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.18
6.14
7.05
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


National Gypsum Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Canadian Roxy Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


More College Graduates Taking Low-Wage Jobs
In a summer of laments about children with $75,000 college degrees who are flipping burgers or digging ditches, the Bureau of Labor Statistics has some sobering findings: one in five college graduates in the 1980's had a job that did not require a college degree.
Many, though not all, of these jobs were low-wage, dead-end positions.
Workers with Bachelor of Arts degrees did fare far better -- on average -- during those years than those without sheepskins.
But while the pay of the typical B.A. rose handily during the decade, the incomes of the unfortunate fifth with nonprofessional jobs -- more than five million -- stagnated or even declined.
Such graduates saw little, if any, pecuniary benefits from their investments.


Critic's Notebook; First There Was Camp; Now There's Cheese
TO teen-agers and members of the 20-something generation, Cheese isn't simply something that comes on top of a pizza or burger; it's an esthetic concept, what Camp was to an earlier generation in the 60's.
Barry Manilow is Cheese.
Pat Sajak is Cheese.
Donny Osmond is Cheese.
Lime-green shag carpeting is Cheese.
Wide-bodied neckties are Cheese.
Bill Murray's sleazy lounge-lizard impersonation is Cheese.
Disco music is Cheese.


Itel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gifts Are Out as an In to Host Status
For the International Olympic Committee, enough is enough.
So yesterday, the secretary general of the I.O.C. said the organization would no longer allow its members to accept gifts of any kind from representatives of cities bidding for future Games.
"There are no cash limits that the I.O.C. can enforce on the bidding cities, but they have agreed among themselves there will be no gifts: no $100 gifts, no $50 gifts, no gifts," Francois Carrard, the I.O.C. official, said.


Hunger Keeps Growing in the Land of Plenty
To the Editor:
In "My Starving Soup Kitchen" (Op-Ed, July 22), Amy Brown asks how she can make someone listen about the growing crisis of hunger in America.
Reports from soup kitchens and food pantries across the country confirm what she experiences at her Brooklyn soup kitchen every day -- that use of these emergency food services keeps increasing, that more and more families with children are served by them and that the providers of these services are overburdened and see no end in sight.


Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Chattanooga Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Biltrite reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Falling Bricks Injure Two People


A Getaway on a Ship of Stateliness
THE newest pedigree in Connecticut belongs to the Mayflower Inn, a glamorous place better suited to those who came over on the Concorde than to more traditional pilgrims.
Situated just outside the pristine village of Washington, this hideaway gives the old traditions of innkeeping a decidedly new spin.
Extravagantly renovated, it boasts an instant supply of the trappings one might associate with a grand old country homestead.
That is, if the grand old country were located at the center of Ralph Lauren's imagination, and if most of its antique polish were brand new.
There is bound to be an air of unreality about this just-add-water brand of traditional elegance (even when it has been achieved so lavishly that one hears Architectural Digest mentioned by guests in hushed tones).
Nothing here is quite what it seems, not even you.
Was it you who left that "Dear Jane" letter on the desk in the sitting room, with the wire-rimmed glasses by its side? ("You will always remain a special flower in all the seasons of my heart," the real writer told his ex-sweetheart in 1929.) Is it you who will be doing the 1,500-piece jigsaw puzzle left in the hallway during the course of your stay?
Not unless you work fast or win the lottery.
A look at the tariffs -- play-acting here is an expensive pastime -- will put your feet back on the ground.


Kansas City Life Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Standard Commercial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Equity Silver reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Alkermes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pound Foolish on Census Data
Census trends and economics statistics make for eye-glazing conversation.
Yet they are vitally important to policy makers, scholars, corporate executives and anyone else trying to make sense of the economy.
That's why the House and Senate budget bills are alarming: They propose making deep cuts in the Census Bureau and Bureau of Economic Analysis, agencies in charge of keeping statistical tabs on the U.S.
The cuts would be shortsighted.
Collection of data on leading indicators that predict recoveries and recessions, and on foreign investment and other vital topics, would have to be eliminated or curtailed.
The cuts threaten projects to analyze the 1990 census and improve the next census, for example, by overcoming the systematic undercount of minorities.


United Cos. Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Environmental Services of America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sounds Around Town
Jazz Passengers
Jazz Passenger, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, SoHo, (212) 219-3055.
The Jazz Passengers synthesize all sorts of elements, from Dada to kitsch to Charles Mingus, from be-bop to the outer fringers of what's called jazz.
And they're funny.
Shows are tomorrow at 9 P.M. and midnight; tickets are $10.
Son Seals
Son Seals, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Mr.
Seals is a brutal blues singer and guitar player.
His band, which varies in size, is always tough and ready to dig deep into rhythm.
Most Chicago blues is generic at best, but Mr.
Seals is something different, somebody who can push a room to the exploding point.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30 and 11:30; tickets are $12.50.


SERBIAN ARTILLERY POUNDS SARAJEVO
At about the time that President Bush was toughening his stand on the Bosnian war, Serbian nationalist forces today mounted one of the heaviest artillery assaults in weeks on the central districts of Sarajevo that have taken the brunt of Serbian attacks.
The heavy artillery shells that began slamming into thickly populated civilian districts at dusk were an extension of a battle that has raged around the city for a week.
The fighting, the most intensive of the four-month siege, has caused the suspension of a United Nations relief airlift to the Sarajevo airport and shredded all pretense that the Serbian forces and the Bosnian Government defenders of Sarajevo are ready to observe an internationally brokered cease-fire.


His Best Years Past, Veteran In Debt Sells Oscar He Won
Harold Russell, the one-time meat cutter who lost both hands during World War II and went on to win an Academy Award for playing a disabled veteran in the 1946 film "The Best Years of Our Lives," auctioned off his Oscar to help pay bills last night, despite pleas from the award's sponsors, who said no winner had ever sold an Oscar.
The 78-year-old Mr.
Russell, whose tender, understated portrait of the young seaman, Homer Parrish, has moved generations of moviegoers, said he needed the money to pay for a cataract operation for his wife, Betty, and for emergency expenses and their retirement.


Bottom Is Rushing Up at Yankees
So it has come to this, as the days of quiet desperation visit the Bronx once more.
Seventh place in the American League East, never a serious threat in 1991, looms only two games away.


A Picture of Agony Emerges From Serbian Camps in Bosnia


S&amp;M Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dale R. Bauer; Publishing Executive, 64
Dale R. Bauer, a magazine publishing executive, died on Wednesday at his home in Quogue, L.I.
He was 64 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend "A STREETCAR NAMED DESIRE," Barrymore Theater, 243 West 47th Street, midtown Manhattan.
Tennessee Williams's drama, directed by Gregory Mosher and starring Jessica Lange, Alec Baldwin and Amy Madigan.
Last performance: Sunday at 3 P.M.
Other performances: today at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $40 to $50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"MORE-THAN-ONE PHOTOGRAPHY: WORKS SINCE 1980 FROM THE COLLECTION," Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, midtown Manhattan.
Works from 61 photographers.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $7.50; $4.50 for students and the elderly; free under age 16.
Information: (212) 708-9480.
"PUSS IN BOOTS: THREE CENTURIES OF THE MASTER CAT," Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, Murray Hill.
Illustrations and manuscripts of the classic fairy tale, including an original 1695 manuscript by the author of the story, Charles Perrault.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: $5; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 685-0008.
Closing Next Weekend  "FIRES IN THE MIRROR: CROWN HEIGHTS, BROOKLYN AND OTHER IDENTITIES," Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, Greenwich Village.
A one-woman show featuring Anna Deavere Smith; directed by Christopher Ashley.
Through Aug. 16.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 7 and 10 P.M., and Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 598-7150.


Banned American Explains Use of Drug
The American hammer thrower Jud Logan left Barcelona today after failing a drug test at the 1992 Olympic Games.
Before he departed, Logan, a five-time national champion who finished fourth in the Olympic hammer throw last Sunday, acknowledged that he had used the substance found in his urine sample, Clenbuterol, for its performance-enhancing qualities, but he said that he stopped using it after it was placed on the list of banned substances.


Suspect in Payroll-Truck Robbery Arrested
A suspect has been arrested on a conspiracy charge involving the attempted robbery of a payroll truck and murder of a security guard in front of a Brooklyn bank last week, Federal authorities announced yesterday.
The suspect, identified as 32-year-old James Goolsby of Queens, was arrested on Wednesday, said Andrew J. Maloney, the United States Attorney in Brooklyn.
He said another suspect in the case, Arnold Stover, who was shot during the attempted robbery, remained in the hospital in critical condition.


Gulf Canada Resources Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Picked 6, Payoff Is Racing Hall of Fame
Just across Union Avenue from the race track that has created legends and champions for 125 years, the Racing Hall of Fame opened its doors today to three great horses from the past and three celebrated riders and trainers from the present.
To Scotty Schulhofer, the man who saddled Fly So Free and other superstar horses, it was "the ultimate winner's circle." To Jerry Fishback, the steeplechase champion, it was "the ultimate goal." To Sandy Hawley, the Canadian jockey who has ridden nearly 6,000 winners, it was the place where "my dream came true." Krone Is There, Too
They were inducted into the hall along with Lady's Secret, Johnstown and Slew o'Gold, three of the historic winners of the last half-century.
And they were flanked by a phalanx of horsemen already enshrined in the Hall of Fame, notably Woody Stephens, Ted Atkinson, MacKenzie Miller, Leroy Jolley, Elliot Burch, Pat Day and Angel Cordero Jr.


Jeffrey Porcaro, Toto's Drummer, And a Studio Musician, 38, Dies
Jeffrey T. Porcaro, a rock musician who played drums for Sonny and Cher, Bruce Springsteen and the Grammy Award-winning group Toto, died on Wednesday in Los Angeles.
He was 38 years old.
His manager, Larry Fitzgerald, said it was believed that he died of cardiac arrest, possibly from an allergic reaction to pesticides.
Autopsy results are awaited, said a spokesman for Humana Hospital West Hills in Los Angeles.


Los Angeles Journal; Fiery Ex-Chief Keeps the Flame Low
When the programmers of KFI radio signed up Daryl F. Gates to fill in for three nights as host of a call-in show, they couldn't have known how exquisite the timing would be.
As it happened, the former Police Chief's debut came Wednesday, the same day Federal prosecutors announced new indictments of four Los Angeles police officers in the beating of Rodney G. King.
Surely there would be fireworks, and Mr.
Gates promised as much when he went on the air.
"Just think, I don't have the restraints that I had before, when I was Chief of Police," he warned.
"Now I can say almost anything I want to say."


Robert Nigro, 45, Dies; Was Theater Director
Robert Nigro, a theater director, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 45 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Keith Sherman, a friend.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Clamed Scott Hemond, catcher-outfielder, on waivers from the Oakland Athletics.
Optioned Warren Newson, outfielder, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Placed Bo Jackson, outfielder, on the emergency disabled list.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Signed Juan Samuel, second baseman.
Optioned Terry Shumpert, second baseman, to Omaha of the American Association.


B.P.'s Shares Plummet After Dividend Is Slashed
British Petroleum said yesterday that it would cut its dividend by 55 percent, take a pretax restructuring charge of $1.82 billion for the second quarter and lay off 11,500 employees, or 10 percent of its worldwide work force.
The moves came five weeks after Robert B. Horton, B.P.'s chairman, resigned under pressure from the company's outside directors.
Analysts anticipated a dividend cut by the oil company, the world's third largest, but the size of the cut was more severe than some had hoped.
In response, shares of the company's American depository rights, each of which represents 12 shares of the London-based company, dropped $3.625, or 7.36 percent, to $45.375.
It was the most active issue on the New York Stock Exchange, with 5.89 million shares traded.


Court That Attacks Sex Bias Is Reported Often Guilty of It
Although the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit has taken the lead among the nation's courts in condemning sex discrimination, a new survey suggests that the court, and the Federal courts in its domain, do not always practice what they preach.
A survey of lawyers and judges in the Ninth Circuit indicates that female judges, lawyers and clients face a variety of discrimination problems.
A draft of the study, prepared for release today at the circuit's annual conference here, says that overt courtroom mistreatment of women is less common than bias in chambers and law offices.


Reviews/Film; Merrily Dealing and Double-Dealing in Hollywood
In the opening scene of "Mistress," Barry Primus's deliciously spiky satire of life on the fringes of the movie business, Marvin Landisman (Robert Wuhl), a failed screenwriter and director, sits in his darkened Los Angeles apartment morosely studying Jean Renoir's film classic, "Grand Illusion." His cinematic reverie is interrupted by a phone call from Jack Roth (Martin Landau), a once-successful producer reduced to grasping at straws.
Jack excitedly tells Marvin he has found a possible backer to finance a movie from an abandoned screenplay of Marvin's, which he has just re-read and insists is "more timely than ever."
"The Darkness and the Light," the property that Jack hopes to revive, isn't just any old screenplay, but a project that consumed five years of Marvin's life and that represents his heart and soul.
The project, the story of a misunderstood artist who commits suicide, would have made it to the screen but for an act of God that is revealed in flashbacks toward the end the film.


3 Assault Officer at Automated Teller Machine
An off-duty police sergeant was assaulted by three men at a Citibank automated teller machine early yesterday morning in mid-Manhattan, the police said.
After being hit on the head, Sgt.
Kevin Carey of Manhattan South Task Force chased the suspects a block and a half to 32d Street and Third Avenue.
There the officer fired at his assailants, hitting one of them in the abdomen, said a police spokesman, Detective Joseph McConville.


Balchem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


California State Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Watch Out for a War To Aid Bush's Ratings
To the Editor:
"Plan Now for the Next Iraqi Test" (editorial, July 28) and "Saddam and Gore," A. M.Rosenthal's column the same day, discuss the temporary resolution in Iraqi compliance with the United Nations resolutions that ended the fighting in the Persian Gulf.
But both fail to alert the American people to the potential of election-year "dirty tricks" by President Bush.
White House strategists, down in the polls almost 30 percentage points, have again resorted to deployment of American forces to the gulf area both to wave the flag and divert the electorate from the country's economic problems in the global economy.


Bristol Journal; These Youths Are Sparks, Living in a Powder Keg
It began senselessly, the ways suchthings often do.
Two young men stole a police motorcycle and, in the ensuing chase, were killed.
Spurious rumors spread that the police in this west England city had deliberately run them down, and an angry crowd soon gathered.
Within hours, several stores in the center of the Hartcliffe public housing project had been set on fire, cars were overturned and burned and more than 500 police officers in riot gear were fanning through the streets.
When it was over, 15 officers were hurt, and more than 80 young people had been arrested.


Las Vegas Discount Golf &amp; Tennis reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Books of The Times; Mysteries That Reveal More Than Just Whodunit
White Butterfly  By Walter Mosley  272 pages.
W.
W.
Norton. $19.95.
Alibi for an Actress  By Gillian B. Farrell  250 pages.
Pocket Books. $19.
If you're not careful while reading detective fiction, you're liable to learn something.
While taking the reader for a ride before solving the mystery, the best writers in the field have something to say, about a city, a profession, a just cause, a moral climate.
Of course, the detective story must abide by the rules of pursuit and solution.
But it doesn't violate the formula if, lurking between the lines, there's a novel of manners, mostly bad.


Site in Mexico Could Unlock Ancient Riddle
Lost in a remote canyon, asleep beneath a blanket of pasture grass, an ancient city known only to a few farmers and ranchers has been identified by archeologists as a possible answer to one of the least-understood riddles of Mexico's past.
The remains of the city were virtually unknown to archeologists before members of a rafting party glimpsed them along an isolated bend in the Nautla River.


Vital Signs Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Wednesday about the Haworth Group misidentified the site where William F. Heimann will be general manager.
It is the newly opened Chicago office; Minnetonka, Minn., is the company's home base.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on July 30, about television programs that teach do-it-yourself home improvement, misstated the location of a renovation project for "Bob Vila's Home Again." The program visited New England and worked on a house in Plymouth, Mass.


CCL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Banister reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dames &amp; Moore Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Woody Allen's Next: A Murder Mystery
A husband and wife find themselves in the middle of a murder mystery in Woody Allen's new romantic comedy, titled "Manhattan Murder Mystery," which is to begin production next month in New York City.


Mastercard Drops a Finalist
Mastercard International made an announcement yesterday about its closely followed account review, but it was not the announcement the advertising industry had expected.
Instead of announcing that it had selected an agency on the creative portion of its $60 million account, Mastercard said it had eliminated one of the three finalists: Lintas New York, which had handled the account since 1987.


Restaurants
La Topiaire
The Broadway theater district can never have too many moderately priced, dependable restaurants, and La Topiaire, a 10-month-old effort on West 45th Street, promises to be a crowd pleaser.
In four visits, however, there were scarcely any crowds to please.
Such is the precarious restaurant business today.
La Topiaire is owned by Joel Benjamin, a native of Brittany who worked at Lutece for 11 years before going out on his own, and his wife, Danuta, who runs the dining room.
The foliage theme is represented by miniature sculptured trees lining an overhead balcony, by more trees on the tables and by black-and-white photos on the walls.
The white-walled ground-floor dining room is comfortable and pleasant; to reach the second level one ascends two flights of stairs, passing an isolated table on the landing.
It would be a great perch up there if there were something to see other than monochromatic West 45th Street.
Moreover, in certain chairs, the overhead pinpoint lighting can make a police interrogation room appear soothing.


General Motors Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quaker Oats Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
Let no one think there is an easy or a simple solution to this tragedy.
The violence will not end overnight, whatever pressure and means the international community brings to bear. -- PRESIDENT BUSH.  [ A8:3. ]


Agencies to Merge In New England
In the latest in a series of agency mergers in New England, Lawner Reingold Britton &amp; Partners and Arnold Fortuna Lane &amp; Cabot in Boston said yesterday that they would combine, creating a shop with estimated billings of $200 million.
Lawner Reingold, with about $70 million in billings from clients like Foot-Joy shoes, Titleist golf balls and the Stanley Works tools, will be acquired by Arnold Fortuna, with about $130 million in billings from clients including New England Telephone and Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Massachusetts.
The merger was not unexpected; Lawner Reingold has been owned by Euro RSCG in Paris, which is reorganizing its American holdings, including the agencies Della Femina McNamee and Tatham/ RSCG.


Review/Theater; Lerner and Loewe Visit the California Gold Rush
For Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe, "Paint Your Wagon" was a rare attempt at dealing with Americana, in this case the California Gold Rush.
Buoyed by a soaring score, the 1951 musical ran for a season on Broadway, but even after the initial engagement, Mr.
Lerner continued to revise it.
As author and lyricist, he never stopped tinkering with "Paint Your Wagon." When the show was finally made into a movie 18 years after it opened, Mr.
Lerner discarded his original book and wrote a new one, at least partly to accommodate the talents of his stars: Lee Marvin, Clint Eastwood and Jean Seberg.
The revival of the show at the Goodspeed Opera House is the closest one can come to the author's final stage version, and for that reason the production has historical as well as entertainment value.
At the same time, if Lerner were alive, he would still undoubtedly be rewriting.


Town Says No Thanks To Curbside Mail Drops
HERE in ZIP code 07090, where nearly every variety of tree has a street named for it and nearly every street seems to have been an ancient breeding ground for gracious colonial architecture, mail carriers make their way down sidewalks and up front stoops, just as they have for generations.
And this is how it will remain, despite what some citizens construed as momentary insanity on the part of the United States Postal Service, whose eagerness to speed delivery and cut costs resulted in a plan that raised eyebrows here the way scantily clad Bikini Weenie hot dog vendors widened eyes in Yonkers.


Aames Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film: Unforgiven; A Western Without Good Guys
TIME has been good to Clint Eastwood.
If possible, he looks even taller, leaner and more mysteriously possessed than he did in Sergio Leone's seminal "Fistful of Dollars" a quarter of a century ago.
The years haven't softened him.
They have given him the presence of some fierce force of nature, which may be why the landscapes of the mythic, late 19th-century West become him, never more so than in his new "Unforgiven."
As written by David Webb Peoples and directed by Mr.
Eastwood, "Unforgiven" is a most entertaining western that pays homage to the great tradition of movie westerns while surreptitiously expressing a certain amount of skepticism.
Mr.
Eastwood has learned a lot from his mentors, including the great Don Siegel ("Two Mules for Sister Sara" and "The Beguiled," among others), a director with no patience for sentimentality.


Mediq Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush's Campaign Dismisses 4 Speech Writers
The Bush/ Quayle campaign, aware of the President's need to craft a message with broadened appeal, has dismissed a group of speech writers as part of a continuing effort to get the Republican Presidential campaign on track.
The dismissal of three writers -- Joe Dugan, Beth Hinchcliffe and Janice Crouse -- and a fourth whom the campaign would not name, was one of the first signs that Steven Provost, the new White House communications director, was bringing in his own team to revamp Mr.
Bush's message.


Moore Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Children
Very little can stop serious beachgoers.
Bad weather and poor cash flow may keep some home, but never for long.
You can tell them by the way they rattle off the names of every Jersey Shore town by heart (along with the parking rates in each town).
They can describe the color and texture of sand with a geologist's expertise.
To avoid traffic, they rise at dawn and get to the beach early, leaving at midday or staying late, past the time everyone else has left.
They love to feel the water lap up against their skin, to luxuriate in the soft embrace of the sand, to keep up their tans, dangerously.
Alex Johnson is a beachgoer on the weekend and a general contractor during the week.
He grew up in Kentucky, but discovered the virtues of the beach when he was in college and found Virginia Beach, on the Virginia coast.
He and his family live on the South Shore of Long Island, and visit nearby beaches regularly.
In his opinion, a good family beach has concessions with lots of ice cream and other summery snacks, a playground and "medium-fine sand that's not too coarse and can hold the water well," for castle building.
He says he is partial to Lido Beach on the South Shore, where he spends hours on the sand creating "low-lying buildings, like pyramids," while his children hop on boogie boards and let the waves toss them around.


Gibraltar Mines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


GTE to Sell Lighting Operations for $1.1 Billion
The GTE Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its worldwide lighting business, best known for its Sylvania light bulbs, to a subsidiary of Siemens A.G. and a group of investors for a total of $1.1 billion.
The price is below what analysts said the lighting business might fetch when a possible sale was announced last year.
But the analysts added that the sale of other assets related to the subsidiary and income from overfunded pension assets were likely to add several hundred million dollars to the eventual proceeds.


Fires in West Threaten Towns in Washington and Oregon


NVR L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Matthews Studio Equipment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Operations Show Profit For G.M.
The General Motors Corporation said today that it had an operating profit of $392 million in the second quarter -- its most heartening quarterly showing in two years.
The company reported a net loss of $357.1 million for the quarter because of the previously announced charge of $749.4 million by its Hughes Aircraft subsidiary.
The operating earnings reflected increased factory sales of cars and trucks to dealers, as well as cost savings from G.M.'s reorganized North American automotive operations, said Robert C. Stempel, the company chairman.


A Year Later, Bond Traders Are a Humbler Lot
In the year since the Salomon Brothers Treasury scandal last August, bond traders have lost their swagger.
They can still make millions of dollars a year.
And the market is still rough and tumble.
But in the last 12 months, traders have been on their best behavior, worried about possible Government indictments.
The image of the cowboy trader, averse to following rules, emerged in the aftermath of the Salomon scandal.
But today, traders all seem to wear white gloves to the party and observe perfect etiquette.
They are filling out more forms, keeping better records and talking less to their competitors before an auction to avoid being accused of collusion.


Democrats Deferring Abortion-Rights Legislation
Congressional Democratic leaders said today that they had all but given up this year on trying to pass legislation that would guarantee broad abortion rights because they could not block amendments that would allow state restrictions.
The Democratic leadership had hoped to pass the measure, known as the Freedom of Choice Bill, before this month's Republican National Convention to embarrass President Bush and highlight the issue during the campaign.


Mets Close To a Trade
The Mets, refusing to concede the season, are on the verge of completing a trade for an outfielder the organization trusts can offer enough offense for the club to survive the absences of Bobby Bonilla (fractured rib) and Howard Johnson (fractured right wrist).
General Manager Al Harazin, speaking before tonight's game with the Chicago Cubs at Wrigley Field, said that the deal was "not a blockbuster" and that he felt confident he could have it done by the end of the weekend.


O'Charley's Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 12


I.B.M. and G.M. Lead Retreat in Stocks
Stocks fell yesterday, as investors awaited fresh unemployment figures and retreated from two corporate giants, I.B.M. and General Motors
In its third straight drop, the Dow Jones industrial average retreated 24.58 points, to 3,340.56.
Since Monday's close, the Dow has fallen 54.84 points.


Sara Lee Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Review/Film; Low Aspirations for High Youths
"London Kills Me" is about the lives of a group of young London druggies and pushers toward the end of the Thatcher era.
Clint is a pusher who wants to get a straight job.
His best friend aspires to an association with the mob.
Sylvie, a pretty addict, sort of loves both the men but not enough to kick the habit.
In various combinations, they wander around Portobello Road, and on one special day they take a trip to the country.
The English film is the first to be directed as well as written by Hanif Kureishi, the hugely gifted playwright and novelist who wrote the screenplays for "My Beautiful Laundrette" and "Sammy and Rosie Get Laid." The kindest thing to say about "London Kills Me" is that Stephen Frears, who directed Mr.
Kureishi's first two scripts, might have persuaded the writer to shape this very raw material to make some dramatic or even political point.


Hoechst Celanese reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Manitowoc Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Abroad at Home; Will Bush Take Real Action?
On Aug. 2, 1990, the morning after Iraq occupied Kuwait, President Bush told reporters: "We're not discussing intervention. I'm not contemplating such action."
Then he flew to Aspen, Colo.
There he met Margaret Thatcher, the British Prime Minister.
They talked for hours.
That afternoon, at a joint press conference, Mr.
Bush took a much tougher line.
He condemned "naked aggression" and said he was considering "the next steps needed to end the invasion." Mrs.
Thatcher had stiffened his backbone.


Review/Film; Psychiatric Murder Mystery
"Whispers in the Dark" is the latest in the bumper crop of shrinks-in-distress movies.
Playing a psychiatrist named Ann Hecker, Annabella Sciorra sets out to find an exciting new sex life, admit she is angry at her dead father and, by the way, avoid being murdered.
No matter what Freud said about there being no accidents, this unsexy, unsuspenseful thriller cannot be what the writer and first-time director Christopher Crowe really wanted.
We see only two of Ann's patients, and she isn't doing either of them any good.
Johnny C (John Leguizamo) is a hot young painter with a violent streak and a fantasy that he is from another planet.
Eve (Deborah Unger) is a beautiful gallery owner who likes to tell the doc about her sexual experiences with a mystery man, who usually ties her wrists to an overhead pipe in a basement.


Show Time for Sad Time at Apollo
"I'm not going," Karen Anderson belted out, leaning into the microphone, as the packed audience at the Apollo Theater responded to the song from the Broadway musical "Dreamgirls" with cheers and tears of mourning.
"Do you think he heard me?" she said, pausing in the middle of her gospel-accented rendition, drawing a roar from the crowd.


Universal Corp.  reports earnings for Year June 30


House Panel Votes to Widen Inquiry Into U.S. Policy on Iraq
A Congressional committee voted today to widen its investigation of the Bush Administration's policy toward Iraq, seeking additional evidence of how the United States helped Iraq build up its military arsenal before the Persian Gulf war.
The investigation seems likely to cause political embarrassment for President Bush in this election year, and the committee vote, 31 to 19, generally followed party lines.


Hunger Keeps Growing in the Land of Plenty; In Westchester, Too
To the Editor:
I could have written every word of Amy Brown's July 22 Op-Ed article, "My Starving Soup Kitchen," only changing the locale to New York State's Westchester County.
Yes, there is hunger in affluent Westchester!
Perhaps no one realizes the depth of this critical problem because of the work done silently and continually for the last 10 to 12 years by volunteers, people who will not stand by and see others denied food.


IRAQ TO BAR U.N. FROM MINISTRIES
Two days before an international inspection team is scheduled to arrive in Baghdad for another round of weapons searches, Iraq announced today that it would bar the inspectors from all its ministries.
The official Iraqi News Agency, monitored in Cyprus, reported that Culture Minister Hamed Youssef Hammadi said such searches were political and intended to humiliate Iraq.


Siliconix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 5


Western Groups to Help Yemen Jews to Emigrate
A major effort is under way by French, British and American Jewish organizations to organize a discreet departure from Yemen of some 1,600 to 1,700 Yemeni Jews, the last of an ancient community that once numbered 50,000.
"There is a dialogue with the Yemeni authorities in an excellent climate of cordiality," said Roger Pinto, vice president of the Representative Council of Jewish Institutions of France, who visited Yemen three months ago and held talks with Abdelkarim al-Iryani, the country's Foreign Minister.


Topics of The Times; History's Mystery -- for $599
The cover of the fall catalogue for New York City's upscale Hammacher Schlemmer emporium features a model of Columbus's flagship, the Santa Maria, priced at a cool $599.
Each model took "a minimum of 450 man hours to create," the catalogue declares, and was "faithfully reproduced by hand on the island of Hispanola  [ sic ]  (where Columbus first set foot)."
Stop the presses!
Is
Hispaniola where he landed?
Historians would give their eyeteeth to know for sure.
At least nine places in the West Indies have been cited as the first landfall, but Hispaniola isn't one of them.


U.N. Meets With Rival Factions in Somalia
United Nations representatives arrived in the ruined Somali capital today and began talks with rival factions to assess the need for security forces to protect an international relief operation.
The leader of the 23-member team, Peter Hansen of Denmark, met with Mohammed Ali Mahdi, whose war with an arch-rival, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aideed, has caused thousands of deaths.


Allstate Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


MILLIONS PROPOSED FOR NEW YORK AREA IN U.S. TRANSIT BILL
The New York region would receive hundreds of millions of dollars in Federal mass-transit subsidies, along with money to upgrade its rail systems, under the transportation bill now moving toward approval in Congress.
The bill, which passed the Senate on Wednesday and the House last month, now moves to a House-Senate conference committee.
It exemplifies the radically new philosophy enshrined by Congress last year in giving states great leeway in spending Federal transportation dollars on mass transit.
The New York region, because of its reliance on mass transit, stands to be one of the largest beneficiaries of this year's $33.8 billion transit appropriation bill.


Northeast Federal reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Joule Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Washington Practices Defense and Diplomacy
Before it can be completely asked, Marvin Washington dismisses a question about Dennis Byrd's working at what used to be Washington's starting left defensive end position.
"I don't want to get into that," Washington said.
"I really don't. Some days it's good. Some days it's bad. But I just don't want to get into it."


Ivax Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vigoro Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Astronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


A Memorial Marquee at the Apollo


Sico Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Calloway's Nursery Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA
U.S. AND CROATIA IN FINAL
The American basketball team crushed Lithuania, 127-76, and Croatia edged the Unified Team.


LVI Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oak Hill Sportswear Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hees International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yankees Get That Sinking Feeling
The Yankees have to wonder when it will end.
Can they continue to spiral into oblivion, tumbling lower in the standings and grasping for anything positive during this torturous stretch?
After yesterday's sorry effort against the Boston Red Sox, maybe they can.
The Yankee comedy act was ugliest when they donned gloves.
There was the foul pop catcher Mike Stanley never saw, the carom that fooled Randy Velarde in left field, the fly ball to center Roberto Kelly inexplicably dropped and the ground-ball single the center fielder booted.


Lillian Vallish Foote; Producer, 69
Lillian Vallish Foote, a theater and film producer who worked closely with her husband, the playwright Horton Foote, died on Wednesday in Princeton, N.J.
She was 69 years old and had homes in New York City and Wharton, Tex.
She died after a short illness, the family said.


Bush Urges U.N. to Back Force to Get Aid to Bosnia
Responding to mounting international and domestic pressure to take action on the Balkan war, President Bush called today for a United Nations resolution authorizing the use of force to deliver food and medicine to the besieged populations of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"My heartfelt hope is that that will not prove necessary, but the international community cannot stand by and allow innocent children, women and men to be starved to death," Mr.
Bush said at a hastily arranged airport news conference after a campaign appearance here.
He said he would "press hard for quick passage" of a Security Council resolution.
Hardening of U.S.
Stand


Brascan Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FRP Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reviews/Film; Many Moods, and Outfits to Match
A peaceful playground.
A pleasant day.
And two parents making small talk as they watch their children and then share a ride home.
Dr.
Carter Nix (John Lithgow), a child psychiatrist taking time off from his work to help bring up his daughter, engages a female friend in small talk about the legitimacy of conducting psychological studies on small children.
The conversation starts innocently, but within moments -- during the course of an edgy, sustained driving shot executed with bravura ease -- it turns hostile enough to make Carter sneeze.
Even worse, it makes Carter commit murder.
Bounding back gamely from "The Bonfire of the Vanities," Brian De Palma has vigorously returned to familiar ground.
"Raising Cain," a delirious thriller starring John Lithgow as a man with at least three more personalities than he really needs, finds Mr.
De Palma creating spellbinding, beautifully executed images that often make practically no sense.
Working with an exhilarating sense of freedom, he seems to care not in the least what any of it really means.
The results are playful, lively and no less unstrung than Dr.
Carter Nix himself.


FirstFed Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Scorpion Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Marian S. Heiskell Honored for Her Work on the City's Environment


Tejas Gas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tepid Recovery in TV's Up-Front Market
IF the up-front market for television advertising time is any indication, the economic recovery is tepid at best.
Network executives estimate that the four networks took in about $3.5 billion, or roughly the same amount as last year, in advance sales of advertising time in the new television season.
Nevertheless, the flat overall dollar amount represents a recovery for the television business to some degree, since advertisers spent almost the same amount of money to buy about 5 percent less advertising time.
That could still shift if the General Motors Corporation, which has not yet fully committed to the market, decides to spend $200 million more in the up-front market.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Banc OneCorp., Columbus, Ohio, is offering $350 million in 7 1/4 percent subordinated notes due in 2002 at 99.209 to yield 7.36 percent through First Boston Corp.
Noncallable for 10 years, the notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.
*
Metropolitan Seattle is offering $119.1 million in 6.2 percent tax-exempt refunding revenue bonds due in 2032 at a price to yield 6.268 percent through Dillon, Read.
The issue is rated A-1 by Moody's and AA by S.&amp; P.


Topics of The Times; Hidden Killers
Anyone who has seen a child suddenly choke or vomit or lose his breath because he's swallowed something to which he's allergic has probably witnessed an anaphylactic reaction.
These reactions kill several hundred young Americans each year, many of whom were unaware they were eating a substance lethal to them.
That's the gist of a study from Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, recounted in the current New England Journal of Medicine.
And the reason an accompanying editorial calls for more explicit food labeling.


NovaCare Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Now, Federal Review of the King Case
The stunning acquittals of four officers on state criminal charges of using excessive force against Rodney King brought riots and ruin to Los Angeles in April.
President Bush's shocked reaction spoke for many Americans.
A Federal grand jury has now brought civil rights charges against the officers, making good on Mr.
Bush's pledge for vigorous Justice Department action.
A Federal courtroom is an appropriate forum to try this case; it scarred the nation as well.
When the Federal trial occurs, the accused are entitled to the same presumption of innocence that governed their state trial.
Instead, the air is full of politicians' cries for conviction as the only just result.


Tyco Laboratories Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Epic Data International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Opera; New Setting of Goethe's Melancholy Love Story
When "The Sorrows of Young Werther" was published in 1774, it triggered in European sensibilities a near-mania for its young author and the people he wrote about.
Readers were fascinated not only by a story of love and suicide, but also by the story of the story.
For Werther, the thwarted lover, was Johann Wolfgang von Goethe himself.
Lotte and Albert were his flesh-and-blood summer friends.
Only the suicide was borrowed, although from neighboring if unrelated events.
Some communities banned the book as preaching self-destruction.
Promotional forces disturbingly similar to today's cooked up a largely mythical wave of suicides said to have been committed by impressionable young readers across Europe.
So strong were the images in this brief novel that Goethe could live deeply into old age without ever escaping his own personal identification with it.
In Thomas Mann's "Lotte in Weimar," we find the real-life Lotte in middle age, never quite sure where she ends and her fictional counterpart begins.


Horsehead Resource reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rumor and Justice in Washington Heights
Soon a grand jury will decide whether to indict Officer Michael O'Keefe in the death of Jose Garcia, the shooting that precipitated rioting in Washington Heights in July.
Mayor David Dinkins must prepare this confused and outraged community and all New Yorkers for the possibility that Officer O'Keefe might not be indicted.
After the Los Angeles riots, Mayor Dinkins averted violence by quickly correcting false reports of rioting and looting in New York.
But in the days after the Washington Heights shooting, he used his office to make unjustified rumors and media reports of police brutality appear valid.


Court Does Well to Forbid Excluding Jurors Because of Race
To the Editor:
Contrary to Ronald Goldfarb (Op-Ed, July 18), the Supreme Court removed one more vestige of discrimination against African-Americans when it found that the Constitution forbids criminal defendants from excluding prospective jurors from service on the ground of race.
When I prosecuted the first Howard Beach, Queens, trial, a case in which the victims were African-Americans and the defendants were white, the defense lawyers attempted to use their peremptory challenges to exclude every African-American prospective juror.
I made a motion to prevent them from excluding such jurors unless they gave race-neutral reasons.
My motion was granted by Justice Thomas Demakos.
As a result, one African-American juror was seated during the trial.


Refugees From Camps Tell of Agony and Terror
Refugees from northern Bosnia and Herzegovina say their agony began in late May, when Serbian forces stormed into dozens of towns and villages in what the refugees describe as an operation of singular brutality.
Their accounts indicate that a pattern was repeated along a 100-mile front: Infantry and tank assaults overwhelmed the local defenders, who were usually armed with nothing more than hunting rifles.
The Muslim and Croatian residents were herded to prison camps in Bosnia, some on foot, some in sealed train cars.
Any Muslim or Croat caught with a gun was executed on the spot or sent to the harshest of the camps, places in which death came from starvation and disease.


Associated Communications Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Swimming Looks Easier on TV


Review/Art; African and American, A Modernist With Roots
The career of the black American artist William H. Johnson (1901-1970) ended abruptly in 1947 when he was confined to Central Islip State Hospital on Long Island for a psychiatric disorder.
Despondent and withdrawn, he never left the hospital or painted again.
Although the art he left behind suggests many shifting states of mind, despondency is seldom one of them.
Rather, it gives evidence of an ambitious artist energetically tackling the issues of 20th-century painting between the world wars, and arriving at a style that combined European modernism with a vernacular American content.
This approach defines the work of a number of Johnson's contemporaries -- Marsden Hartley, Jacob Lawrence and Stuart Davis, among them -- but it is the way Johnson mixed and weighted those ingredients that gives his art its distinction.
A generous sampling of his work is now on view at the Studio Museum in Harlem and at the Whitney Museum of American Art.
The paintings in the Whitney's "Homecoming: William H. Johnson and Afro-America, 1938-1946," which originated at the National Museum of American Art in Washington, are the late works on which Johnson's reputation will doubtless stand.
The installation does everything possible both to consolidate their modernist credentials and to present them as political documents anticipating today's multi-cultural thinking.
It is, however, the exhibition at the Studio Museum, mixing early work with late, that offers a real sense of the jumpy rhythm of Johnson's life and career.





Shearson Discusses the Sale of Its Boston Company Unit
Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. announced yesterday that it was negotiating the sale of the Boston Company, its large money-management subsidiary, with several financial institutions.
In a statement, Shearson described the talks about the sale as preliminary and said the firm had not yet decided to sell the unit.
Citing confidentiality of the conversations, the firm declined to identify the bidders or say how many might be interested in buying the diviison.


As for Rights, Bork Follows Madison
To the Editor:
"Court Again Upholds Rights of the Individual" by Ellery Schempp and "When Dred Scott Was" by Ephraim Banks (letters, July 17) misrepresent what Robert H. Bork wrote in his July 8 Op-Ed article.


Feeling Prisons' Costs, Governors Look at Alternatives
After years of discussing ever-tougher measures to reduce crime rates, the nation's governors are exploring alternatives to prison for nonviolent offenders.
Many say that both the criminal and society benefit from such alternatives, like half-way houses, home confinement and supervised probation with regular jobs.
And criminal-justice experts say that virtually every state is expanding these programs.


Diner's Journal
Scandinavian and Casual
The number of Scandinavian restaurants in Manhattan doubled last month -- from one to two -- with the opening of Snaps on Park Avenue at 46th Street, a rakish, casual cousin of Aquavit on West 54th Street.
The airy setting in the Helmsley Building is sunny yellow and has a long marble-topped bar, bent-cane chairs and, moored on overhead crossbeams, a representation of a Viking longboat.
Waiters, who have yet to get their sea legs, wear snazzy brown and green shirts with ties that are about as subtle as the walls.
Fans of Aquavit will recognize some of the herring, venison and salmon dishes.
A starter of salmon ravioli with dill sauce was leathery and thick, although the sauce was refreshing ($6).
Gravlax is the real thing here, not merely salmon with some dill tossed on it, as you find in so many restaurants ($7).
I could do with half the sauce they slather over it, though.
The same good gravlax can be ordered with a plump potato cake ($7).
Tuna carpaccio ($7) is served warm and half-cooked on the hot plate, which is a surprise.
Moreover, it is served under an avalanche of mild Scandinavian cheese, which all but obscures it.


CHRONICLE
A dramatized documentary based on the experiences of former hostages in Beirut has provoked the anger of three of those hostages, TERRY WAITE, BRIAN KEENAN and JOHN McCARTHY.
The men, who have not seen the film, contend that the film's makers could not begin to understand the circumstances of their confinement and release.
The two-hour program, "Hostages," a joint production of Granada Television and HBO Showcase, is to be shown on television in Britain in the fall and in this country early next year.
It depicts "the kidnapping, imprisonment and final release of some of the Western hostages in Lebanon," according to Granada publicity statements.


The Price of Punishment in Delaware
John P. O'Connell's job is to try to make sense of Delaware's correctional system and to advise its elected officials on proposed policies and legislation.
His work is a major reason that experts cite the state as a leader in the national effort to rein in the costs of dealing with criminals.
Mr.
O'Connell brings the power of computers and common sense to a problem that has eluded political solutions.


National Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Canadian Marconi reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Avesis Inc. reports earnings for Year to May 31


Art in Review
Todd Webb  Houk Friedman Gallery 1094 Madison Avenue, at 82d Street Upper East Side Through Aug. 28
Todd Webb's photographs of New York in the 1940's have a quiet simplicity.
Mr.
Webb, who moved to the city just after World War II and photographed it extensively with a large-format camera over the next several years, recorded familiar sights in elegant, uninflected black-and-white pictures.


National Patent Development Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Woman's Quest for Fame Ends in Death in the Night
It was, last week, just another gruesome, unsolved murder in Manhattan: a nameless teen-age girl, shot in the head, her nude body stuffed into a plastic garbage bag and dumped in a parking lot in Chelsea in the dead of night.
A couple of days later, the case began to take on tragic substance.
The police had sifted through the missing persons' reports and her family had gone down to the morgue.
The victim was identified as Lynda Burgos of Brooklyn, an 18-year-old aspiring actress, model and dancer.


Weston (George) Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dynamic Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


McGriggs Is in Position To Be Giants Starter
A year ago, Lamar McGriggs was a floundering rookie safety, an eighth-round draft choice who made the Giants mainly because he was such a big hitter on special teams.
Now he is a year older and many years wiser, and he is pushing Greg Jackson and Myron Guyton for a starting job.
Jackson was unsigned until Monday and Guyton has been sidelined by back spasms, so McGriggs has been a starter in training camp here.
When the Giants open their preseason campaign against the Cincinnati Bengals Sunday night in Giants Stadium, McGriggs seems sure to start.


AGCO Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


RESULTS PLUS
FOOTBALL  Knox II Debut Is a Hit for Rams  Jim Everett threw two touchdown passes and Mike Pagel passed for another as the Los Angeles Rams opened their second era under Coach Chuck Knox with a 21-7 victory over the Seattle Seahawks last night at the Kingdome in Seattle.
Knox left the Seahawks following last season after coaching them for nine years.
Tom Flores, the former Raiders coach, made his Seahawk coaching debut.
The Rams intercepted Kelly Stouffer and Dan McGwire once apiece and also recovered a fumble by Stouffer. (AP)


Confidence and the Car Market
At first glance, perhaps even second, the American auto industry seems to be emerging from two years of rough times and huge losses.
Sales have been up, market share is on the rise, and second-quarter results produced black ink.
But rather than proclaim that they have turned the corner and face smooth sailing, industry executives and investors have turned exceedingly cautious, fearful of the nation's economic uncertainty and stumbling growth.


Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Companies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Runs and Soars and Clicks Heels Over 9 Medals
In a remarkable display of United States talent in track and field, nine Americans won medals at the Barcelona Olympics today, led by Kevin Young, a 400-meter hurdler from Los Angeles who destroyed one of the oldest world records in the sport.
Young, one of four Americans who captured a gold medal, finished his race in 46.78 seconds to become the first man in history to break 47 seconds in the event.
He also broke the world record of 47.02 seconds that Edwin Moses, who is considered the greatest intermediate hurdler in history, had held for nearly nine years.


Accounts
*
No Touch North America, Irvine, Calif., to Dailey &amp; Associates, Los Angeles, to handle advertising for the No Touch tire-care products account, previously at Basso &amp; Associates Advertising and Public Relations, Costa Mesa, Calif.
The account, with billings estimated at $6 million to $9 million, was awarded without a review. *
Disney Store Inc.
Glendale, Calif., to Rubin Postaer &amp; Associates, Santa Monica, as the Disney retail chain's first national advertising agency.
Billings were not disclosed, nor were the names of other agencies that participated in a review on the account.
Rubin Postaer also handles advertising for other Walt Disney operations like the company's cable television channel and film-licensing unit.


As the Flame Flickers, a Sense That Sport Will Never Be the Same
Olympic officials and athletes of the former Soviet Union drank a symbolic farewell toast to the old system tonight, and welcomed a million-dollar sponsor to try to keep afloat the fractured remains.
The final Olympic weekend loomed, and with it the last days of the Unified Team, which is leading the world in medals won, with 35 gold, 29 silver and 23 bronze.


Southwest Orders $1.2 Billion in Boeing Jets
The Boeing Company said today that it had agreed to sell 34 of its 737-300 jets to the Southwest Airlines Company for $1.2 billion.
The pending Southwest deal will be the largest 737 order since November 1989, when Delta bought 50.
So far this year, 44 jets have been ordered from various carriers, and the largest order was 17 jets from Malaysian Airlines.


Croatia's Mission Impossible: Beat the U.S.
The game Croatia had to win is behind it.
The game the United States can't fathom losing will be played Saturday night.
Both teams, then, ought to return home from the men's Olympic basketball final with their missions accomplished, for when asked how Croatia might steal the gold medal from the Dream Team, Toni Kukoc, the Croatian forward, paused to make sure he understood the question and said:


OMI Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Says Rival Would 'Pull a Fast One' Over Taxes
Trying to steady the Republicans' wobbly conservative base, President Bush today made his most aggressive assault yet on Gov.
Bill Clinton, asserting that the Democratic nominee would "pull a fast one on the American people" and raise taxes by hundreds of billions of dollars.
Appearing before an enthusiastic group of conservative state lawmakers at the annual convention of the American Legislative Exchange Council, Mr.
Bush made the economy the battleground of the day, targeting the issue on which his advisers believe he is most vulnerable and on which he has received the most fire from conservatives.
A Liberal Trojan Horse


Biocircuits reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Memo; Democrat's Road Tour: Selling the Ticket Retail
This is not the way Presidential nominees are supposed to campaign.
The general election race between the Republican and the Democratic candidates is supposed to be a matter of what the people in the business call wholesale politics: big-scale, highly structured events scripted to be fitted neatly into a thematic scheme geared toward the national television audience.


Retail Chains Report Widely Varied Sales for July
Retail sales in July varied widely from store chain to store chain, according to retailers' reports yesterday.
While sales exceeded analysts' expectations in some cases and disappointed in others, they failed over all to give any clear indication of the long-awaited rebound in consumer spending.
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. startled analysts with strong sales in a traditionally slow month, while sales at Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company continued to slide.


The Spoken Word
DRAMATIC READING, Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, Fifth Avenue at 55th Street, midtown Manhattan.
Five actresses from the cast of the Broadway play "Jake's Women" -- Talia Balsam, Genia Michaela, Maura Russo, Helen Shaver and Joyce Van Patten -- will read from Edgar Lee Masters's "Spoon River Anthology." Today at 1 P.M.
Sponsored by the Free Theater Project.
Free.
Information: (212) 874-5935 or (212) 247-0490.
"NAGASAKI DAY: A TIME TO REFLECT," Brooklyn Bridge Anchorage, Cadman Plaza West and Old Fulton Street, Downtown Brooklyn.
An art installation, panel discussion and documentary film on disarmament.
Participants include Helene Aylon, an artist, and Ynestra King, an ecologist.
Noon to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 802-1215.


Physicians Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Megafoods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Gensia Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Arden Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Citizens Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Allied Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Molex Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Plan Creates Jobs for Some On Welfare
Seeking to increase the ranks of people who must work for their welfare grants, New York State will begin creating thousands of temporary part-time jobs for single and childless welfare recipients next month.
The new program, called Working Toward Independence, is the state's first effort to use its own agencies -- including hospitals, psychiatric institutions and offices -- as work sites for recipients of Home Relief welfare grants.


Brother, Sister and 100 Miles; A Judge Lets Adoptive Parents Sue Counties for 'Bungling'
Michael Whalen got a pet hamster and stuffed animals when he came to live with his adoptive parents three years ago.
But his new parents knew he was missing the most important playmate of all: his sister.
It seemed it would be simple enough to bring the two together in a state where the highest priority is supposed to be given to reuniting siblings like Michael, who is now 6 years old, and his sister, Elizabeth, now 4.


An Officer Admits Lies In a Shooting
One of six Newark police officers suspended after the mysterious shooting of a teen-age car-theft suspect two months ago broke ranks with his fellow officers today, pleading guilty to lying on a police report and agreeing to testify before a special grand jury.
At the same time, the lawyer for two other officers said that his clients had been granted immunity from prosecution in the case in return for their testimony and that they were scheduled to appear before a grand jury next Wednesday.


Inter-City Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; High-Risk Debt From the Old Days
IN the bad old days, when Drexel Burnham Lambert was a feared investment banking powerhouse and deals were done on the assumption that operations of acquired companies would dramatically improve, pay-in-kind bonds became a Wall Street rage.
Those bonds, known as PIK's, promised high interest rates, which buyers found attractive, but allowed companies to avoid parting with cash for years after the bonds were issued.
Instead, companies would simply issue more bonds.
So long as the printing presses were working, such companies could not default.


At the Bar; From the mountains to the prairie to the oceans white with foam, a law firm sells itself.
Imagine that Shea &amp; Gould, the law firm representing the Mets, sponsored their broadcasts, too.
Or that some televised, inside-the-Beltway brawl like the McLaughlin Group was brought to you by Covington &amp; Burling.
Or that "L.A. Law" was sponsored by a real Los Angeles law firm like O'Melveny &amp; Myers.
It sounds far-fetched, for the fanciest corporate law firms have ceded the airwaves to their poorer cousins in the personal injury, divorce and immigration bars.
Corporate types have always marketed themselves more discreetly, through country club lunches, agate type in the back of Metropolitan Opera playbills, and, increasingly, by planting self-aggrandizing articles in the press.


Michael Merritt; Set Designer, 47
Michael Merritt, an award-winning set designer for movies and plays, died on Aug. 3 at his home in Chicago.
He was 47 years old.
He died of colon and liver cancer, said Michael Maggio, the associate artistic director of the Goodman Theater in Chicago.


Relatives Cracked Serial-Killing Case
In a story that could come out of a mystery novel, the critical breakthrough in the arrest of Nathaniel White, who has confessed to killing six people, came not from any of the four police departments that were investigating the slayings.
Instead, the suspect's name was first offered to the police by the mother and two sisters of one of the victims, who took it upon themselves to look into the woman's disappearance.


Sports of The Times; An Olympian For Ancient Greece
TWENTY years ago, not long before his 11th birthday, Carl Lewis won the long jump at a kids track meet in Philadelphia, not far from his Willingboro, N.J., home.
Presenting the medals that day was Jesse Owens, the winner of the four gold medals in the 1936 Olympics at Berlin.
"You're really talented," Owens told him.
"You're a little guy but you beat all the big guys."


Bias Found Widespread In the Courts
A task force set up to study the New Jersey judicial system has found widespread bias and a lack of opportunity for racial and ethnic minorities to work in the system or receive even-handed treatment from it.
The 48-member task force, whose findings were released today by Chief Justice Robert N. Wilentz, said blacks were more likely to be arrested, less likely to be released on bail, less likely to see members of their own race in the courtroom and jury box and more likely to be the target of a death penalty hearing when charged with murder, especially if the victim was white.


General Re Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


It's Brains Over Bronze as Clever Cuba Reaches Final
It was meant to be an all-power semifinal between the two big-hitting teams of the women's Olympic volleyball tournament, but in the end it was the soft touch that won.
Cuba beat the United States tonight simply because it showed finesse instead of muscle at just the right moment.
In fairness, as both the American and Cuban coaches noted, the hard-fought seesaw match, which Cuba won, 8-15, 15-9, 6-15, 15-5, 15-11, could have gone either way.
Yet it went the Cuban way because, time and again at crucial moments, the American defense was disarmed by drop shots.
A Missed Opportunity
Cuba will now compete Friday for its first Olympic gold medal in women's volleyball.
Its opponent will be the Unified Team, which beat Brazil tonight, 15-8, 13-15, 15-5, 15-5.
The United States will play Brazil Friday, this time for a chance to win the bronze medal.


Talks Focus on Environment In Push for Free Trade Pact
Canadian, Mexican and American trade negotiators labored over the environmental section of a North American free trade agreement today, trying to put the finishing touches on a deal that President Bush could announce Friday, people involved in the negotiations said.
But a Canadian spokesman, Yves Gagnon, said tonight that the three nations' trade ministers stopped talking at 9 P.M. and would resume negotiations before 9 A.M.
Friday.


Little Magazines
To the Editor:
"Into the 21st Century, Bleakly" by Daniel Bell (Op-Ed, July 26) laments parochialism among American intellectuals.
But the pages of little magazines have in the last 25 years been open to work from around the world.


Pothole Pennies Add Up
To the Editor:
Re your July 20 report that the shrunken New York City budget has left streets in dangerous disrepair:
The city's Office of Management and Budget cut the maintenance budget of the Department of Transportation from 200 people to 30, "saving" the city $5 million.
Paradoxically, restoring this cut would save the city $9 million.
This is because the city pays out about $14 million in claims for damage done by potholes that the city did not repair.


House Democrats Pass Bill To Aid Families in Trouble
Seizing the Republican banner of "family values," House Democrats today passed legislation intended to keep troubled families together and prevent them from going hungry.
Democrats insisted that the plan, which would be paid for by higher taxes on millionaires, offered Congress a chance to do more than talk about helping families.
The bill, said Representative Patricia Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado, shows "who's for kids and who's just kidding."


U.S. Puts 2 Fighters In Medal Finals
After being involved in two of the disputes that have marked this Olympic boxing competition, and coming up on the losing side, the United States received a break today -- sort of.
Oscar De La Hoya, a hard-hitting lightweight from Los Angeles, did not fight well and suffered through two nightmarish rounds with Hong Sung Sik of South Korea.
But with the help of a warning against the Korean, he survived a warning of his own and prevailed in the alley fight by an 11-10 score.


Sounds Around Town
Peggy Lee
Peggy Lee, Club 53 at the New York Hilton Hotel, Avenue of the Americas at 53d Street, midtown Manhattan, (212) 261-5853.
At the age of 72, Miss Lee is still synonymous with high-style nightclub elegance and exudes a sultry charisma, despite her precarious health.
This program in her first New York club engagement in more than two years includes well-known hits including "Manana" and "Fever" and an eerie, trancelike rendition of "Is That All There Is?" Although the program has its share of swingers, the emphasis is on dreamy ballads.
A bossa nova version of " 'S Wonderful" is especially scrumptious.
Her backup ensemble, led by the pianist Mike Renzi, is exceptional.
Shows are 8:45 and 10:45 tonight and tomorrow night.
Tickets are $40 for table seating and $25 for bar seating, and there is a $10 minimum.
Berlin Revue
"Say It With Music: The Irving Berlin Revue," Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th floor, midtown Manhattan, (212) 632-5000.
Kaye Ballard, who is comedic and grandly sentimental; Ron Raines and Liz Callaway, who have sturdy Broadway voices, and the impish Jason Graae, who suggests Tom Hanks as Al Jolson, are the four agreeably well-matched personalities in the revue saluting the late composer.
If the pacing is a bit frantic, with 40 songs squashed into too little time, the performances are effervescent, and the material is timeless.
Shows are 9 and 11:15 tonight and tomorrow night.
There is a $35 cover charge, and dinner is required at the early shows.


Western Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about a program to reduce air pollution from lawn mowers included one utility erroneously in some editions among those participating in a test program and rendered its name incorrectly.
Arizona Public Service, not Arizona Power System, has decided against taking part.


Algoma Central reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


KinderCare Learning Centers reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


For Mets, Hardly a Fearsome Showing
A forfeit tonight might have ended it more efficiently for the Mets.
It's unlikely it would have ended it any less eventfully.
Consider the ingredients for the Mets against the Chicago Cubs: Wrigley Field; a lineup without Howard Johnson and Bobby Bonilla; a starter, Wally Whitehurst, with a 1-6 record; Greg Maddux, with 13 triumphs.


TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Washington Redskins
What comes after $2.29 million, $2.22 million and $1.5 million?
The short answer is: trouble.
To hear the Redskins tell it, the next amount in that declining series should obviously be no higher than the one immediately before it, and, since those first three numbers happen to be the average annual salaries negotiated by the first three 1992 draft picks, the No. 4 pick should be grateful for anything over $1 million or so.
Right?
Guess what?
The No. 4 pick and his agent don't see it that way, and until they and the Redskins do see eye to eye, Desmond Howard, the high-scoring Michigan kick returner and wide receiver who won the 1991 Heisman Trophy, will remain unsigned.


Not Tough Enough With Serbia
President Bush, under pressure from Bill Clinton and public opinion, has quickened his response to the carnage in the Balkans.
He will ask the United Nations to authorize military protection for deliveries of food and medicine.
That's commendable but hardly enough to end the savagery.
Bosnia is being overrun by Serbian-sponsored terrorists.
Its cities are being shelled and starved into submission.
Its people are being routed from their homes, shot at as they flee, even as they bury their dead.
Reports say thousands are being herded into concentration camps.


U.S. Wrestler Sets Mark With Medal
Bruce Baumgartner made a bit of Olympic history today and, in the process, gave the United States its first gold medal in wrestling in these Summer Games.
Baumgartner defeated Jeff Thue of Canada, 8-0, in the 286-pound category.
The victory brought Baumgartner a gold medal to go along with the silver he won in the 1988 Games and the gold he gained in 1984, making him the first American wrestler to win medals in three Olympics.


CHRONICLE
WARREN PHILLIPS, the former publisher of The Wall Street Journal who retired as chairman and chief executive of Dow Jones &amp; Company, is returning to publishing in a somewhat different arena.
He and his wife, BARBARA PHILLIPS, an editor and writer, and their daughter NINA PHILLIPS have established the Bridge Works Publishing Company, an independent press in Bridgehampton, L.I.
They are already reading manuscripts and intend to publish four books of contemporary fiction and nonfiction a year.


Florida Rock Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


House Votes Billions in Aid to Ex-Soviet Republics
After 45 years of voting for foreign aid to combat the Soviet Union, the House voted today to provide billions of dollars in assistance to Russia and the other former Soviet republics.
The action assures Congressional approval of an aid package that President Bush has called essential to the post-cold-war world and that President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia told Congress in June would help guarantee the success of his efforts to nourish democratic and economic reform.


Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Last Hurdle Stops Devers From Gaining 2d Gold
Gail Devers was so far ahead in the 100-meter hurdles final, it was time to dive into the record books for the proper spelling of Fanny Blankers-Koen.
She was the Dutch woman who won an uncommon sprint-hurdles double at the 1948 Summer Olympics in London.
Her events were the 100-meter dash and the 80-meter hurdles.
Devers took care of the dash last Saturday, and she came within 10 meters from the hurdles gold medal tonight, but her right foot caught the top of the final hurdle and sent her sprawling toward the track.


Hewlett Warns On Earnings
The Hewlett-Packard Company said yesterday that earnings for its third fiscal quarter, which ended July 31, would fall below analysts' expectations.
The company said earnings would range from 76 cents a share, which is what it earned in the period last year, to about 87 cents.
Analysts' estimates average $1.12 a share.


Coors Testing New Beverage
Advertising for a different kind of alcoholic beverage, which is to be tested by the Coors Brewing Company, strives to establish what the product is not as much as what it is.
Zima (pronounced ZEE-ma), a clear, carbonated malt beverage with natural flavors, will be introduced on Sept. 14 in test markets in Sacramento, Calif.; Nashville, and Syracuse.
Aimed at men and women aged 21 to 49 who drink beverages like light beer, spritzers and wine coolers, Zima is called "zomething different" in a campaign created by Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco.


Reviews/Film; The Clash of Cultures And Dreams Unrealized
On the surface, the rough-edged style and down-and-out characters of Claire Denis's second feature, "No Fear, No Die," make this film seem radically different from her exquisitely beautiful, fluid "Chocolat." But "No Fear" is about much more than its small-time heroes: two black immigrants in France who train and sell birds for illegal cockfights.
As she did in the 1988 "Chocolat," the partly autobiographical story of a French girl growing up in Cameroon, in "No Fear" Miss Denis shows how the details of daily life carry the weight of a whole lifetime, even a culture.
This film is exquisite in its own tough-minded way.
"No Fear, No Die," released in France in 1990, will be shown today through Tuesday at the Walter Reade Theater as part of the Film Society of Lincoln Center's series "Eurobeat: Blacks in European Cinema."


On Stage, and Off
The "On Stage, and Off" column will resume with the new theater season in the fall.


U.S. Is Tracking AIDS-Like Illness
Federal health officials have set up a national surveillance system for cases of an AIDS-like illness in people who show no evidence of infection with the two viruses that are known to cause AIDS -- H.I.V.-1 and H.I.V.-2.
Nine cases of the mysterious illness were reported in the first week after the Centers for Disease Control established the system, the Federal agency in Atlanta said yesterday.
The nine cases add to five cases that were reported to the centers over the last two years.


Israel Imposes New Limits On Building of Settlements
As Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin left for the United States and meetings next week with President Bush, the Government announced new restrictions today on settlement in the occupied territories, saying it had temporarily stopped giving land to Jewish settlers to build their own houses.
The measure was a blow to the settlers, who had planned to offset previously announced curbs on Government-financed construction by raising money for private building ventures.
Thousands of settlers and their right-wing political allies, chanting "Rabin go home!," rallied in central Jerusalem this evening to protest the Government's actions.


Suncoast Savings &amp; Loan Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Second National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Russ Berrie &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Disappointed Astronauts Prepare Return
After the disappointing failure of their experiment in tethered space flight, the astronauts of the space shuttle Atlantis settled down to routine science and engineering tests yesterday before preparing to return to Earth tomorrow.
The shuttle is scheduled to end its eight-day mission with a landing at 7:39 A.M. at the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Fla.


Candidates On Television    The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Vice President Quayle    TODAY: 5 P.M., C-Span, tape of speeches at campaign stops in Ohio.


TVWeekend; Words vs. Music in Opera: A Straussian Valedictory
Richard Strauss had fun contemplating the philosophical ironies of musical theater: not intellectually in his spare time but by making them the subjects of the operas themselves.
"Ariadne auf Naxos" looks with amusement at the clash between popular and classical cultures; "Capriccio," tonight on PBS, muses on opera's oldest and most pervasive squabble, the meeting of words and music.
In this, Strauss's last opera, the arguments are personified in the Countess Madeleine and her two suitors, a poet and a composer.
The work, with a libretto by Clemens Krauss, indulges Strauss's love of the stage within a stage, and in keeping with this, its introductory instrumental sextet operates within the ranks of the pit orchestra.


Post Office Plans Large Cut In Workers at Headquarters
Postmaster General Marvin T. Runyon plans to announce Friday that the United States Postal Service's management will be restructured and trimmed of thousands of jobs through the early retirement of headquarters workers, a postal official said tonight.
Such a move has been expected since July, when Mr.
Runyon took over the Postal Service's management and told his senior staff to come up with a plan to cut costs for the organization, which has been losing money.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  BUSH SEEKS U.N. ACTION ON BOSNIA
Responding to mounting pressure, President Bush called for a United Nations resolution that would authorize the use of force if needed to deliver food to besieged towns in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A1  CAMPAIGN PRODS THE PRESIDENT
News analysis: Prodded by his campaign rivals and his own party, President Bush clearly felt he had to shake accusations of timidity and take concrete steps to contain the Balkan crisis.
A1  TRACKING AN 'ETHNIC' STORM
Interviews with refugees yield a picture of a singularly brutal Serbian operation across northern Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Beginning in May, infantry and tanks along a 100-mile front overwhelmed Muslims and Croats and drove them into prison camps in an offensive they call ethnic cleansing.
A8  A 'NEW' ANCIENT CITY IN MEXICO
The discovery of an ancient, apparently undocumented city less than 100 miles from Veracruz has been a startling reminder that much of Mexico's past remains buried.
A1  HOUSE APPROVES AID FOR RUSSIA
The House voted 255 to 164 to provide billions of dollars in assistance to Russia and other former Soviet republics.
The action assures Congressional approval of the package.
A1  BALTICS CHAFE AT RUSSIAN TROOPS
Russia's slow and uncertain withdrawal of its troops from the Baltic states is adding new poison to a relationship already polluted by the legacy of Soviet rule.
The three governments fear that Russia may still cling to imperial ambitions.
A3  SETBACK FOR ISRAELI SETTLERS
As Prime Minister Rabin left for talks in the United States, the Israeli Government said it had temporarily stopped giving land to Jewish settlers to build their own houses in the occupied territories.
A2  IRAQ REBUFFS U.N.
AGAIN
Two days before an inspection team was scheduled to arrive, Iraq said it was barring arms inspectors from all its ministries.
President Bush said the United States would help guarantee the United Nations' inspection rights.
A9  A House panel votes to widen the inquiry into U.S. policy on Iraq.
A9  Groups seek to organize the departure of Jews from Yemen.
A9  Bristol Journal: Clashes stir debate about despair among the young.
A4  National A10-14  NAVY TEST STANDARDS AT ISSUE
After being assured by the Pentagon that a new weapon would undergo stringent tests, lawmakers said the Navy had eased standards for the $2 billion jamming device.
A10  FOR SALE: ONE OSCAR
Harold Russell, who won an Academy Award for his portrayal of a disabled seaman in the 1946 film "The Best Years of Our Lives," put his Oscar on the auction block.
A10  YOU'RE ON THE AIR, MR.
GATES
The programmers of a Los Angeles radio station did not know when they signed up former Police Chief Daryl Gates for a call-in show how exquisite their timing would be.
A10  ASTRONAUTS RETURN TO ROUTINE
The astronauts of the space shuttle Atlantis settled down to routine science and engineering tests after the failure of their experiment in tethered space flight.
A12  9 NEW AIDS-LIKE CASES
Nine new cases of AIDS-like illness have been reported since Federal health officials set up a surveillance system for such cases.A12  NEW HOPE FOR TRANSPLANTS
Tests show that a new protein can trick the mouse immune system into accepting transplanted tissue instead of attacking it.
A12  DEMOCRATS AND 'FAMILY VALUES'
House Democrats seized the Republican banner of "family values" and passed legislation intended to keep troubled families together and prevent them from going hungry.
A13  ABORTION RIGHTS BILL DEFERRED
Congressional Democratic leaders said they have all but given up on trying to pass legislation this year that would guarantee broad abortion rights.
A13  BUSH ATTACKS CLINTON ON TAXES
President Bush made his most aggressive assault yet on Gov.
Bill Clinton, charging that the Democratic nominee would "pull a fast one on the American people" and raise taxes by billions of dollars.
A14  STRIKE THAT POLITICAL RULE
Political Memo: In a year when cliches of politics are proving even more wrong than usual, another has been quietly scrapped by Bill Clinton and Al Gore.
A14  Group of speech writers dismissed by the Bush-Quayle campaign.
A14  Law Page A17  Cost may do what experts couldn't: reshape states' corrections policies.
The role of computers and common sense in Delaware's prison system.
Metro Digest B1  TRANSIT AID FOR REGION
The New York region would receive hundreds of millions of dollars in Federal mass-transit subsidies, along with money to upgrade its rail systems, under the transportation bill now moving toward approval in Congress.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-28  A stately Connecticut inn.
C1  First Camp, now Cheese.
C1  The joys of cultural confusion.
C3  For Children C28  Theater: "Paint Your Wagon." C2  Film: "Unforgiven." C1  Restaurants C20  Art: A black modernist with roots.
C22  Word and Image: A pair of revealing mysteries.
C25  Obituaries A16  Jeffrey T. Porcaro, drummer for the rock band Toto.
Sports B6-16  9 AMERICANS WIN MEDALS
In a dazzling display of prowess in track and field, nine Americans, led by Kevin Young in the 400-meter hurdles, won medals in track and field competition at the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
A1  Baseball: Braves complete sweep of Reds.
B14  Surprise!
Mets lose again.
B15  Columns: Anderson on Carl Lewis.
B7  Lipsyte on a basketball legend.
B16  Olympics: Devers says second gold wasn't meant to be.
B7  It's Robert, not Dave, in the decathlon.
B7  Dream Team trounces Lithuania in basketball.
B7  Brave appearance for Petrovic of Croatia.
B8  Cuba beats U.S. women in volleyball.
B8  Unified Team gets ready to part ways.
B9  Rosset defeats Ivanisevic in tennis.
B9  Obituaries A16 Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  Not tough enough with Serbia.
Federal review of the King case.
Pound foolish on census data.
Topics: History's $599 mystery.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: Will Bush act now?
Rudolph W. Giuliani: Rumor and justice in Washington Heights.
William Manchester: Guadalcanal, Aug. 7, 1942.
And forever.
Charles Piller and Liza Weiman: America's computer ghetto.


The Word From the Goat Park Legend: 'I'm Not into the Dream Team'
Up in Goat Park, the legend picks glass off the concrete, chides a grown man for urinating against the fence, listens solemnly to an invitation to come to the Columbia University gym tonight and pick up an award.
"What for?"


Delta Settles Complaint of Bias
Delta Air Lines has agreed to hire a man who said he had been turned down for a job because he is gay and H.I.V.-positive in a settlement announced yesterday by the New York City Human Rights Commission.
The man's complaint was one of 300 filed with the commission by former employees of Pan American World Airways who said they were asked discriminatory questions about their sexual orientation and other private matters in job interviews conducted by Delta in New York.
None was hired by Delta.


Rosset Beats A Weary Ivanisevic
After 10 days of sighs about slow surfaces, inconvenient timing and creature discomforts, the real Olympics came to the tennis courts at Vall d'Hebron today.
They began with the 46th-ranked player in the world blowing kisses to the sky as he drank in a standing ovation for his upset of a close friend, and they marched into the shadows on the shouts of a hometown for its last remaining son.
"Sometimes, it's good to play for something other than points, rankings and money," said Marc Rosset of Switzerland, who had just dumped Goran Ivanisevic and his No. 4 world ranking, 6-3, 7-5, 6-2.
"It's good to play for your country."


People
*
David Ogilvy, as expected, retired yesterday as chairman at WPP Group P.L.C., London.
Mr.
Ogilvy, 81 years old, was named president emeritus and will serve as a consultant.
Gordon Stevens, 66, succeeded Mr.
Ogilvy as chairman.
He is chairman at Scholl P.L.C., London, a position he will retain. *
Jann Baskett was named marketing services director at Texas Monthly magazine, Austin, Tex., succeeding Gail Kirsh Susholtz, who left the magazine.
Ms.
Baskett was previously a freelance creative director and promotion consultant in New York.


EDO Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Art in Review
Paul Georges  Salander-O'Reilly Galleries 20 East 79th Street Upper East Side Through Aug. 28
What Paul Georges lacks in conception and drawing skills, he makes up for with expanses of saturated, usually monochromatic color.
Almost.
His big, ambitious allegorical paintings feature nearly life-size heavy-limbed figures, but their main strength comes from the densely painted monochrome fields that give his art a semblance of modernist flair.
Thus the goddess Aurora is seen against bright yellow, an apt chromatic metaphor for dawn, and Diane, arrow poised, occupies a sky of cadmium red so radiant and thick that it reads not so much as a sky that she flies through, but as a slightly soft plane that cradles her like an enormous cushion.


The Art Market
This week, the Art Loss Register of the International Foundation for Art Research sent a flier to about 1,100 people on the foundation's mailing list and to more than 4,000 subscribers to Christie's catalogues for Impressionist and modern-art auctions.
The message seemed simple enough.
It offered a $250,000 reward for information leading to the recovery of two paintings recently reported stolen: Monet's "Customs Officer's Cabin at Pourville," from 1882, and Picasso's "Nude Before a Mirror," from 1932.
Constance Lowenthal, the foundation's executive director, said several insurance companies had estimated that together the paintings were worth $12.5 million.


National Education reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oh, for Olga or Nadia, or Even a Little More Kim
Oh, oh.
NBC's Olympics ratings are no longer spectacular.
After a wonderful first week, when ratings peaked with last Thursday night's 22.3, those nettlesome Nielsens fell for three straight nights beginning Sunday, before the decline was stemmed with a 15.8 Wednesday.
By last week's fantastic Thursday, NBC's prime-time coverage averaged a 19.9 rating -- 17 percent above the same period in the 1988 Seoul Olympics.
But by Wednesday of this week, NBC's 11 nights in Barcelona were tied at 18.2 with its 11 nights in Seoul.


Croatia Gives Petrovic Chance to Be a Leader
For Drazen Petrovic, there were two major differences between this suburb of Barcelona and East Rutherford, N.J.
One was that the stands were full.
The other was that the stands were happy.
Exuberant might be a better word.
This afternoon, Petrovic scored two foul shots with 9.1 seconds left and led the scoring with 28 points to give surging Croatia a 75-74 basketball victory over the crestfallen Unified Team.
The comeback guaranteed Croatia of at least a silver medal when it plays the United States on Saturday night for the gold medal in the 1992 Summer Games.


Players in Daily News Survival Nearing Final Stages of Battle
Like an intricate chess match, the six-month battle of wits and strategy among newspaper unions, prospective buyers, creditors and management over who will own The Daily News is reaching its final stages.
The principal players are Conrad M. Black, the newspaper tycoon and owner of The Daily Telegraph in London, and Mortimer B. Zuckerman, a real-estate developer and owner of U.S.
News &amp; World Report.
Each is trying to buy The News and each has made separate and conflicting alliances with the paper's unions.


INSIDE
Political Tactics and Attacks
Back on the road, Bill Clinton and Al Gore have scrapped a political rule: that campaigning is all big events.
In Colorado, President Bush made his strongest attack yet.
Page A14.
Abortion Rights Bill Deferred
Congressional Democrats have all but given up on abortion-rights legislation that was sure to provoke a veto fight this year.
Page A13.


Review/Film; 3 Junior Ninjas Home Alone
Take a half-pint imitation of "Home Alone," fuse it with a Bruce Lee martial-arts fantasy, and frost it with a thick sugarcoating of Walt Disney-style comic cheer, and you have "3 Ninjas," the story of three young brothers trained in the martial arts who foil the schemes of an evil arms smuggler named Snyder (Rand Kingsley).
Rocky (Michael Treanor), Colt (Max Elliott Slade) and Tum Tum (Chad Power), sons of an F.B.I. agent, have been trained as ninjas by their indefatigably spry grandfather (Victor Wong).
Grandpa, as he is known, also seems to possess magical powers.
Early in the film, he vanishes in a flash, only to be discovered seconds later perched high in a tree.


Parker Hannifin Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


R &amp; B Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Learning Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Docucon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Randall M. Klose, 37, Benefactor In Causes on AIDS and Gay Rights
Randall M. Klose, a philanthropist who raised millions of dollars for causes concerning gay rights and AIDS, died on Thursday at his home in Washington.
He was 37 years old.
The Human Rights Campaign Fund, a national political organization for gay rights and AIDS issues, said Mr.
Klose had died of AIDS.
He had been the fund's co-chairman for the last two years and on its board since 1987.


Rest and Relaxation


Johannesburg Journal; Dial 'S' for Soothsayer as Custom Weds Marketing
Each evening after finishing her work as a maid in a white suburb of Johannesburg, Liza Khumalo retires to her tiny servant's cubicle and dons the beaded woolen wig of a traditional African soothsayer, or sangoma.
She arranges before her the tools of her art: the whisk made of a wild ox's tail, the bones of goat for communing with the ancestors, and one item the ancestors never envisioned, a Japanese tape recorder, filled with the voices of clients who have paid $2 a minute to dictate their complaints over the telephone.


Transit Agency Argues Against Baby Strollers in the Subways
Saying that 27 children had been hurt in the subways since a ban on strollers was lifted two years ago, the New York City Transit Authority announced a campaign yesterday to persuade parents to carry, not push, their babies.
The Transit Authority said most of the stroller accidents had occurred on escalators or stairways, where children were bounced from their seats.
In other cases, children in strollers were caught in subway doors.
In the most serious accident, a child and its stroller rolled off an elevated subway platform in Brooklyn.


Zagreb and Belgrade Favor Prisoner Swap
The Prime Ministers of Yugoslavia and Croatia signed an agreement today to exchange more than 1,100 prisoners of war held in their countries next week.
The exchange, mediated by the International Red Cross and based on prisoner lists compiled by the organization, is to take place on Aug. 14 and is to be followed by further exchanges as additional lists are drawn up.


Corrections
A map on Thursday with articles about six slayings in the Hudson Valley misidentified the suspect's hometown.
The accused killer, Nathaniel White, is from the town of Wallkill in Orange County; the hamlet of Wallkill in Ulster County was not related to the case.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Frost Holds One-Shot Lead David Frost of South Africa, who won the Buick Classic in Rye, N.Y., in June, shot a second-round 67 yesterday in the Buick Open, giving him a 10-under-par 134 and a one shot lead over Wayne Grady of Australia at the Warwick Hills Golf and Country Club in Grand Blanc, Mich.
The first-round leader, Brad Fabel, had to settle for an even-par 72 that left him two strokes off the lead at 136. (AP)
King Ahead Again: Betsy King's name is atop the leader board again.
Aiming for her third victory of the season and 28th of her career, King shot a 5-under-par 66 for a two-shot lead after two rounds of the $500,000 L.P.G.A.
Stratton Mountain Classic in Vermont.
Her 136 was two shots ahead of Dottie Mochrie, the tour's hottest player, and Lori West.
Patty Sheehan, needing one victory to qualify for the Hall of Fame, shot a 72 for 143. (AP)
Clarke Ties Record: Darren Clarke of Northern Ireland tied the course record with a bogey-free 10-under-par 62 to take the lead after two rounds of the $1 million BMW Open golf tournament in Munich, Germany.
Clarke had 10 birdies and matched the record set by his countryman David Feherty for the 6,887-yard, par-72 Eichenried course.
That round gave him a two-shot lead with a 14-under 130 total.
Steen Tinning of Denmark also shot a 62, carding two eagles, eight birdies and a double bogey, and shared second with Colin Montgomery of Scotland. (AP)
Muehr Reaches Semifinals: Michael Muehr of Roxiticus, a 20-year-old junior at Duke who won the Ike tournament earlier this year, defeated Jay Blumenfeld of Mountain Ridge, 4 and 3, to reach the semifinals of the Metropolitan Golf Association Amateur Championship at Wee Burn Country Club in Darien, Conn.
Muehr will oppose John Karcher of the host club, who eliminated Jerry Courville Jr. of Shore Haven, the Ike winner in 1990 and 1991, 3 and 2.
Karcher is a former professional who regained his amateur status this year. (AP) FOOTBALL Cowboys Prevail in Preseason Game Backup quarterback Steve Beuerlein threw two second-half touchdown passes and Brad Daluiso kicked a 24-yard field goal with 10 seconds left to give the Dallas Cowboys a 27-24 exhibition victory last night over the Miami Dolphins at Joe Robbie Stadium. (AP)


Felix J. Cuervo, 73; Led Group Devoted To New York's Past
Felix J. Cuervo, founder and president of the Native New Yorkers Historical Association, died on Thursday at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park, Queens.
He was 73 years old and lived in Richmond Hill, Queens.
Mr. Cuervo died of cancer, said his son, Robert.
Mr.
Cuervo was a Navy veteran of World War II who was a personnel administrator for several Federal and state agencies from the 1940's to 1983, when he retired.


Passenger Liner Is Briefly Stuck
The passenger liner Queen Elizabeth 2 ran aground off the coast of southeastern Massachusetts Friday night but managed to free herself a short time later, a Coast Guard official said.
No evacuations were ordered and no injuries were reported, said Petty Officer David Moynihan of the First Coast Guard District Operations Center in Boston.
The ship is carrying about 2,800 people from Martha's Vineyard to New York City.


First American Bonus Plan
First American Bankshares Inc., embroiled in scandal since disclosure that it was secretly purchased by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, is now defending itself from criticism that its management team will reap $10 million in bonuses once the bank is sold.
In a statement released today, First American's chairman, Nicholas deB.
Katzenbach, said the compensation package was fair and called it a way to attract managers willing to run the bank after the reports of its links to B.C.C.I., which has been accused of drug-money laundering and bribery.
Mr.
Katzenbach, who is not part of the bonus plan, said the executives, including George L. Davis, who became First American's chief executive in December, would be paid based on their performance, and the bank's sale price.


Icahn-U.S. Impasse Reported
Carl C. Icahn, chairman of Trans World Airlines, and the Federal agency that insures the airline's pension fund have apparently broken off talks over Mr.
Icahn's plan to reorganize the bankrupt carrier.
Those talks, under way for roughly a week, have focused on negotiating an agreement with the airline's unionized employees and creditors to buy out Mr.
Icahn, who has run the airline for several turbulent years.


For Bicyclists, a Breath of Fresh Air and a Bell
A bicycle equipped for a ride in the country is about as out of place on the streets of a crowded city as a hay wagon.
But with proper accessories, a bicycle can be superb urban transportation.
Two new products are especially useful.
The Greenscreen is an antipollution mask made in London by a company of the same name.
It consists of two layers of sponge around a layer of activated carbon, which is replaceable, plus one layer of knit filter.
The Greenscreen is designed to reduce exposure to smog, diesel fumes, dust, pollen and other irritants.
The American distributor, Greenscreen U.S.A., said that, in addition to health, the mask helps in "raising public awareness, and thus making a potent and visible statement as to the state of the current environment."


Atlanta Gas Light reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


JOBLESS RATE DIPS A NOTCH TO 7.7% IN MIXED SHOWING
The nation's jobless rate improved marginally last month, edging down to 7.7 percent from 7.8 percent in June, the Government reported yesterday, thanks in part to a Federal summer jobs program for teen-agers.
But the improvement was not enough to signal a stronger economic recovery or to help President Bush as he heads into the Republican National Convention.
Indeed, in some areas the employment situation was deteriorating.
Unemployment in New Jersey jumped to 9.8 percent in July from 9.2 percent in June, and in New York State the jobless rate grew to 9.4 percent, from 9.2 percent in June.


Pride Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Resorts International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bosworth Sentenced for Drunken Driving
BRIAN BOSWORTH, the former Seattle Seahawks linebacker, pleaded guilty yesterday to a charge of drunken driving in Seattle, and was sentenced to a day in jail and fined $500.
Bosworth was also sentenced to two years of probation, ordered to attend alcohol-information school and to perform 50 hours of community service, according to DAN DONOHOE, a spokesman in the King County Prosecutor's office.


The Iselin and the Sword
The booming season at Saratoga Race Course will enter a new dimension Saturday with the $250,000 Sword Dancer Handicap, a major turf race switched from Belmont Park to Saratoga with the express aim of attracting the country's leading grass horses.
The race, which has done exactly that, will feature the New York debut of Quest For Fame, who won the Epsom Derby in 1990 and the Hollywood Turf Handicap in his last start on May 25.


The Bald Eagle Is Flying a Little Lower
Brazil. Why did the United States men's volleyball team have to play Brazil?
"We were undefeated, they were undefeated," said the American star Steve Timmons after a 12-15, 15-8, 15-9, 15-12 defeat tonight ended his three-peat Olympic dream.
"It's not fair that we play in the semis, when Holland goes 2-3 in their pool and gets an easy path to the final. It's a little bit of a joke."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the fading chances for an abortion rights bill to pass in Congress this year misattributed the assessment that the Senate Democratic leadership lacked the votes to be certain of averting a filibuster or defeating a Republican amendment.
That assessment was spoken by some Congressional Democrats but not by the Senate Democratic leader, George J. Mitchell.


Patents; Enlarging Vision Of Lottery Players
August D. Piccinini of Baltimore, a part-time inventor and full-time Lotto player, says all you need is a dollar, a dream and a magnifying glass.
His invention, a Lotto ticket card holder, enables players to compare their tickets with the winning numbers quickly and easily.
In Lotto, which is a lottery game offered in many states, a player chooses a set of numbers, say any six numbers between 1 and 60, hoping to match the set that will be drawn by lot.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
TEXAS RANGERS -- Placed Dickie Thon, shortstop, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Mario Diaz, shortstop, from Oklahoma City of the American Association.


Home Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Patents; A Mower Broom Sweeps the Lawn
Mowing a big lawn was made easier long ago by the riding mower, but bagging the clippings can still ruin a perfectly good day of baseball viewing.
Max B. Swisher of Warrensburg, Mo., and David Burnham of Rose Hill, Kan., hope to speed the process along.
Their mower pickup broom is a riding lawn mower with an attached nylon rotating broom that scoops up mowed grass and other lawn debris and flips it into a grass catcher attached to the back of the machine.
"One pass does it all," Mr.
Burnham said.


Bearings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
I never even thought of going any place, least of all Washington, where I'm angry with everybody there, anyways. -- DOROTHY MELVIN, who nonetheless took advantage of a $5 bus fare from New York.  [ 1:5. ]


Kenyans Make It A Steeple Sweep
It was a memorable moment for African men as three Kenyan distance runners swept the medals in the 3,000-meter steeplechase tonight.
Memorable, that is, until two African women -- one black and one white -- upstaged them 25 minutes later.
Yet the results of the women's 10,000 meters merely confirmed that this was Africa's night in the Olympics.
Derartu Tulu of Ethiopia became the first African woman to win a distance track medal, and South Africa's Elana Meyer, who finished second, won her country's first track and field medal in 32 years.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  DISSENSION AT. U.N. OVER BOSNIA
President Bush's effort to get the United Nations to authorize force to get humanitarian aid into Bosnia and Herzegovina ran into resistance from Britain and France.
The nations questioned the military value of Mr.
Bush's offer to provide air cover for relief convoys.  1  Bosnia's President says his country needs arms, not just food.  5  President Bush vows to have Serbian prison camps inspected.  4  EUROPE PONDERS WAR CAMPS
Horrified by pictures of emaciated inmates of camps in the Balkans, some Europeans have called on their governments to take a firmer line against Serbian aggression in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Reminded of Nazi-era camps, many fear that history may be repeating itself, but there have been no mass petitions.  1  U.N.
SEEKS ROLE IN SOUTH AFRICA
The United Nations Secretary General recommended to the Security Council that 30 observers be sent to South Africa to help defuse violence and ease the way for further negotiations on democracy.  2  VETERAN'S TALE DISCOMFITS TOKYO
A 78-year-old veteran's report that Japan organized kidnapping squads to keep wartime brothels supplied with tens of thousands of coerced Korean women has become something of a nightmare for the Japanese Government.  3  CHINESE PLEDGE ON PRISON LABOR
China signed an agreement promising to investigate accusations of the use of prison labor in production of goods for export.
It also promised to let American diplomats inspect institutions in disputed cases.  3  IRAN PLANS VAST ARMS PURCHASES
Iran has committed more than $7 billion to acquire fighter jets, missiles, tanks and nuclear technology from China, North Korea and Russia, according to Arab, French and other officials.  3x  Johannesburg Journal: Telephone diviners gain a vast following.  2  National 6-9  JOBLESS RATE A BIT BETTER
The unemployment rate edged down to 7.7 percent in July from 7.8 percent in June.
But the improvement was too slight to suggest that the economic recovery was picking up much strength.  1  BUS COMPANIES IN FARE WAR
In a ruthless fare war, the nation's two largest bus companies have knocked down the price of a trip from Manhattan to Washington three times in the last three weeks.
The current fare: $5, less than such a trip cost in 1939.  1  FADE OUT FOR DRIVE-INS
In the last two decades, the number of drive-in theaters has fallen steeply.
But for the people who drive to Neligh, Neb., to see the latest Hollywood releases, the Starlite Drive-In, is the only game in town.  6  BILL FOR BILINGUAL BALLOTS
In an effort to increase the turnout of Asian, Hispanic and American Indian voters, the Senate passed a bill that requires more state and local governments to provide bilingual ballots.  7  CONGRESS'S EFFORT TO CUT COSTS
Responding to public criticism over perks and waste, Congress established bipartisan House-Senate commission to try to increase efficiency and cut costs.  7  CLINTON'S CALL FOR COURAGE
Until recently, Governor Clinton's campaign has used the public's yearning for change to score political points.
Now, aware that the desire for change sometimes brings the fear of change, he is begun stressing a new theme: courage.  8  NEW THEMES ON BUS TOUR
A new favorite theme of Bill Clinton's speeches is that George Bush is a desperate man.  8  QUAYLE ARGUES FISCAL POLICY
Vice President Quayle said Governor Clinton's economic and environmental proposals would cost almost two million jobs a year.  8  OUTLINING CUTS AT POST OFFICE
Marvin T. Runyon, the postmaster general, outlined staff cuts, showing what he learned about Japanese management style while working for Nissan.  9  MORE ACCUSATIONS AT C.I.A.
TRIAL
Former Senator Thomas F. Eagleton testified that Clair E. George misled a Senate panel about the Iran-contra affair in 1986.  9  Fires raged in Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon and Washington.  6  Metro Digest 23  HAITIANS AND ASYLUM
Only provisionally allowed into the United States, many Haitians pursue a complicated path toward winning asylum.  1  Business Digest 37  Sports 28-35  CAPRIATI'S GOLDEN DAY
Jennifer Capriati, the 16-year-old American, beats Steffi Graf in three sets and ends up with a tennis gold medal around her neck and tears in her eyes at Barcelona.  1  GIANTS MAY MOVE BACK EAST
A group of investors from the Tampa Bay area in Florida has reached an agreement with the San Francisco Giants to purchase the team and move it to St.
Petersburg.  1  Baseball: Mets lose to the Cubs.  35  Yankees beat the Red Sox.  35  Basketball: O'Neal joins Magic for reported $40 million.  35  Column: Rhoden on the Olympics.  29  Football: Al Toon has heart palpitations.  35  Olympics: U.S boxer loses to Cuban in flyweight match.  29  Joyner-Kersee wins bronze; Bubka wins nothing.  29  Consumer's World 50  A perfect home for wines.
Good nutrition is not expensive.
For bikers, fresh air and a bell.
Guidepost  Arts/Entertainment 11-16  Theater: "Roleplay," musical.  16  Music: "The Beggar's Opera." 11  Stomping with Jelly Roll.  11  Piano contest winner's debut.  14  Dance: Pilobolus 1971-92.  11  Resurrecting ancient Mexico.  16  Obituaries 10  Francisco Fernandez-Ordonez, former Spanish official.
Randall M. Klose, benefactor in causes on AIDS and gay rights.
Felix J. Cuervo; founded the Native New Yorkers Historical Association.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  Don't blame parole for murders.
Renew independent counsel law.
The great national park swindle.
Letters  Russell Baker: A preacher is lost.
Steve Radlauer and Paul Slansky: What's your Quayle quotient?
Fareed Zakaria: Stay out of Bosnia.
Larry Shook: Bad dogs.


Youth Tells Investigators That He Saw Officer Fire
The teen-age car-theft suspect who was shot in a confrontation with the police two months ago has told investigators that he saw a uniformed officer fire his weapon, his lawyer said today.
But the lawyer, Russell W. Grayson, indicated that his client, Howard Caesar, was unable to make a full or positive identification of officers at the scene.


Laperriere &amp; Verreault reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Savannah Foods &amp; Indus.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Houston Investor Bids For Continental Airlines
A Houston investor has made a surprise bid for control of Continental Airlines.
The bidder, Alfredo Brener, has a background in supermarkets and real estate, but his father and uncle control a Mexican airline.
Mr.
Brener, who is 40 years old, made a bid of $385 million for the bankrupt Continental through the newly formed Houston Air Inc.
The offer exceeds an offer of $350 million from Maxxam Inc., another Houston-based company.





Mets Get Kevin Bass In the Nick Of Loss
The sheets of papers lay side by side on a table in the center of the Wrigley Field clubhouse.
On one were the career statistics of Kevin Bass, the outfielder the Mets had moments before officially acquired from the San Francisco Giants.
On the other were the statistics from the afternoon's mortifying 9-1 loss to the Chicago Cubs, the Mets' fourth straight.
Thus was the question of the moment accidentally, but perfectly, framed for the Mets: Can Kevin Bass's numbers do anything to rectify the sort of numbers the Mets were buried under again today?


Khmer Rouge Only Gains by Exclusion; Elections Can Proceed
To the Editor:
I agree with the main conclusion of William E. Colby and Jeremy J. Stone, urging elections among the non-Khmer Rouge factions ("Bypass the Khmer Rouge," Op-Ed, July 9).
Yes, elections without the Khmer Rouge seem to be the most probable option left for us now.
It is also more sane and more decent, as criminals and terrorists do not have the right to stand for elections in the first place.
Without this group inside, the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia can organize and supervise these elections more smoothly.


Inside Serbs' Bosnian Camp: Prisoners, Silent and Gaunt
Pale and gaunt under a dirty Batman sweatshirt, Mirsad, a 24-year-old Bosnian Muslim prisoner from the nearby ghost town of Kozarac, complained little today of the treatment he had received at the Serbian detention camp here.
"There wasn't enough to eat at the beginning," he said, adding that he had been detained since late May.
"The Serbs were unprepared for us."


Baseball's Giants Reach Agreement To Move To Florida
Thirty-five years after they left New York and helped open the West Coast to big-time baseball, the San Francisco Giants put themselves in position yesterday to move back east and help open Florida to the major leagues.
A group of investors from the Tampa Bay area of Florida announced that they had signed a memorandum of agreement to buy the Giants and move them from San Francisco to St.
Petersburg in time for the 1993 season.


The Great National Park Swindle
Americans who flee Manhattan's streets for a few hours in the Gateway National Recreation Area and those who burrow into the velvet wilderness of Yosemite National Park in California for days on end are on quite different terrain.
But they have two important things in common.
Both groups are being swindled by archaic Federal park policies under which Washington gives away millions of dollars a year to concessioners -- money that should be plowed into parks.
And both have a fighting chance to end the giveaway.


Review/Music; Debut for Winner Of Secret Piano Contest
For two years, a team of judges secretly flew to concerts around the world.
They listened closely to seven pianists who had made it through a strenuous selection process.
No age requirements and no repertory requirements made these musicians eligible for such surreptitious evaluation; these chosen seven had been filtered out of the surrounding mass of contemporary pianists by 82 nominators and a jury of 13 professionals.
The idea, modeled on the fellowships awarded by the MacArthur Foundation, was to find a competition winner without having a competition, to select an honoree who would not be weighed down with typical trophies, to find a pianist worthy of being presented in over 70 recitals and appearances valued at more than a quarter of a million dollars.
The crucial catch: contestants never knew that there was a contest or that they were being judged.
Pianists were heard in their natural habitat: the ordinary concert.
Even the prize has a name that is still, for the public, somewhat anonymous: the winner is named the Irving S. Gilmore Artist, after the late department store magnate in Kalamazoo, Mich., who established the Gilmore Foundation, the $100 million philanthropic organization that oversees the competition.
The unusual concept was developed by David Pocock, the Gilmore's artistic director.


Parents of Officer Are Slain in Queens
The parents of a New York City police officer were shot to death in their Queens home yesterday in what was apparently a push-in robbery, the police said.
The parents, Sergio and Juanita Ramirez, both in their 50's, were each found bound and shot in the head in the rear bedroom of their apartment, on the first floor of a well-maintained red-brick building in Woodside, the police said.
The apartment appeared to have been ransacked, although there was no sign of a forced entry, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.


Ephraim Katz, Film Encyclopedist, 60
Ephraim Katz, a writer and film maker, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old.
He died of emphysema, said his daughter Alyssa, of Brooklyn.


In Case of Emergency
Many life-threatening emergencies occur in the home, and a quick response is crucial.
Here is some advice that could help to save a life.
WARNING SIGNS
Sudden severe pain, mental disorientation, diminished balance, high body temperature and severe blood loss require immediate medical care.
AT THE READY
Telephone numbers that could be used in an emergency should be listed near all telephones in the house.
If a phone is equipped with an automatic dialing program, the emergency numbers should be programmed, with appropriate buttons highlighted in red.
Include the numbers of the local ambulance service or rescue squad, your family physician and specialists, like a cardiologist or pediatrician.
MEDICAL PROFILE
Compile a compact medical profile of each family member, including blood type, allergies to medications, prescription drugs that are being taken, pre-existing conditions and insurance-identification numbers.
Note the name of a preferred hospital or one where the person has been before.
For elderly people, add the location of any living will and the name of someone who could make decisions for the patient.
Post this profile in a prominent spot, like a bulletin board in the kitchen, so that emergency medical workers can find it easily.
Each person should also keep a copy in a wallet or purse.
Source: The Society for Critical Care Medicine, Anaheim, Calif.


Hewlett's Shares Plummet On Disappointing Earnings
The Hewlett-Packard Company's shares were hammered today, losing almost a fifth of their value after the company announced late Thursday that its earnings for the third quarter would fall below Wall Street analysts' estimates.
Hewlett-Packard stock closed today at $58.875, down $12.625 a share, on a volume of almost 6.9 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company's shares traded as high as $85 earlier this year, after it reported 41 percent growth in earnings for the first half of its fiscal year.


COORS IS NEAR SALE OF TRUCKING ASSETS
The Coors Brewing Company said yesterday that it had signed a letter of intent to sell most of the assets of its trucking subsidiary to Westway Express Inc. for an undisclosed amount.
The sale comes less than a month after Coors broke off talks to sell the business to J. B. Hunt Transport Inc.
Coors, a unit of Adolph Coors Inc., said it expects to complete the sale to Westway, based in Albuquerque, N.M., by Oct. 1 after legal, regulatory, and financial conditions are met.
The sale of the Coors Transportation Company is part of an overall plan to focus on Coors's brewing business.


Review/Theater; Topical Humor Homes In On Its Predictable Targets
Who says George Bush and Dan Quayle aren't doing anything about the economy?
Of course they are.


Warriors Won't Match Offer to Elie
The Golden State Warriors announced yesterday they would not to match the Portland Trail Blazers' offer sheet to MARIO ELIE, a restricted free agent guard.
In one and a half seasons with the Warriors, the 6-foot-5-inch Elie averaged 7.8 points, 2.0 assists and 21.1 minutes per game.
Last season, Elie started 32 games and averaged 7.8 points, 2.2 assists and 21.2 minutes a game.


No More Tears: Women Bully Way to Bronze
The operative word at the Palau Sant Jordi today was redemption.
The United States women's volleyball team, still teary-eyed from its loss on Thursday night to Cuba, found some measure of self-worth from a 15-8, 15-6, 15-13 victory over Brazil, and from bronze medals all around.
"I did a little bit of crying last night, apologized to the other players for my performance," said Caren Kemner, an outside hitter who had a subpar game against the Cubans.
"But I looked at myself in the mirror, and knew I could do better."


Citicorp Plans Stock Issue
Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, said yesterday that it planned to raise $650 million of capital by selling 32.5 million shares of preferred equity redemption cumulative stock in a public offering.
Buyers of the stock will receive a dividend for a maximum of three years, when each share of the preferred stock would be converted to one share of Citicorp common.
Citicorp may convert the preferred stock to common shares earlier, and depending on the price of its common shares, could issue less than one common share for each preferred share.


Ranger Oil Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bellcore Planning to Lay Off Up to 750
Bellcore, the research and development arm of the regional Bell operating companies, said yesterday that it planned to lay off as many as 750 employees, or about 9 percent of its work force, in the next month or so, but that it did not plan to lay off researchers.
The Bell companies, the seven multibillion-dollar companies spun off from the American Telephone and Telegraph Companyin 1984 that provide most of the country's local telephone service, have been scaling back their expenses in response to advances in telecommunications and probable future competition in local service.


Marlton Technologies Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
BAROID CORP., a Houston-based supplier of petroleum services, said it had signed a definitive agreement to acquire Sub Sea International, Inc., a privately held company, from the Energy Recovery Fund of Chevy Chase, Md., and other shareholders.
Terms were not disclosed.
BOC GROUP Windlesham, England, announced that a new industrial gases company had been established in northern China as a result of a joint venture agreement between BOC and Hua Bei Oxygen in Tianjin.
NISSAN Tokyo, said it had begun purchasing engine blocks from General Motors Corp. for use in vehicles sold in Japan and around the world.


Victory Comes With Thrills and Spills
About 2 o'clock yesterday morning, Manager Buck Showalter of the Yankees stopped the game tape in his v.c.r. and turned his television set to Showtime.
He had been watching countless hours of film underlining the Yankees' recent slide toward the bottom of the American League East, and he had decided to switch the channel, looking for relief.
In those wee hours, Showalter found his escape in the form of one of those late-night movies with unrecognizable actors and a title that's hard to recall.
Last night, for seven innings, he thought he had found more escapism at Yankee Stadium.


Refitting Groton's Military-Based Economy for Peacetime
Officials from the state, local utilities and a fledgling Florida corporation today unveiled three small steps they have taken toward converting the military-dependent economy of New London County to peacetime industry.
In a garage at the Groton Department of Public Utilities, three pickup trucks were parked with their hoods up, showing off the work of people laid off from Electric Boat, the nuclear-submarine maker.
Teams of the retrained workers had removed the gasoline engines and fitted the trucks with electric motors and batteries.


Iran Said to Commit $7 Billion to Secret Arms Plan
Iran has committed more than $7 billion to acquire fighter jets, missiles, tanks and nuclear technology from China, North Korea and Russia, according to Arab, French and other officials who monitor the country's efforts.
The secretive program, which began in 1988, has been so costly that a Western European embassy in Teheran told its Government this week that the Iranian economy was so overstretched that it doubted it could honor its debts.


Corrections
An article on July 31 about an investigation into complaints of sexual harassment against Danny L. Trapp, a Rikers Island official, misstated his title.
He is the warden of the Rikers Island security division.


U.N. Chief Asks Council to Send 30 More Observers to South Africa
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali recommended to the Security Council today that 30 United Nations observers be sent to South Africa to help existing groups in defusing violence and creating conditions for further negotiations toward "a democratic, nonracial and united" country.
He also recommended the creation of undetermined number of operation centers at the major "flashpoints" around South Africa where violence is most likely to occur.
The Secretary General said "there is desperate need" for these centers, staffed 24 hours a day and capable at all times of "acting immediately to defuse incipient problems."


Corrections
A music review last Saturday about a concert by the band Baha Men at S.O.B.'s in Lower Manhattan on July 30 misidentified the group's home base.
They are from Nassau, the Bahamas, not from Brooklyn.


Religion Notes
Anguish Over Bosnia
Harrowing images from Bosnia and Herzegovina of dying children and gaunt men behind wire fences have provoked outrage among many American religious leaders.


Dinkins and Giuliani Exchange Charges on Washington Heights
Mayor David N. Dinkins traded barbs yesterday with his main Republican rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani, after Mr.
Giuliani sharply criticized Mr.
Dinkins's handling of the disturbances in Washington Heights on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times.
Mr.
Giuliani, who was defeated by Mr.
Dinkins in the 1989 election and who has said he intends to run again in 1993, asserted in an article in the newspaper yesterday that Mr.
Dinkins had "used his office to make unjustified rumors and media reports of police brutality appear valid."


Congress Votes to Put Its Chambers in Order
Responding to public criticism over perks and waste, Congress has set up a bipartisan House-Senate commission to try to increase efficiency and cut costs.
The House gave final approval to the commission on Thursday by voice vote.
It was approved by the Senate last week.


Welfare Experts Skeptical of Cuomo Plan
As New York State prepares to create thousands of temporary, low-skill jobs for welfare recipients, many welfare experts say the program will do little to reduce the welfare rolls without a larger investment in job-training and placement programs.
Starting next month, the new state program will require single adults and childless couples to work part time for state agencies or lose their Home Relief welfare grants.
The Cuomo administration says the program will help break welfare dependency by giving the people job training and experience.


METRO DIGEST
A VIVID TALE OF PERSECUTION
In a Manhattan law office, Angelot Cyriac rifled through an accordion folder, the only possession he carried aboard a leaky sailboat for his journey last April from Haiti to the United States.
From its folds, he brought forth laminated identification cards, membership certificates, diplomas and photographs -- a paper trail of the political ties that landed him in a Coney Island apartment, on the lam from the Haitian military.
His story is an immigrant's odyssey, the kind of story that usually gets lost in the public debate over the fate of Haitian refugees.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY
A DANGER ON THE SUBWAYS
Saying that 27 children in strollers had been injured in the subways since a stroller ban was lifted two years ago, the New York City Transit Authority announced a campaign to persuade parents to carry, not push, their babies.
Page 25.
A DETENTION CENTER IS UNWELCOME
A group of civic and political leaders shepherding a revitalization plan for the South Bronx is mounting a campaign to get the Dinkins administration to stop the imminent construction of a juvenile detention center in a busy commercial district that is central to their plan.
Page 25.
DINKINS RESPONDS TO RIVAL
Mayor Dinkins traded barbs yesterday with his likely Republican rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani, after Mr.
Giuliani sharply criticized Mr.
Dinkins's handling of the disturbances in Washington Heights on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times.
Page 25.
A BET TO BLOW UP POLICE STATION
It was an intriguing bet, the suspect said.
Five thousand dollars.
All he had to do was fill an old car with gasoline-soaked newspapers, throw in some dynamite and figure out a way to blow it up outside the 109th Precinct station house in Queens.
But the contraption didn't work and the suspect was arrested.
Page 25.
REGION
NEW JOBS FOR THE JOBLESS
Connecticut officials, working with a fledgling Florida corporation, unveiled three small steps they have taken toward converting the military-dependent economy of southeastern Connecticut to peacetime industry.
In a garage at the Groton Department of Public Utilities, three pickup trucks were parked with their hoods up.
Teams of retrained workers from Electric Boat, the nuclear-submarine maker, had removed the gasoline engines and fitted the trucks with electric motors and batteries.
Page 26.
VICTIM SAYS HE SAW OFFICER FIRE
The teen-age car-theft suspect who was shot in a confrontation with the police two months ago has told investigators that he saw a uniformed officer fire his weapon, his lawyer said.
But the lawyer indicated that his client, Howard Caesar, was unable to make a full or positive identification of officers at the scene.
Page 26.
A SNAG FOR L.I.
FISCAL PACKAGE
New York State's fiscal rescue package for Long Island hit a legal snag when a taxpayer group won a temporary restraining order to bar Nassau and Suffolk counties from issuing bonds to close their deficits.
Officials for both counties said the order would have no immediate impact, and they expressed confidence that they would be able to have it rescinded.
Page 26.
About New York by Douglas Martin 24


Edvins Strautmanis, Abstract Painter, 58
Edvins Strautmanis, an abstract painter known for his slashing, oversized calligraphic imagery who worked as often with brooms as with paintbrushes, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 58 years old and also had a home in Isla de Vieques, P.R.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Ijra.


The Times Dismisses 12 Drivers In Dispute Over Loading Papers
A dispute between The New York Times Company and the union representing truck drivers resulted early yesterday in failure to deliver 53,000 copies and in the dismissal of 12 drivers.
The conflict was the most serious such incident with The Times since the drivers union, the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers' Union of New York and Vicinity, approved new contracts in May giving greater power to the employer in the workplace.
The dispute arose over The Times's insistence that newspapers be loaded onto certain trucks by pallets of bundles and not by individual bundles, said John M. O'Brien, executive vice president of The Times.
The Times recently began the pallet-loading procedure.


Review/Theater; Group Therapy With Words and Music
Six women who end up in group therapy in "Roleplay," a musical by Doug Haverty and Adryan Russ, are all so interesting they make one conclude there is a lot to be said for social and mental imbalance.
These women are desperate, smart, sassy, affectionate, aware and determined.
They are comfortable, but they keep one alert.
Ms.
Russ's songs, some because they deliberately allude to numbers everyone knows, are memorable and instantly hummable, and in the production by the Village Theater Company most of them are given strong, even gutsy, voice to the accompaniment of piano and bass.


BRITISH AND FRENCH RESIST BUSH'S CALL ON FORCE IN BOSNIA
President Bush's effort to seek United Nations authorization for the use of force to deliver food and medicine to Bosnia and Herzegovina ran into resistance today from Britain and France.
They called it a hasty and ill-prepared reaction to political concerns in the United States.
But diplomats said Britain and France agree with the United States on the need for a show of force to demonstrate that they were not bluffing in warnings to the Balkan factions to cooperate with United Nations relief efforts and honor innumerable cease-fire agreements.


Hope for Life That's Better Is Shattered
Abdul Ahad was a man with a meticulously hewn American dream.
A 28-year-old immigrant from one of the poorest nations on earth, Bangladesh, he had crafted his dream of classic immigrant stuff: a job at a restaurant in the glittery heart of Manhattan; a bed in a basement apartment shared with four other men; a plan to return home, marry and bring a bride to America to start a family.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Quayle Says Clinton's Proposals For Economy Will Destroy Jobs
Laying the groundwork for a crucial debate on fiscal policy, Vice President Dan Quayle sought to raise fears today that Gov.
Bill Clinton's economic and environmental proposals would cost the country almost two million jobs a year.
In doing so, Mr.
Quayle became the first member of the Bush Administration to quantify the Republican argument that Democratic proposals for new taxes and stricter Government regulation would break the back of an already fragile economy.
But Mr.
Quayle's speech to an economic research group in Columbus, Ohio, this morning also signified a grudging recognition within the Bush-Quayle campaign that the 1992 election would be played on what many strategists said was decidedly Democratic turf.


Don't Stall Development of Village Waterfront
To the Editor:
The Greenwich Village waterfront is one of the most breathtaking pieces of real estate in New York City.
The views are awesome, especially from the piers that jut out into the Hudson River.
That the city has allowed these piers to deteriorate is shameful and a constant reminder of New York City's failure to maintain its unique resources.
New York State has now come up with a plan that would transform the Greenwich Village waterfront and its adjacent waterfront areas into a place where everyone can enjoy its beauty, not just the motley assortment who now use it for casual sex, drug abuse, prostitution and simple loitering.


Capriati, Just 16 But Revived, Stops Graf's Olympic Reign
Steffi Graf knew it, Jennifer Capriati tried not to think about it, and anyone looking down at the red clay at Vall d'Hebron had to suspect it.
When Graf, the two-time defending gold medal winner, double-faulted to fall into a 0-40 cavern with the score dead even at one set apiece and 4-4 in the third, the tennis match was over.
"I was trying to get my second serve in and I lost totally the rhythm," said Graf, who gathered herself to win three points and reach deuce before it all blew away in a windstorm of steady backhands and a forehand on the line by Capriati.
The chant began for the first time all day -- "U.S.A., U.S.A." -- and from there, it was just a few minutes to a final forehand in the net for Graf and a moment to remember the rest of her life for Capriati: a 3-6, 6-3, 6-4 upset that put the gold medal around her neck and tears in her eyes.


Intellicall reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Selective Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yield on 30-Year Bonds Falls to 7.39%
The yield on the 30-year bond fell to its lowest level of the year as Treasury securities rallied yesterday after July employment data confirmed that the economy continued to grow only sluggishly.
In late trading in the secondary market for Treasury securities, the yield on the 8 percent bond of 2021 was 7.39 percent, matching the closing low of early January this year.
The bond was offered at 1077/32, up almost seven-eighths of a point on the day.
The yield was down from Thursday's 7.45.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton, on Bus Tour, Puts New Emphasis on Courage
Up to now in his campaign for President, Gov.
Bill Clinton has used the public's yearning for change as a way of scoring political points.
Now, aware that the desire for change can sometimes be outweighed by the fear of it, Mr.
Clinton is begun stressing a new theme: courage.
As his eight-bus motorcade has wound its way along the Mississippi River from Missouri to Minnesota, Mr.
Clinton has exhorted crowds to have the fortitude to accept changes and to resist Republican attempts to portray him and his running mate, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee, as "two young guys with strange ideas."


William J. Weatherby; British Writer Was 62
William J. Weatherby, a British journalist and novelist who spent much of his career in the United States, died on Wednesday at Saint Francis Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
He was 62 years old and lived in Poughkeepsie.
He died of cancer, an associate, Robert Silverstein, said.


Canadian Tire reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


INSIDE
Tightening at the Post Office
Marvin T. Runyon, the postmaster general, outlined plans to cut 40,000 employees, most of them managers, through early retirement.
Page 9.
Short-Term Police Chiefs
The departure of New York City's top police official is part of an emerging national pattern of chiefs lasting only a short time on the job.
Page 23.


Toon Undergoes Tests For Heart Palpitations
Jets receiver Al Toon, who experienced heart palpitations after practice on Monday, underwent tests at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan today to determine the cause of the problem, and he will miss Saturday night's exhibition game against the Washington Redskins at Giants Stadium.
Doctors have not determine the cause of the palpitations and he will undergo further testing next week, according to Jets spokesman Frank Ramos.


A Field Day for the New Champions of Track
They are champions for so long, the records and gold medals seem their birthright.
Another competition begins, they strive for another victory.
We watch.
We wait.
Tonight, for all the watching, for all the waiting, Jackie Joyner-Kersee and Sergei Bubka could not produce the magic.
Joyner-Kersee settled for a bronze medal in the long jump; Bubka inexplicably failed to clear a height in the pole vault and won no medal at all.
These things happen, they will always tell you.
But if their failures contributed to the memorable nature of the next-to-last full day of track and field at the Barcelona Olympics, consider what else happened:


Hi-Shear Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Your Taxes; Family Values In Legislation
ON the campaign trail, the family-values theme plays out through symbols like Dan Quayle's attack on Murphy Brown, a cookie baking contest between Barbara Bush and Hillary Clinton, and Tipper Gore's espousal of clean lyrics.
In the Senate, which is about to debate a big tax bill, there is some substance on the issue, in a few obscure provisions that go right to the family purse.
One provision of the bill, which is expected to reach the Senate floor next week, would reduce the costs of adopting children who are harder to place in new homes because of factors like age, ethnic background, physical or psychological condition, and mental illness.


Pride Helps Women Avoid Welfare Trap
To the Editor:
I am receiving state help for myself and my 6-month-old daughter.
However, there is a big difference between me and the women in "On the Edge of Survival: Single Mothers on Welfare" (front page, July 6).
The difference is pride.
I have been working for nine years, ever since I was 13.
I finished high school with a Regents diploma and have three years of college.
Even when I was pregnant, I went to school until two days before I was supposed to give birth.
I do not live with my mother.
I have my own apartment (by myself) and I pay my own bills.
This is because I like to be independent.


Don't Blame Parole for Murders
The case of Nathaniel White, charged with six murders committed after his release on parole, has revived criticism that the parole system irresponsibly returns violent criminals to society.
But the criticism is off target.
Parole officials apparently made reasonable judgments in releasing Mr.
White.
And it is doubtful that any feasible alternative system would prevent such killings.
There is indeed good reason to abolish the parole system -- but not in the mistaken belief it would reduce violent crime.


Review/Jazz; Stomping and Steaming the Jelly Roll Way
When the New Orleans pianist and composer Jelly Roll Morton started composing his music in the first decades of this century, he was wandering where no one had wandered before.
His amalgam of marches, European classical music, African-Caribbean music and the blues was profoundly American, a mixture possible only in a cosmopolitan, urban place like New Orleans.
As countless forgotten avant-garde experiments have proved, working without the foundations of a tradition can be perilous; it's a tribute to Morton that his structural ideas became paradigms, lasting to this day.
Some 70 years later, his music is still worth hearing and can bear the weight of improvisation.
At Alice Tully hall on Wednesday night, as part of Lincoln Center's Classical Jazz program, the clarinetist Michael White brought a band made up mostly of musicians from New Orleans to perform the repertories of Morton and the New Orleans clarinetist Johnny Dodds in a program called "Blue Clarinet Stomp." The band consisted of Wynton Marsalis and Nicholas Payton on trumpets, Mr.
White and Todd Williams on clarinets, Fred Lonzo on trombone, Don Vappie on banjo and guitar, Steve Pistorius and Marcus Roberts on piano, Reginald Veal on bass, Herlin Riley on drums and Wycliffe Gordon on tuba.


Court Links Abuse Count To Parolee
A man who the police say has confessed to killing six people was accused of child abuse by the Orange County Department of Social Services about a month before the last five slayings, Family Court officials said today.
A parole official said the parole officer for the suspect, Nathaniel White, was never told of the charge.


Review/Music; An Opera With an Irreverent Message for Today
When the duty to do good, honor friends, reject greed and uphold fidelity becomes a little onerous, there is "The Beggar's Opera" to give one's conscience a few hours off.
John Gay's hugely successful and forever influential ballad opera is the antimatter of all that was noble on London's musical stage in 1728.
Yet for Gay and his literary colleagues, Alexander Pope and Jonathan Swift, it was more.
What seems to us cheerful theatrical nihilism meant for them bold revision of a prevailing balance of trade, one in which simpler domestic ingredients would emerge from beneath the weight of foreign importation.
Englishness at the time was under siege from all sides, with a foreign King from Hanover, with a German composer named Handel at the head of London's music and with Italian opera seria everywhere.
"The Beggar's Opera," played here at the Santa Fe Opera on Thursday night, thoroughly demolished them all.


Ceremony Marks 50th Anniversary of the Start of the Battle of Guadalcanal


Building Code Applies Throughout Jerusalem
To the Editor:
Despite the impression created by a staged photograph published in The New York Times -- with icons and candelabra carefully placed among the ruins -- or by the claim of the accompanying caption, the partially finished empty shell of a building demolished by the Jerusalem Municipality was not a place of worship, though it was intended to become one when completed ("Amid Controversy, Jerusalem Destroys Church Built Without Permit," July 25).
Given the sensitivity of the case, we tried for a long time to find an amiable solution to the flagrantly illegal construction by the Greek Orthodox patriarchate.
Had work ceased on the site until proper building permits were obtained, as the patriarchate twice solemnly promised to do, razing the structure would not have been necessary.
The municipal building code applies throughout the city, to synagogues as well to as to churches, to small-property owners as well as to rich and well-connected ones like the Greek Orthodox patriarchate.


Shepherding Prostitutes With AIDS
"ANDREA, you got busted!" Dr. Joyce Wallace said with a friendly smile.
Andrea said she had not been arrested for 18 months and bragged that she had received a scholarship to start college.
She declined to reveal her full name or that of the college.
"Right now, I just do a little prostitution to make ends meet," Andrea volunteered.
"I was just doing private parties for awhile, but I got greedy."


Jack Clark Files for Bankruptcy
JACK CLARK, in the second year of a three-year, $8.7 million contract with the Boston Red Sox, has filed for bankruptcy and listed $6.7 million in debts.
"He had some expensive hobbies, and I think they got ahead of him," said FLETCHER A. ROBBE of Long Beach, Calif., the ballplayer's lawyer.
The 36-year-old Clark filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition on July 30 in Santa Ana, Calif.
Details of the filing appeared in The Orange County Register yesterday.
Clark, batting only .211 and sidelined with shoulder injuries, could not be reached for comment.


The File of a Refugee: One Haitian's Account
In a Manhattan law office, Angelot Cyriac rifled through an accordion folder, the only possession he carried aboard a leaky sailboat for his journey last April from Haiti to the United States.
From its folds, he brought forth laminated identification cards, membership certificates, diplomas and photographs -- a paper trail of the political ties that landed him in a Coney Island apartment, on the lam from the Haitian military.
By the standards of refugees seeking political asylum, this folder was gold.
Many Haitian refugees tell United States immigration authorities of relatives slain by soldiers, of their own torture in prison, of their ardent support for the deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
And the authorities say: Where is the body?
Where is the scar?
Where is the proof of persecution?


Xyvision Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
Only a handful of players can claim to have had a major success in their first appearance in a national championship.
A new addition to that select group is Kathy Anday of Manhattan, whose debut consisted of a second-place finish in the Master Mixed Team Championship, with board-a-match scoring, at the conclusion of the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals in Toronto six days ago.
Her teammates were Bjorn Fallenius of Manhattan and Jeff and Shirlee Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla.


Sports of The Times; Medals Are Not The Point
With two days remaining before the end of competition, however, the medal count reflects the world order more than an impending athletic disaster for the United States: The Unified Team, made up mostly of what used to be the Soviet Union, has won 42 gold medals and 100 medals over all, compared with 31 gold and 96 total for the United States.


Team Inc.  reports earnings for Year to May 31


Saving by Recycling: Greening of the Grand Hotel
Replace more than 7,000 light bulbs in hallways, in bathroom vanities and in 362 hotel rooms with bulbs that are up to 50 percent more efficient.
Recycle almost 2,000 telephone books into hydroseeding mulch for growing grass.
Stop using plastic bags to deliver newspapers and laundered shirts to guests.
Package soap in guest rooms with recycled paper containers, and equip sinks, showers and toilets with water-saving devices.
It may seem like a lot of fuss, but a number of hotels including the Willard, on Pennsylvania Avenue a block from the White House, have found that it actually adds up to savings.
One of the Willard's sister hotels, the Inter-Continental New Orleans, says it saved $79,000 last year by recycling.
And a good environmental record also attracts more business, some hotels have found; the Boston Park Plaza Hotel says its group business alone has increased some $750,000 this year for that reason.


Despite a Ruckus, 3 American Wrestlers Strike Gold
It was what the Olympics were never meant to be: a coach running out to shout at officials, a loser crying while his brother led fans in derisive whistling aimed at an American winner, and foot stomping during the awards ceremony.
The outburst after Kevin Jackson of the United States won the gold medal in the 180 1/2-pound class almost obscured a three-medal day for American freestyle wrestlers that capped their best showing in a fully attended Olympics since 1972.


Garan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Continental Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Home for Wines Where the Weather Is Perfect
During summer's dog days, Donald Kurtz, a wine wholesaler and importer in Manhattan, does not lose sleep over his 1,000-bottle personal collection.
He has placed his holdings, which are strong in Bordeaux and Rhone reds, in a refrigerated walk-in closet in his living room.
But not every wine-collecting apartment dweller can spare a closet or wants to insulate and refrigerate one.
And many collectors do not want to keep their air-conditioners on around the clock until October just to keep their wine from being damaged.


CHRONICLE
When QUEEN ELIZABETH, PRINCE PHILIP and two of their sons, PRINCE ANDREW and PRINCE EDWARD, started a vacation this week, they didn't have to ponder what books to take along.
A selection carefully chosen by the Book Trust, an educational charity, was presented to the royal family members, who set sail on Thursday night aboard the yacht Britannia for the Queen's Scottish home, Balmoral.
MARTYN GOFF, deputy chairman of the Book Trust, which promotes reading, assembled more than 30 books and audiotapes for the royal family.
He said he got the idea nine years ago when he learned that the Association of American Publishers did the same thing for Presidents.
"I thought, 'Gosh, what fun to do this for the Queen,' " he said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; Fearing Fickleness, Clinton Says, 'Stick With Us'
A new favorite theme of Bill Clinton's speeches is that his opponent, GeorgeBush, is a desperate man doing desperate things.
"The President has said over and over again, 'I will do anything to hold on to this job,' " Mr.
Clinton told reporters as he was leaving a hotel in La Crosse, Wis., this morning.
"These national Republicans desperately want to hold on to the White House. They cannot imagine what their lives would be like if they did not have all those dinners and all of that stuff they do, and all that power."


South Africa Grins and Gripes
It was a day for South Africa to celebrate, with the winning of its first Olympic medals in two decades, and the head of the South African Olympic Committee, Sam Ramsamy, was smiling as he waited to greet the tennis doubles team of Piet Norval and Wayne Ferreira.
But Ramsamy said there have been a few complaints on the occasion of South Africa's first trip back to the Olympics since being banished after the 1960 Games for its practice of racial apartheid.


Patents; Extra Air Adds Speed To Barbecue
IN the weekly tome of new patents, there is inevitably a helium compound or two, a few new superconductors and a few inventions for Sunday afternoon -- devices that encourage loafing, lounging and labor avoidance, or just something to roast a hot dog faster.
Consider the barbecue briquette booster.


Credit-Card Late Payment Fees Backed
A Federal appeals court has blocked the attempt by Massachusetts to prevent out-of-state banks from collecting late payment fees on credit-card bills sent to state residents.
The Federal Court of Appeals in Boston issued the ruling late Thursday.
The case, which involved the Greenwood Trust Company, a Delaware-based subsidiary of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company that issues the Discover credit card, was closely watched by bankers.
It could have set a precedent allowing other states to enforce local limits on late payment fees and other charges by out-of-state banks.


Oshkosh Truck Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bargaining On Trade Is Snagged
An ugly squabble prevented Canadian, Mexican and American negotiators from concluding a North American free trade agreement today.
But participants in the talks remained optimistic that they would be able to strike a comprehensive deal soon.
The blowup came late Thursday night when Mexico made a new demand, trying to reserve all contract work from Pemex, the huge national oil company, for Mexican companies.


Placer Dome Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In a Blur, Cuban Ends a U.S. Boxer's Quest
Thumbed in the left eye, flyweight Timothy Austin of the United States boxing team walked away from Cuba's Raul Gonzalez, took a right on the back of his headgear and a standing-eight count, then accepted a left-right-left battering before the referee, Kishen Narsi of India, stopped their Olympic bout today after only 64 seconds of the first round.
"I could've continued," Austin said later, holding an ice pack on his left eye.
"But the referee made a good decision. He saw I was squinting. My vision was blurry. I didn't want to get caught by a punch I couldn't see." 9 Cubans in Finals
Cuba now has boxers in 9 of the 12 finals that will determine gold and silver medals Saturday and Sunday.
In addition to Gonzalez, the Cubans advancing today were superheavyweight Roberto Balado, light-middleweight Juan Lemus and light-welterweight Hector Vinent.
Balado and Lemus are the reigning world amateur champions in their divisions.


China Signs Agreement With U.S. To Cut Exports Made by Prisoners
China signed an agreement today promising to investigate accusations of the use of prison labor in production of goods for export, and to let American diplomats inspect Chinese institutions in disputed cases.
A United States Customs officer will be based in the American Embassy in Beijing under the agreement, Under Secretary of State Arnold L. Kanter said at the signing ceremony at the State Department.
Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu signed for China.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
3.34
5.59
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.14
5.32
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.22
5.38
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.04
6.15
7.80
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.45
8.22
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.25
8.40
9.15
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.18
6.18
7.05
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Samurai Manager Takes On the Postal Service
The Nissan trucks had not yet started rolling off the assembly line in Smyrna, Tenn., back in 1981, but Marvin T. Runyon, the Detroit-trained president of Nissan Motor Manufacturing Corporation, U.S.A., had already identified what he liked about Japanese management style: they sized up situations fast, and acted faster.
Standing on a podium at the United States Postal Service's ornate headquarters today, a month and a day after he took Benjamin Franklin's old job and became the 70th Postmaster General of the United States, Mr.
Runyon showed he had learned something about samurai management style during his eight years in Smyrna, followed by four years running the Tennessee Valley Authority.


Corrections
The headline on the "Our Towns" column yesterday about mail delivery in Westfield, N.J., misstated the Postal Service action in some editions.
The service has abandoned a plan for curbside mail delivery and will continue delivering mail to front doors.


Nebraska Time Warp: Movies at the Drive-In
It is a midsummer's Friday night, and while the rest of the country files into air-conditioned multiplexes with window-sized screens and $4.99 popcorn, here the Pontiacs and pickup trucks line up outside the Starlite Drive-In Theater as if the last 30 years had never happened.
Parents prop their children up with pillows and blankets and warn them not to spill Pepsi on the car seats.
Teen-age boys sneak through the beanfields to watch the double feature free.
And young couples back their sports cars near the edge of the fields for seclusion.


Teen-Ager Shot in Quarrel Says He'll Continue to Oppose Drugs
A little more than a year ago, a gang of drug dealers down the block invited two of Patsy and Winfred Rembert's sons to join their thriving trade.
The boys, Edgar, now 14 years old, and Winfred Jr., 16, said no.
Well-schooled on the topic by their parents, they said no to the girls they were told their new wealth would attract, no to the prospect of expensive sneakers and fashionable running suits, and no to the gold jewelry and fancy cars they were promised if they would only agree to sell illegal drugs.
That was when the trouble started.


Bush Says Any U.S. Action Must Come Through U.N.
President Bush vowed today that he would not rest until Serbian-run prison camps were opened to outside inspection, but he stopped short of threatening to bomb Serbian positions and targets to gain access.
On the question of military action to keep relief supplies flowing, which the United States is pressing the United Nations to authorize, Mr.
Bush insisted that any American involvement must be part of a United Nations effort.
But the British and the French are both resisting a United Nations authorization vote.


Immigration Still Makes America What It Is; Sophisticated Crossings
To the Editor:
"Bar the Door" by David James (Op-Ed, July 25) urges that we fortify and militarize our southern border so as to seal it against entry by "illegal aliens." Like so many advocates of sterner measures, he may have underestimated the amount of leakage through official border checkpoints.
People interested in solving the "illegal alien" problem would do well to talk to typical undocumented migrants, both in Mexico and in this country.
As a matter of human interest, I have listened to many describe their experiences.
Most appear to be from poor families.
Some survive on handouts or have odd jobs or seasonal work in Mexico, but they make job-seeking trips to the United States to earn extra money for their impoverished families in Mexico.


Weary Firefighting Army Holds Line in the Northwest
Ponderosa pines ignited and popped like matchsticks today in a fire that is consuming a forest about 80 miles northeast of here, while helicopters dumped 3,000-gallon buckets of fluid and bulldozers scraped dirt boundaries to halt the flames of burning forests throughout the Northwest.
The fires, covering nearly 30,000 acres, are among thousands that have roared across more than a million acres in the parched Northwest so far this year.
Nearly 100,000 acres are still in flames today as 13,000 firefighters battle fires in six states.
But the fires have caused less destruction than expected.


County Chief O'Rourke Waits for Judge O'Rourke
Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Westchester County Executive, has become the Man Who Could Not Leave.
It is not that he wants to remain as the Republican chief executive of this suburban county: for some two years he has made it clear that he would much prefer the seat on the Federal District Court in Manhattan for which President Bush formally nominated him in November.


Diagnostek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


South Africa Wins Medals
South Africa took its first medals in these Olympics today when the doubles team of Wayne Ferreira and Piet Norval won a silver medal in tennis and a distance runner, Elana Meyer, took a silver medal in the women's 10,000-meter run.
South Africa's last Olympic medals, a silver and two bronze, came at the 1960 Rome Olympics.
The country was banned from the Olympic movement by the International Olympic Committee for its apartheid policy.
The I.O.C. reinstated South Africa this year.


NFL TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Game Time
The first full weekend of the exhibition season hits its stride tonight with 10 games on the schedule, including the Redskins' visit to Giants Stadium to play the Jets.
Sunday's lone game will also be at Giants Stadium, where the Giants will play the Bengals.
In the finale Monday night, the Saints will play the Bears in Chicago.
Seattle Seahawks
If Seattle's president and coach, Tom Flores, hoped Thursday night's game against the Rams would help him decide between his two contending quarterbacks, the quarterbacks didn't give him much help.
Both looked pretty bad in the 21-7 loss.
Dan McGwire had the better of it in completion percentage, connecting on 7 of 12 attempts, and Kelly Stoufer completed 7 of 14 but outgained McGwire, 66 yards to 47, and had the team's only touchdown to boot, a 19-yarder to Tommy Kane.
If that seemed to give Stouffer the edge, he also had the team's only fumble, a loss that set up a Rams touchdown.
Los Angeles Rams
If the Rams' new coach, Chuck Knox, had an especially big grin after the victory over his former team, it may have been because the game tended to verify his assertion that Jim Everett is the best quarterback he has coached in his 19 professional seasons.
Playing only the first half, Everett completed 9 of 15 passes for 95 yards and 2 touchdowns, including a 25-yarder to Willie Anderson.
By a couple of measures, Everett's backup, Mike Pagel, did even better.
He hit 9 of 12 for 122 yards but no touchdowns.
And just to rub it in to the Seahawks, Jeff Chadwick, who was released by Seattle to Plan B during the offseason, was the game's leading receiver with 5 catches for 74 yards.
Cleveland Browns
Contract negotiations between the Browns and wide receiver Webster Slaughter have reached the "pay-me-or-trade-me" stage.
According to his agent, Bill Duffy, Slaughter, who made $550,000 last year, thinks he's worth at least $1 million, and if the Browns don't see it that way he wants to be traded to a team that will recognize his value and use him accordingly.
"He feels he's one of the marquee receivers in the league, but he'll never get his skills showcased in Cleveland," Duffy said.
"The system there is not conducive to getting the ball down field."
The Cleveland owner, Art Modell, said the Browns, who play the Falcons in Cleveland tonight, were not interested in trading Slaughter, which is hardly surprising: The 10 receivers the team has in camp have a total of seven touchdown catches among them, while Slaughter has 27.
Minnesota Vikings
Contract negotiations between the Vikings and their projected starting quarterback, Rich Gannon, seem to have reached the "take-it-or-take-a-hike" stage.
According to The Star Tribune of Minneapolis, the Vikings have told Gannon that their offer of a two-year deal worth $2.6 million plus incentives is final and that if he doesn't accept it soon they will find another quarterback, leaving Gannon, who has reportedly been seeking $1.6 million a year, out in the cold.
Coach Dennis Green would not comment on the newspaper's report but underscored the reported threat by saying he thought backup quarterback Sean Salisbury had the potential to take over the starting position.
Whether that's true or not should be more apparent after tonight's home game against the Bills.
Salisbury is scheduled to start.
Atlanta Falcons
Center Jamie Dukes said he had come to terms with the Falcons on a four-year deal that will average about $800,000 a year with a chance to hit the $1 million mark if he's an All-Pro selection.
"It's a fair contract, and that's what I was looking for," said Dukes, who started the last 48 games but is not expected to play in tonight's game in Cleveland.
Kansas City Chiefs
He's not very big.
He's not very fast, and he was only a seventh-round draft choice, but if Coach Marty Schottenheimer knows his linebackers, Erick Anderson will soon be living up to a venerable Chiefs tradition.
If he makes the team, Anderson, who played at Michigan, will be the third winner of the Butkus Award to play for the Chiefs since 1989, when Derrick Thomas, the 1988 award winner, joined the team.
Percy Snow, the 1989 winner, also is with the Chiefs.
Anderson, who won the 1991 Butkus Award as the top linebacker in college football, might not look the part, but Schottenheimer has been impressed.
"He's one of the guys who defy the numbers," the coach said.
"He's a very, very instinctive player. There are just some players that because of their natural instincts and abilities are able to make the plays. He is a football player."
Enough of one, anyway, that Anderson was named to start tonight's game against the Packers.
Washington Redskins
Erick Anderson might not be the only prominent rookie from Michigan starting an exhibition game tonight.
With center Jeff Bostick a probable no-show because of a swollen knee, Matt Elliott is in line for the job.
And while the Redskins would presumably much rather have Elliott's unsigned Michigan teammate, Desmond Howard, the winner of the 1991 Heisman Trophy and the No. 4 National Football League draft choice, in the lineup, Elliott is also an award winner, thank you, and a draftee of special distinction.
Elliott was, in fact, the winner of the 1992 "Lowsman Trophy," an annual spoof on the Heisman presented by a California club each year to the last man selected in the draft.
Elliott qualified for the honor when he was picked by the Redskins at the very end of the very last (12th) round, making him the 336th of 336 players selected.


Elsinore Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Trimac Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chrysler Investor Wants a Seat
Kirk Kerkorian, the longtime movie-industry executive who is the largest individual shareholder of the Chrysler Corporation, says he is disappointed at the pending retirement of Lee A. Iacocca and will seek representation on the company's board.
In a letter to Chrysler's directors dated yesterday, Mr.
Kerkorian explained that because Mr.
Iacocca was resigning as chairman, "the interests of the shareholders now require strengthened representation." Mr.
Kerkorian said he had invested in Chrysler largely because of his confidence in Mr.
Iacocca.
He did not specify whether he would seek a board seat for himself or for another person.


U.S. Long Distance Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The jobless rate improved a bit last month, edging down to 7.7 percent from 7.8 percent in June, thanks in part to a Federal summer teen-age jobs program.
But the improvement was not enough to signal a stronger economic recovery or to help President Bush politically.
Unemployment worsened in New Jersey, jumping to 9.8 percent from 9.2 percent in June, and in New York, rising to 9.4 percent from 9.2 percent.  [ Page 1. ]
Consumers reduced their debt for the fifth straight month in June, the Federal Reserve reported.
A $1.02 billion improvement in their balance sheets resulted from a drop in auto loans, which fell by $2.8 billion.  [ 48. ]
Another fare war is being fought.
The weapons -- $5 bus tickets between Washington and New York -- are being wielded by Greyhound and Peter Pan bus lines, and the jousting is attracting droves of passengers to the Port Authority bus terminal.  [ 1. ]
Plans to cut 40,000 postal jobs, three-fourths of them managers, were outlined by Postmaster General Marvin T. Runyon.  [ 9. ]
A Federal appeals court blocked a Massachusetts attempt to prevent out-of-state banks from collecting late-payment fees on credit-card bills sent to state residents.  [ 39. ] International
A North American free trade agreement was balked by an ugly squabble, but Canadian, Mexican and American negotiators were hopeful that they could strike a comprehensive deal soon.  [ 37. ] Companies
Kirk Kerkorian will seek Chrysler board representation.
The movie executive, the auto maker's largest individual shareholder, said he was disappointed Lee A. Iacocca was retiring.  [ 37. ]
Hewlett-Packard shares were hammered, closing down $12.625, at $58.875, after the company announced its third-quarter earnings would fall below Wall Street analysts' estimates.  [ 37. ]
The dismissal of most of Apple's $5.5 billion copyright suit against Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard over on-screen symbols in its graphical interface was reaffirmed by a Federal judge.  [ 38. ]
Carl C. Icahn and the Federal agency that insures T.W.A.'s pension fund have apparently broken off talks over Mr.
Icahn's plan to sell the bankrupt carrier to employees and creditors.  [ 39. ]
Bellcore said it would lay off up to 750 employees, or about 9 percent of its work force, but no researchers.  [ 39. ]
A surprise bid of $385 million for bankrupt Continental Airlines was made by Alfredo Brener, a Houston real estate investor whose father and uncle control a Mexican airline.  [ 39. ]
Rembrandt painted self-portraits.
Now JVC plans the same for users of its new compact video cameras.  [ 39. ] Markets
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond fell to 7.38 percent, its lowest level this year, as credit markets rallied after July jobless data confirmed the economy's growth was sluggish.  [ 40. ]
Stocks dropped for the fourth straight session after a late round of futures-related selling wiped out a solid rally.
The Dow Jones industrial average gave up 8.38 points to close at 3,332.18.  [ 40. ]
The dollar fell, despite repeated Fed intervention.  [ 46. ]  Soybean futures prices dropped after a private forecasting service predicted the harvest would be the biggest in a decade.  [ 46. ] Today's Columns
The campaign phrase "family values" is influencing several provisions of the big tax bill that is expected to reach the Senate floor next week.
John H. Cushman Jr.: Your Taxes.  [ 38. ]
Inventions for people who want to loaf, lounge and avoid labor include new barbecue aids, a tray for dining while reclining and a broom for lawn mowers.
Patents.  [ 38. ]


Is It True That Good Nutrition Is Too Expensive? Not at All
About four Americans in 10 believe that healthful food costs more than less nutritious food.
Since good eating is increasingly associated with good health, many are angry because they feel powerless to take advantage of nutrition information.
But the conviction that healthful food costs more is simply wrong.
Eating well may take more time and more knowledge, but it does not have to take more money.


Lakers Sign Peeler to Multiyear Contract
The Los Angeles Lakers signed ANTHONY PEELER, their first-round draft choice, to a multiyear contract yesterday, General Manager JERRY WEST announced.
In keeping with team policy, terms of the contract were not disclosed.


Taxpayers Sue To Forestall Fiscal Rescue
New York State's fiscal rescue package for Long Island hit a legal snag yesterday when a taxpayer group won a temporary restraining order that, for the moment, will prevent Nassau and Suffolk counties from issuing bonds to close their deficits.
Officials for both counties said the order would have no immediate impact, and they expressed confidence that they would be able to have it rescinded.


Khmer Rouge Only Gains by Exclusion
To the Editor:
The recommendation of William E. Colby and Jeremy J. Stone to exclude the Khmer Rouge from Cambodia's elections next spring is a mistake ("Bypass the Khmer Rouge," Op-Ed, July 9).
Though the Khmer Rouge has refused to honor its commitment to disarm 70 percent of its military force, dismissing it from the peace process would be a critical error.
To allow the Khmer Rouge to slip back to its jungle strongholds under a veil of secrecy, shielded from the international community's attention, would ignore the primary strategy of Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge leader: isolation of the Khmer Rouge cadre.


Balkan Scenes Stir Europe, But Action Remains Elusive
Scenes of sealed trains, emaciated inmates of prison camps and women and children fleeing "ethnic cleansing" operations in the Balkans have begun to stir European consciences with ugly reminders of the Nazi brutality of half a century ago.
With many people horrified that some parts of Europe are still capable of falling back so deeply into the nationalist abyss, there have been calls in France and Britain for European leaders to show more determination to stand up against Serbian aggression in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as most of them stood up against Iraq after the invasion of Kuwait two years ago.


Observer; A Preacher Is Lost
Putting Michael Milken in prison was ridiculous in the first place, and sending him up for 10 years was outrageous.
He was just another finagler, after all.
The financial world abounds in finaglers, always has, always will.
They go with the territory, as fixed wheels, stacked decks and loaded dice go with casino sports.
Of course Milken's killing had been just too, too big.
To put it another way, he was not as brilliant as Wall Street fans made him out to be, because raking in dollars by the billion was bound to start envy's poisonous juices bubbling and boiling.
A brilliant finagler would have known when to stop.
Not Milken.


Review/Dance; Pilobolus 1971 to 1992: Evolution in Progress
Pilobolus Dance Theater started out with a bang in 1971 when two smart and imaginative Dartmouth students decided they wanted to take up dancing but in their own exuberant way.
The company has grown and changed, surviving adulthood and changes in personnel but keeping its identity as a freewheeling collective of choreographing dancers who all look as if they have had some training in gymnastics.
Now, however, Pilobolus seems to be going through a new kind of transitional period.
The distance it has gone from its raw beginnings could be seen in the fourth and last program of the company's monthlong season at the Joyce Theater, which ends on Aug. 15.
In "Walklyndon," a 1971 signature work, four men stride, crawl, tumble and lunge in straight paths that take them from one side of the stage to the other, pausing in their busy or addled voyages for physical collisions and colliding social manners.


Japanese Veteran Presses Wartime-Brothel Issue
From his modest house in this distant Tokyo suburb, Seiji Yoshida, now 78 years old and bent by age, has become something of a nightmare for the Japanese Government: a self-described former war criminal eager to confess in front of the television cameras.
Again and again in recent months Mr.
Yoshida has told the story of how he led a group of wartime policemen into rural corners of Korea, surrounded entire villages, and seized women between the ages of 18 and 35.
Often, he said, he grabbed screaming infants from the women's arms before forcing the women into trucks and shipping them to the front lines in China to serve in brothels for Japan's invasion force.


Bowman Won't Return as Penguin Coach
SCOTTY BOWMAN, the Hall of Fame coach who guided Pittsburgh to the Stanley Cup this spring, said yesterday he would not return to the Penguins' bench for another season.
"I am going to go back to my other job as director of player development," Bowman said in Kitchener, Ontario, the training-camp site for Canada's national junior team.
Bowman was the obvious choice to replace the late BOB JOHNSON, who was diagnosed with brain cancer last August and died early in the 1991-92 season.
Bowman, whose coaching style was markedly different that Johnson's upbeat demeanor, had problems with the Penguins, causing General Manager CRAIG PATRICK to call a private meeting in early March to discuss the players' problems with their coach.
Bowman refused to criticize the players even in the face of a possible mutiny, so the rift never widened.


Renew the Independent Counsel Law
If the Democrats win the Presidential election this fall, they may swap positions with Republicans about the usefulness of the Independent Counsel Act.
After all, one of the law's most useful provisions is the power it gives to the party out of the White House to vex the incumbents.
That's an excellent reason to make sure the law is not allowed to expire at year's end.
That's also why reports of flagging Democratic enthusiasm for the law's renewal are disquieting.


Review/Dance; White Loincloths and Glistening Knives
The night air was filled with color, light and the sweet and driving sounds of flutes, violins and drums on Wednesday night when the Ballet Folklorico Tradicion Mestiza, the first attraction of the free four-week Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival, performed traditional Mexican dance and music.
The program's title was "The Splendor of Mexico." The dull gold costumes and helmets were certainly splendid in the "Dance of the Concheros," for instance, with its conch-blowing introduction and galloping processionals and spinning ranks.
It was engaging presences and a soft-sell performing style, however, that made this program about an evolving culture so compelling.


Immigration Still Makes America What It Is; Invisibility Counts
To the Editor:
In "Bar the Door" (Op-Ed, July 25), Daniel James argues that illegal aliens "provided the tinder for rioting in Los Angeles and the Washington Heights section of New York City."
He continues: "About 45 percent of South-Central Los Angeles is Hispanic, the Census Bureau says, and many of the newcomers participated in the riots."


Ex-Senator Says Iran-Contra Witness Misled Panel
Former Senator Thomas F. Eagleton testified today that Clair E. George seriously misled the Senate Intelligence Committee about the Iran-contra affair in late 1986.
Mr.
Eagleton, a member of the committee when it began looking into the scandal, described Mr.
George as a "founding father of the whole sordid mess" when he was the head of the C.I.A.'s overseas clandestine operations.
Mr.
Eagleton strongly suggested that Mr.
George's testimony to the Senate intelligence panel thwarted its investigation of the affair.


Brown Resignation Highlights High Turnover Among Chiefs
Lee P. Brown's departure after two and a half years as New York City's top police official is -- in one sense, at least -- typical of an emerging pattern across the nation: with increasing frequency police chiefs are lasting only a short time in the job.
In the last five years, the heads of the police departments in 41 of the 50 largest cities in the country have resigned or been dismissed, according to an analysis by the Police Executive Research Forum in Washington.
Thirteen cities have replaced their chiefs twice in that time, and Chicago, San Francisco and Dallas have each had three different police executives.


Congress Approves More Use of Bilingual Ballots
Hoping to increase the turnout of Asian, Hispanic and American Indian voters, the Senate gave final passage today to a bill that requires more state and local governments to provide bilingual ballots to voters who are not fluent in English.
The bill, which was approved in the Senate by a vote of 75 to 20, has been passed by the House of Representatives and is expected to be signed by President Bush.
It reauthorizes and expands provisions of the 1965 Voting Rights Act, which required bilingual ballots in 175 counties where at least 5 percent of the population was from a single ethnic group and less than fluent in English.
Those provisions expired at midnight Thursday.


Bronx Group Opposes Site Of New Juvenile Center
A group of civic and political leaders in the South Bronx is mounting a last-minute campaign to stop the Dinkins administration from building a juvenile detention center in a busy commercial district that is a focus of a revitalization plan.
The Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, said the 124-bed secure detention center, for which contracts have been awarded and construction is expected to begin within months, would work against the borough's Bronx Center Plan.
The plan is a blueprint for commercial, residential and institutional development in a 300-square-block area that includes the Hub, the Bronx's second-largest business district.


Francisco Fernandez-Ordonez, Former Spanish Official, 62, Dies
Francisco Fernandez-Ordonez, who helped remold Spain's image in the post-Franco era and served as Foreign Minister from 1985 until June, died today at his home in Madrid.
He was 62 years old.
He died of cancer of the colon and liver, according to his doctor, Carlos Sanz.
His body lay in state this afternoon at the Foreign Ministry in Madrid.


Judge Delays Officer's Retrial In Los Angeles Taped Beating
A state judge indicated today that he might drop the lone state charge remaining against one of the four Los Angeles police officers in the beating of Rodney G. King because of the Federal charges announced this week against all four.
The officers, who were acquitted April 29 of assault and related charges in state court, were indicted this week by a Federal grand jury in Los Angeles on charges of violating Mr.
King's civil rights.
At the initial state trial, a single count of assault against Officer Laurence M. Powell resulted in a hung jury, leaving open the prospect of a second state court trial on that charge.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a United Nations Security Council debate on the Balkan war referred incorrectly to remarks by the Turkish delegate, Mustafa Aksin.
He urged the Council to lift the international arms embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina, not Yugoslavia.


Bosnian Leader Says He Needs Arms, Not Just Food and Medicine
With his office under relentless attack by Serbian tanks, Alija Izetbegovic, the Bosnian President, said today that President Bush appeared to have "finally diagnosed the situation" here correctly.
But he said that what the Bosnian Government needed to combat the "threat of extinction" by the Serbs was arms, not just food and medicine.
Mr.
Izetbegovic said in an interview that statements by Mr.
Bush in Colorado Springs on Thursday and in Washington today had been "a touch stronger" in their condemnation of Serbian action here than previous remarks.
He cited Mr.
Bush's references to what Mr.
Izetbegovic called "Serbian death camps" for Bosnian Muslims.


Immigration Still Makes America What It Is
To the Editor:
In "Bar the Door" (Op-Ed, July 25) Daniel James tries to make a case for the closing of our borders to legal as well as undocumented immigration.
The article represents a naive and uninformed approach to this complex situation.
I am an immigration lawyer, and my insights and experience contradict Mr.
James's conclusions.
Legal immigration is not the problem he suggests.
In every generation there was a minority who felt the current wave of immigration would somehow ruin our country.
In post-revolutionary America there was a wave of German immigration.
The ethnic English Americans thought the Germans would destroy their society.
Later the ethnic English and Germans thought the Irish immigrants would ruin the country.
The nativists have always been wrong.


New York - Washington $5 Is Cheaper Fare Since 1952
Move over Delta, United and American.
Another savage fare war is under way, driving down the price of a bus ride between Manhattan and Washington to $5.
Five dollars.


Prairie Oil Royalties reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Making the 'G' Stand For Gold, Not Greed
Michael Jordan, the airborne legend of marketing, happens to be experiencing serious public-relations jet lag.
Here is what he might do if he is interested in stopping the growing momentum of thought that he is a synonym for greed:
He should take the gold medal he is going to receive tonight after the Dream Team finishes its Olympic business against Croatia and hang it around the neck of Mike Bantom.
If he can't get Bantom through security and onto the medal stand, then have his own ceremony, to which he will surely attract the hungry journalist masses.


Do-It-Yourself Screen Tests; Camera, Camera In My Hand . . .
Being vain just got easier.
A new compact video camera from the JVC Company offers a "self-portrait mode," a feature designed to eliminate a common complaint from people who often get stuck holding the camera.


Nuevo Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Price Tag: Renting Exotic Automobiles
Estimated costs of renting automobiles other than those typically offered by car-rental companies.
Daily rate is for a 24-hour period with pickup and drop-off at the same location.
Special arrangements, if required, are listed.
Selections are 1992 models unless otherwise indicated.
For comparison, the averae cost of renting a typical, midsize sedan (like a Ford Escort, Toyota Corolla or Nissan Sentra) is about $50 a day.
SPORTY Mazda Miata: $80 a day, 50 cents a mile Alfa Romeo Spider: $129 a day, 50 cents a mile Prosche 911 Turbo: $350 a day, 50 cents a mile LUXURIOUS Rolls-Royce Corniche: $750 a day, 50 cents a mile CLASSIC 1976 Volkswagon Beetle: $50 a day.
ULTRA-HIGH PERFORMACE Lamborghini Diable: $1,500 a day, $10 a mile.
Plus: The renter must carry liability insurance of a least $1 million and collision coverage of at least the replacement value of the vehicle (approximate 1992 sticker price: $292,000).
An agent of the rental company may be required to accompany the vehicle during the rental period.
Note: Insurance regulations vary by state.
Renters may be required to carry liability insurance, as well as collision insurance to cover replacement of the vehicle.
In some states insurance may be available at extra cost.
Source: Budget Rent-A-Car, Car Collection division; Classic Convertibles Ltd., East Hampton, L.I.; Hertz Rent-A-Car; Avis Rent-A-Car; Motor Trend magazine; Car and Driver magazine.


Patents; A Tray for Eating Even When Afloat
Another recent invention aids eaters on the go or in the pool.
As Hsieh Mei-Hwa, the device's inventor who is based in Taiwan, pointed out, "It is very difficult to enjoy a large and satisfying meal while one is lying in bed, relaxing outdoors, watching sports or sitting in an operating motor vehicle." Enter the inflatable serving tray.
The tray has one large strip of soft plastic that rests on three cushioned legs.
The key feature is the soft plastic, which is flexible and should mold comfortably to the lap of the reclined muncher.
It is also portable.


CHRONICLE
Political pundits, read into this what you will: BARBARA BUSH'S chocolate-chip cookies beat out HILLARY CLINTON'S by more than a morsel in a vote at three Washington restaurants this week.
The final tally, reached after the lunch hour yesterday, was 210 votes for Mrs.
Bush's cookies, 187 for Mrs.
Clinton's.
But ADRIENNE FELDMAN, a lawyer and loyal Democrat who helped organize the voting, was not discouraged.
Mrs.
Feldman, whose husband, MIKE FELDMAN, was counsel to Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, said, "Although Mrs. Bush won the popular vote, Mrs. Clinton actually did better in two of the three restaurants." That would be like an election won in the Electoral College by a candidate who didn't win a majority of the popular vote.


It May Not Be the Top Medal, But U.S. Gets Medal of Honor
A tongue-lashing at halftime followed by a rally in the second half kept the United States women's basketball team from leaving the Olympics without a medal today.
But the bronze medal the Americans won by defeating Cuba, 88-74, is very likely to be more of a reminder of the gold that got away.


Flattering Freud
To the Editor:
The selection of objective book reviewers must be perpetually problematic for book review editors.
Richard Wollheim was selected to review my book "Freudian Fraud" (June 28), which is critical of Sigmund Freud.
Mr.
Wollheim wrote a highly flattering biography of Freud.
He claimed that Freud "did as much for  [ humanity ]  as any other human being who has lived" and concluded that "it would be hard to find in the history of ideas, even in the history of religion, someone whose influence was so immediate, so broad and so deep." Isn't this a bit like asking a Roman Catholic priest to review a book that is critical of the Pope?
E.
FULLER TORREY, M.D.
Bethesda, Md.


Deborah Rowe, John Marchiony
Deborah Elizabeth Rowe, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Edward Rowe Jr. of Weston, Mass., was married there yesterday to John Andrew Marchiony, a son of Lawrence Marchiony Jr. of Montclair, N.J., and the late Eve Marchiony.
The Rev.
Robert G. Windsor performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Marchiony teaches history at the Chapin School in New York.
She and her husband are Dartmouth College graduates.
Her father is the president of Sigarms Inc., a handgun manufacturer in Exeter, N.H.
Her mother, Elizabeth Rowe, is a fund manager at the Boston Financial Group in Boston.
The bride's late grandfather C. Edward Rowe, a former judge of the Franklin County District Court in Orange, Mass., was the vice chairman of the Federal Reconstruction Finance Corporation.


AUGUST 2-8: Wealth Awaits; Judge Grants Early Release To the Talkative Milken
America's wealthiest prison librarian, Michael R. Milken, should be leaving that job earlier than expected.
A Federal judge reduced his sentence last week.
The ruling means that Mr.
Milken, the former junk-bond financier, will probably leave a minimum security prison in northern California next March, after serving two years.
He had originally been sentenced to 10 years for securities fraud, though he would have been eligible for release after three years.


Fernandez Doubly Proud With Her Doubles Gold
Go ahead, ask Gigi Fernandez why she's playing for the United States and not her native Puerto Rico in these Olympics.
"If I played for Puerto Rico," said Fernandez, "I would be home."
Instead, here she was today, fresh off the clay of Vall d'Hebron and wearing the gold medal that she and Mary Joe Fernandez had just won with a 7-5, 2-6, 6-2 victory over Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Conchita Martinez of Spain.
Don't think she isn't proud, but don't think she doesn't know her heart.


New Leaders of Ancient City Try to Lead Russia to Reform
For seven decades this ancient city, renamed Gorky by the Bolsheviks, led the Soviet Union in making weapons of destruction.
Now a new breed of bold leaders hopes that as Nizhny Novgorod once again the city can lead Russia -- this time, into a new phase of economic reform.
From offices in the medieval citadel, a brash young Governor, a Mayor who used to fight white-collar crime and a crusading economist, backed by some imported Western talent, are plotting an ambitious and independent economic path that they believe could provide a model for the stalled reforms of Moscow, 250 miles to the west.


Networking; Who, When, Where -- Organizing a Meeting
Trying to get people together for a meeting can be a pain in the logistics -- an endless loop of memos, telephone tag and schedule adjustments.
The ideal solution is to post everyone's schedule in a central location so that a time when all the participants are free becomes apparent.
Or at least findable.
That's the concept behind scheduling software.
Each person on a network has a personal calendar that is stored on a server, and the program can then determine the blank spots common to everyone being invited.
Scheduling programs are not new, but with the advent of graphical user interfaces such as Microsoft Windows, Apple Macintosh and X-Windows in Unix, they have become easier to use.
Calendars actually look like calendars, making it easier to see what time frames are available.


Kelli-Janay Powell And Bruce Bluitt
Kelli-Janay Powell, the daughter of Myrone Powell Sr. of Queens Village, Queens, and Gloria J. Powell of East Elmhurst, Queens, was married yesterday in Corona, Queens, to Bruce Edward Bluitt, a son of Kate Bluitt of Galveston, Tex., and the late Lawyer Bluitt Sr.
The Rev.
Laura Sinclair performed the ceremony at the Antioch Baptist Church.
Mrs.
Powell-Bluitt, 30 years old, is a post-placement counselor at Prep for Prep, a nonprofit organization in New York that recruits members of minority groups in the public schools, tutors them and places them in independent schools to prepare them for college.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father is a retired New York City police officer.
Her mother is an assistant principal with the New York City Board of Education.


Family Affairs


Carolyn Senatore, R. C. Kingston Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter J. Senatore of Greenlawn, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Carolyn Mary Senatore to Robert C. Kingston Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kingston of Vero Beach, Fla., and Greenwich, Conn.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Senatore, 29 years old, is a vice president in the treasury department at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is an environmental engineer consultant for Gershman, Brickner &amp; Bratton Inc., an engineering firm in Falls Church, Va.
Her mother, Marian Senatore, is a special education teacher at Kings Park (L.I.) High School.


Making a Difference; When the Dials Tell Lies
Nuclear reactors are sealed inside buildings with thick walls of steel-lined reinforced concrete, and, of course, no windows.
So operators run them by remote control, from distant control rooms crammed with meters, dials and computer read-outs.
What happens if those instruments are wrong?


Caramoor Season About to Close
THE current season is nearing its end at the Caramoor festival in Katonah and at the Untermyer festival in Yonkers.
On its last weekend, Caramoor will offer both classical music and jazz.
On Friday at 8:30 P.M., the Bridgehampton Chamber Music Festival from Long Island brings a distinguished sextet to play music by Mozart, Foote, Shostakovich and Dvorak.
In the ensemble are the flutist Marya Martin, the violinists Ani Kavafian and Scott St.
John, the violist Paul Coletti, the cellist Nathaniel Rosen and the pianist Andre-Michel Schub.


Carrie Rymer, Glendon Elliott 2d
Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Rymer of Providence, R.I., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Caroline Dunning Rymer to Glendon Mandeville Elliott 2d, a son of Ann M. Elliott of Barrington, R.I., and John H. Elliott of Providence.
Miss Rymer, who is 29 years old and known as Carrie, graduated from Colby College and Suffolk University Law School.
She is an associate at the Boston law firm of Ropes &amp; Gray.
Her father is a patent lawyer in Providence.


Westport Playhouse Offers Gurney's 'Fourth Wall'
ON stage at the Westport Country Playhouse, A. R. Gurney is evidently working through a what's-it-all-about career crisis, otherwise known as the fear of being irrelevant.
The play he's written is about what kind of play he should be writing -- the laid-back drawing room kind that he's known for, or the socially conscious, politically agitated, life-changing sort.
And he's called it "The Fourth Wall," a handy title that means, in conventional theater parlance, the audience.
Ultimately, he's trapped by his own ostensible ambivalence, though the real choice -- to avoid choosing, or if pressed, to choose both -- seems perfectly clear.


Event Lures Two Nicklauses
Since he has settled into the Senior PGA Tour, JACK NICKLAUS has cut down considerably on his regular tour appearances, playing in only seven this year and making the cut three times.


Conversations: Tom Hayden; From Inciting Riots in 1968 To Winning in a Wealthy District
Whatever else one says about Tom Hayden, he practices what he preaches.
At the appointed time of the interview, he drives up in his white Ford Escort, jumps out on Wilshire Boulevard and proudly props up the hood to display the big batteries.
Opening the flap where the gasoline cap used to be, he pulls out an electric charging cord and points to such optional accessories as the black solar panels on the roof.
He uses the $20,000 converted electric car for most local chores near home in Santa Monica and Los Angeles except, that is, when it's close enough to bicycle.
"It's much more efficient to charge this every night than fill up with gasoline all the time," he says, and then launches into an elaborate idea he has to solve the dual California problems of joblessness and foul air by opening factories in impoverished South-Central Los Angeles to employ youths to make electric cars for suburban commuters.


Emily Noel and Timothy Sullivan Jr.
Emily Rebecca Noel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Don O. Noel Jr. of Hartford, was married there Friday to Timothy Joseph Sullivan Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sullivan, also of Hartford.
The Quaker ceremony took place at the Immanuel Congregational Church.
Ms.
Noel, who is 34 years old and is keeping her name, is a mathematics teacher at Weaver High School in Hartford, where her husband is a social studies teacher and her mother, E. Brad Noel, retired as chairman of the guidance department.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Mount Holyoke College, and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in secondary urban education from the University of Hartford.
Her father is the political columnist for The Hartford Courant.


Garry, Meet Larry


Unemployment Rises in County, Despite Signs Of a Recovery
UNEMPLOYMENT continues to climb in Westchester despite some signs of an economic rebound, and labor market analysts are trying to determine why.
Perhaps, the economists say, larger forces are at work in the county, causing the employment picture to remain bleak.
"The recession has let go, but when a recovery doesn't behave like an average recovery, there may be something else going on," said Thomas J. Spitznas, an economist in Mount Vernon.
"It may mean this is a different ball game from what we are used to."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Spending in Congressional Races Is Up in a Topsy-Turvy Year
Congressional campaign spending has spurted this year, but political action committees are providing a smaller share of the cash, a Federal Election Commission report showed today.
Spending through June 30 in all House and Senate races reached $288 million, up 50 percent from $192 million two years ago.
The increase appeared to be caused largely by two hotly contested Senate races in California, which had none in 1990, and by an increase in House candidates seeking to take advantage of reapportionment.
There are 2,247 people in races for the 435 House seats this year, as against 1,372 in 1990.


China Sees Singapore As a Model for Progress
IN the 1950's Chairman Mao declared: "The Soviet Union's today is China's tomorrow." Now it would be a counter-revolutionary offense to say that in public.
But in searching for a country to emulate, Deng Xiaoping, China's 87-year-old senior leader, has come up with a partial model, one that in many respects runs counter to China's original revolutionary principles.
That model is Singapore.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
SILVERMINE CELEBRATION
The Silvermine Guild Arts Center in New Canaan, where art exhibitions, chamber music concerts, lectures and an art school function throughout the year, is celebrating its 70th anniversary this year, beginning with free events on Saturday and Sunday.


How Congress Can Deter Auto Theft
As overburdened law enforcement agencies focus scarce resources on violent crimes involving guns and drugs, a huge car theft industry flourishes nationwide.
More than 1.6 million vehicles were reported stolen in 1990 -- an astonishing 34 percent increase since 1986.
In New York City, a car gets stolen every three and a half minutes.
Legislation just approved by the House Judiciary Committee holds real promise for combating this epidemic.
But firm leadership by Speaker Thomas Foley is needed to insure prompt approval by the full House.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
VIEWS OF TOMORROW
Forebodings of life in the future are represented in a new exhibition titled "Warnings" on view from Tuesday through Sept. 1 at the Nardin Fine Arts Gallery in Cross River.
Fifteen artists were asked to submit works that illustrate unsolved social and environmental problems, and each artist has contributed one to six pieces.
The paintings, photographs and sculptures range from figurative to abstract.


On Sunday; To Some, Hope Is Just a Drug Too Far Away
Many who treat schizophrenia believe clozapine is the most important medication to come along in 30 years.
The press is so excited, it keeps using "Awakenings" in headlines, conjuring images of the film star Robert De Niro taking a new medicine and suddenly going from comatose to superstar.
Clozapine isn't quite De Niro, but study after study shows 30 to 60 percent of chronic schizophrenics who do not respond to other medications -- people plagued by voices, paranoia, hallucinations -- improve considerably, with 10 percent making outstanding progress.
It means many on back wards of state hospitals can leave for supervised housing, like group homes.


Cliffhanger Punctuated By a Rare Coup
THERE was an element of revenge about the final of the Spingold Knockout Team Championship, which concluded the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals in Toronto a week ago.
Eight days earlier, a Washington foursome including Steve Robinson and Peter Boyd had won the Grand National Team title, defeating a Florida squad that included Ron Rubin, Michael Becker and Bob Levin.
The tables were turned in the Spingold when the Floridians, now joined by Peter Weichsel, Ron Sukoneck and Russ Ekeblad, won a cliffhanger by 15 imps.
The Washington pair, now teamed with Kit Woolsey, Neil Silverman, Chip Martel and Lew Stansby, would have won the title if a sound grand slam almost at the end had not been defeated by bad breaks.


Missing Link?
To the Editor:
It is bewildering to see the Chanin Building credited with civic-minded linkage to public transportation, as Herbert Muschamp does in his essay "For All the Star Power, a Mixed Performance"  [ July 12 ] .


A la Carte; Eating by the Numbers
THE burlesque queens who sang "You Gotta Have a Gimmick" in "Gypsy" were not discussing restaurants.
Nevertheless their advice makes sense for restaurateurs.
Deligance, a new modern 300-seat restaurant in Adam's Commerce Plaza in Hauppauge has a gimmick.
They weigh the food.


Bush's Plan Puts Stress On Harried U.N. Troops
By proposing that the United Nations authorize the use of force to keep relief supplies flowing into Bosnia, President Bush is putting new demands on the United Nations military command here at a time when its relations with the Bosnian Government are strained to the breaking point.
Alija Izetbegovic, the Bosnian President, said his people appreciated the airlift of food and medicine, which resumed today after a 72-hour suspension.
But he expressed some reservations about the United Nations approach to the struggle in Bosnia.


A Super Head For Superimposing
To Michael Evert, a sculptor, the supermodel Christy Turlington's most impressive measurements are from the neck up.
Mr.
Evert is making a clay model of Ms.
Turlington's head for Pucci Manikins, a company in SoHo.
The likeness will be used on the female mannequins at the Metropolitian Museum of Art's Costume Institute, which will reopen in December.


Drug Gang Suspected in Queens Couple's Slaying
Police officials said yesterday that they were investigating the possibility that the parents of a police officer who were shot to death in their Queens home on Friday were victims of a drug gang that has been committing other push-in crimes throughout the city.
The couple, Sergio and Juanita Ramirez, both 50 years old, were each found bound and shot in the head in the bedroom of their Woodside apartment on Friday afternoon.
The apartment had been ransacked.
There were no signs of forced entry, which led the police to believe that the intruders knocked on the door before forcing their way in.


A TALE OF TWO SWIMMERS
I would like to thank you for the article profiling my sister, Janet Evans, and Anita Nall ("A Tale of Two Swimmers," by Patrica Lear, July 12).
However, I disagree with the premise that Janet's life has taken some "hard turns" since the 1988 Summer Olympics.


Lisbon Taxis
To the Editor: I travel to Portugal about six times a year, and I thought you really ought to be aware of what is becoming a problem in what was once a tourist-friendly country.
On both of my last two trips the taxis to and from the airport did not turn their meters on.
All Lisbon taxis have meters, and when I asked the drivers to turn the meters on, I was met with varying degrees of hostility.
I reported this at the Tourist Office desk at the airport and was told that they recognize there is a problem but "don't know what to do about it."


Ms. Makepeace, Tarun Jotwani
Lindsay H. Makepeace of Washington has announced the engagement of her daughter, Anne-Lindsay Makepeace, and Tarun Jotwani, a son of Dr.
V.
K. and Kiran Jotwani of New Delhi.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Makepeace graduated from Connecticut College.
She is an account executive with the Image Bank, a stock-photography subsidiary of the Eastman-Kodak Company in New York.
Her father, the late LeRoy Makepeace, was a Foreign Service officer and served as an adviser on South Asia to the Smithsonian Institution.
Her mother is a landscape artist and a member of the Spectrum Gallery in Washington.


Can Wal-Mart Keep Growing at Breakneck Speed?
Investors have long wondered when some air would start to leak from the amazingly buoyant shares of Wal-Mart Stores Inc., one of the great growth stocks of the last decade.
The market value of the giant discount retailer doubled in 1991 as the stock climbed to an all-time high of $59.875 a share by Jan. 2 this year, from $1.33 a share 10 years earlier.


Miss O'Reilly, Mr. Austin
Elizabeth Ann O'Reilly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent M. O'Reilly of Winchester, Mass., was married there yesterday to Christopher James Austin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Curtis J. Austin of Moses Lake, Wash.
The Rev.
Joachim Lally performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Eulalia.
Mrs.
Austin, 28 years old, graduated from Georgetown University and received master's degrees in public health and nursing from Yale University, from her husband received his law degree.
Her father is a deputy-chairman of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, an accounting firm in New York.
Her mother, Annette O'Reilly, was until recently a social worker at New England Memorial Hospital in Stoneham, Mass.


Jean Cherouny, Willem Jewett
Jean Dickson Cherouny, the daughter of Richard and Mary Cherouny of Canton, Conn., was married yesterday to Willem Westpalm van Hoorn Jewett, a son of Marianne v.H.
Jewett Liberatore of Orrs Island, Me., and the late Joseph E. Jewett Jr.
The Rev.
Theodore Hoskins, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the Tucker Hill Lodge in Fayston, Vt.
Ms.
Cherouny, who is 24 years old and is keeping her name, has been a teacher's assistant at the Northwest Montessori School in Portland, Ore.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Vermont, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father owns Displaycraft Inc., a maker of trade-show exhibits in Bristol, Conn.


Lives of a Simpleton
THE COLOR OF THE SNOW
By Rudiger Kremer.
Translated by Breon Mitchell. 117 pp.
New York: New Directions.
Cloth, $19.95.
Paper, $9.95.


KEEPING CONTROL
At one point in her article, Hart says: "Most chilling of all, the doctor  [ in China ]  warned that after the procedure I might not be able to conceive again." Isn't that what doctors are supposed to do -- inform the patient about the hazards of an operation?
Should not American doctors do the same?
From Hart's experience, we can presume that they do not.
ALMA M. WATSON
Staten Island


When Everyday Life Became More Colorful
The Ephemera that most people discard theater tickets, railroad time tables, greeting cards, calendars, candy wrappers -- are some people's obsession.
No one knows how many of these disposable items survive, but the numbers of vintage examples could be staggering.
"Ephemera collecting is a kind of paper archeology," said Dale Roylance, who organized "Graphic Americana: The Art and Technique of Printed Ephemera," an exhibition at the Princeton University Library, where he is a curator.
"It's a way of discovering the everyday life of another age."


And Now Batting for the Treasury Department . . .
The Quayle staff was on a losing streak.
Things were looking bad when the starting pitcher took a long drive in the lip during warm-up and had to be substituted with an intern.
Later, the intern was hit in the foot with a bunt.
Conspiracy theories began to accumulate: "How come our team members keep getting hit rather then getting hits?" one player demanded.


Hull Damaged as QE2 Strikes Undersea Ledge


Jessica E. Lydon And Charles Pohl
Jessica Elizabeth Lydon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick Stuart Lydon of Newcastle, Me., was married yesterday to Charles Gaynor Pohl, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton S. Pohl of Wilton, Conn.
The Rev.
John Ineson performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Bowdoin College Chapel in Brunswick, Me.
Mrs.
Pohl, 25 years old, is a candidate for a master's degree in nutrition at Boston University.
She and her husband are graduates of Bowdoin.
Her father is the chief financial officer of the Maine Yankee Atomic Power Company in Wiscasset, Me.
Her mother, Stella Dunham Lydon, is a teacher's assistant in special education at the Great Salt Bay School in Damariscotta, Me.


Fernandez Doubly Proud With Her Doubles Gold
Go ahead, ask Gigi Fernandez why she's playing for the United States and not her native Puerto Rico in these Olympics.
"If I played for Puerto Rico," said Fernandez, "I would be home."
Instead, here she was today, fresh off the clay of Vall d'Hebron and wearing the gold medal that she and Mary Joe Fernandez had just won with a 7-5, 2-6, 6-2 victory over Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Conchita Martinez of Spain.
Don't think she isn't proud, but don't think she doesn't know her heart.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bay Shore 1.1 million
80 South Saxon Avenue  6-bedroom, 6-bath, 50-year-old English Tudor; barn, guest cottage, stables, 9.6 acres; taxes $24,900.
Brightwaters 425,000
120 Concourse East  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 71-year-old colonial; dining room, sunporch, basement, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $11,600.
Great River 800,000
265 Great River Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 30-year-old ranch; finished basement, boat slip, heated pool, 3.6 acres, 2-car garage; taxes $16,000.
Islip 701,000
111 St.
Marks Lane  5-bedroom, 5-bath, 37- year-old brick colonial; den, fireplace, solarium, boat slip, 3.5 acres; taxes $16,600.
Mineola 195,000
73 Jerome Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40- year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.
Westbury 190,000
164 Aspinwall Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 44-year-old colonia; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 2- car garage; taxes $3,700.
OTHER AREAS Scarsdale, N.Y. 300,000
2 Inverness Road
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, den, living room, terrace; taxes $8,215.
Essex, Conn. 170,500
8 Sunset Terrace  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 19-year-old contemporary; living room with fireplace, loft room with stall shower, 1.7 acres; taxes $1,826.
Brick, N.J. 743,000
228 Squan Beach Drive
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 18-year-old ranch; bayfront, 150-foot bulkhead, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $10,873.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Votes in Congress
Senate
1.
Supercollider: Vote to kill an amendment to an appropriations bill that would have eliminated funds for the superconducting supercollider.
Approved 62 to 32, Aug. 3
2.
Nuclear Testing: Vote to impose a nine-month moratorium on nuclear testing and to stop testing permanently in 1996.
Approved 68 to 26, Aug. 3
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
N
Lieberman (D) . . .
N
N
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
N
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
N
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
N
N
Moynihan (D) . . .
N
N
House
1.
Soviet Aid: Vote to approve 1.2 billion dollars in bilateral aid and a $12 billion increase in American commitment to the International Monetary Fund which will finance loans to Russia and other nations.
Approved 255 to 164, August 6.
1
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
N
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
N
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
N
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
N
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
3. Pallone (D) . . .
N
4. Smith (R) . . .
N
5. Roukema (R) . . .
N
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
A
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
N
8. Roe (D) . . .
N
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
N
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
N
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
13. Saxton (R) . . .
N
14. Guarini (D) . . .
N
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
N
2. Downey (D) . . .
N
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
N
4. Lent (R) . . .
N
5. McGrath (R) . . .
N
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
N
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
N
9. Manton (D) . . .
N
10. Schumer (D) . . .
N
11. Towns (D) . . .
Y
12. Owens (D) . . .
Y
13. Solarz (D) . . .
N
14. Molinari (R) . . .
N
15. Green (R) . . .
N
16. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
17. Weiss (D) . . .
N
18. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
19. Engel (D) . . .
N
20. Lowey (D) . . .
N
21. Fish (R) . . .
N
22. Gilman (R) . . .
N
23. McNulty (D) . . .
N
24. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
N
26. Martin (R) . . .
N
27. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
28. McHugh (D) . . .
N
29. Horton (R) . . .
N
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
N
31. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
N
33. Nowak (D) . . .
N
34. Houghton (R) . . .
N
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Praise by J.D. Salinger
THE BIG HYPE
By Avery Corman. 224 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


When the Boss Fell to Earth, He Hit Paradise
Last year, shortly before marrying his former backup singer Patti Scialfa, Bruce Springsteen was seized with an intense creative fever.
"It was nine months after my son was born," he recalled recently.
"I was a father, and I had a real relationship with Patti, which was something that had evaded me for a long time. I'd just finished the album 'Human Touch,' but it felt unfinished."


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending July 25  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village 395,000
45 West 10th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining ell, two terraces; maintenance $1,520, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Debra Kameros Co.)  Flatiron District 630,000
18 East 18th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,750-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, den, 12-ft.-ceilings, mezzanine office; maintenance $1,370, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Kingman Associates)  Inwood 19,500
100 Park Terrace West  420-sq.-ft.
L-shaped studio-co-op in a postwar building; renovated kitchen, south exposure; maintenance $328, 53% tax-deductible (Broker: Simone Song Properties)  TriBeCa 343,750
32 North Moore Street  1,575-sq.-ft. open-plan penthouse condo in a loft building; private elevator, 1 bath, skylight, 800-sq.-ft private roof space, 2 exposures; common charge $377, taxes $6,325 (Broker: Tabak Real Estate)  Upper West Side 390,000
186 Riverside Drive (91st St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,050, 38% tax-deductible (Brokers: Hunt-Kennedy/A.J. Clarke)  BRONX  Pelham Parkway South 222,000
837 Neill Avenue  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick, Center-Hall Colonial; dining room, den, fireplace, finished basement, 2-car garage, 29- by 104-ft. irregular lot; taxes $2,184 (Broker: Tryax Realty of the Bronx)  Riverdale 175,000
3701 Henry Hudson Parkway  (Georgian)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, terrace; maintenance $922, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Trebach Realty)  BROOKLYN  Boerum Hill 280,000
372 Pacific Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, 4-story brownstone; dining room, double parlor, 7 fireplaces, original moldings and details, rear garden, 12 1/2- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,230 (Broker: Cobble Heights Realty)  Cobble Hill 182,000
121-125 Pacific Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,175-sq.-ft. co-op in a renovated warehouse; elevator, dining area; private terrace; maintenance $782, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Park Slope 345,000
382 Eighhth Street  2-family, 3-story, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, fireplace, rear deck in primary duplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in simplex; original moldings and details; 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes (Broker: Warren Lewis Real Estate)  QUEENS  Corona 152,000
50-41 102d Street  6-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, aluminum-sided house; dining room, full basement, two detached 1-car garages, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Veterans Realty)  Whitestone 185,000
145-27 21st Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached brick and aluminum-sided colonial; dining room, hospitality suite in finished basement, 23- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  STATEN ISLAND  New Springville 118,000
21-B Signs Road  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. postwar condo; dining room, fireplace, loft skylight, 1-car garage; common charge $121, taxes $1,360 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  Todt Hill 410,000
45 East Loop Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, detached, brick Tudor; dining room, family room, den, dinette, full basement, 2-car garage, 280- by 200-ft. irregular lot; taxes $3,820 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Musical Company Picnic
PEOPLE in the record world spin at a speed different from the rest of us.
Need proof?
Turn on MTV and behold the style of dress, or lack thereof.
And listen to the vocabulary.
Can you correctly use "techno" or "head banger" in a sentence?
Because music people speak and look differently, it makes sense that they would play differently.
That may explain why Phoebe Snow and the Barrio Boys were at the Sid Jacobsen North Shore Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. in East Hills competing in a tug-of-war.


Finding Something, Many Things, To Smile About
Nearly everyone is smiling in Carolyn Jones's recent photographs, which may strike some viewers as surprising because all the subjects have AIDS or are H.I.V. positive.
"They are not sad photographs," said Ms.
Jones, who has more than three dozen portraits in her portfolio, which she's calling Living Proof.
"These people have come around to the other side and said, 'Damn it, I have a certain amount of time to live, and I'm going to do all the stuff I meant to do but never did. I'm going to approach this positively.' "


U.N. Doctor Charges Iraq Hinders Children's Care
The United Nations doctor overseeing children's health care in Iraq has complained that the Government is obstructing his work despite serious problems among children, including many cases of weight loss and the threat of a measles epidemic.
Dr.
Enzio Gianni Murzi of Italy, who heads the United Nations Children's Fund's delegation in Iraq, said in an interview here that since the start of July the Iraqi Government had refused to issue his staff and drivers the travel permits that are necessary for moving about the country.


Technology; Different Strokes for Computing
The quest to design a radically new keyboard, once the realm of tinkerers rarely taken seriously, is beginning to look a lot less quixotic.
The main reason is concern about mounting reports of muscle and nerve injuries among clerical workers, journalists and other office workers who use computers extensively.
Doctors are saying part of the blame lies with the design of the traditional keyboard.
These ailments are usually called repetitive stress injuries, or R.S.I.
Faced with lost productivity, rising insurance and worker's compensation claims, and, more recently, a surge in lawsuits against keyboard manufacturers, business is finally taking seriously the decades-old claims of inventors that a sensible keyboard would look a lot different from those now used.


Meg Murphy and Timothy P. Nash
Mairead Walsh Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Murphy of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Timothy Patrick Nash, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Nash of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Leo J. O'Donovan, the president of Georgetown University, performed the ceremony at St.
Agnes Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Nash, who is 25 years old and known as Meg, graduated cum laude from Providence College.
She is an assistant to her father, who illustrates the comic strip "Prince Valiant."


Unlikely Hero For Cemetery
In the end the deadlock between the United States General Services Administration, which is building an office tower in lower Manhattan, and those who wanted to preserve the Negros Burial Ground was not broken by local politicians, lawyers threatening to go to court or outraged citizens threatening civil disobedience.
The somewhat unlikely hero was Alton H. Maddox Jr., a civil-rights lawyer suspended from practicing in New York because of his refusal to cooperate with an ethics panel looking into his conduct of the racially divisive Tawana Brawley case four years ago.


Does Television Itself Nurture Violence?; Reception Blockers
To the Editor:
I was greatly encouraged to see David C. Anderson's July 27 Editorial Notebook, which discusses the possibility of devices that would allow parents to block reception of violent programs in advance.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about tornadoes in the New York metropolitan region rendered the last name of a Pennsylvania State University meteorologist incorrectly.
He is Fred Gadomski.


Michele Lang, Scott D. Blair
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen R. Lang of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Michele Susan Lang to Scott David Blair, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Blair of Rochester.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lang, 29 years old, is the office manager of the law firm of Kane, Dalsimer, Sullivan, Kurucz, Levy, Eisele &amp; Richard in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is the presiding partner at the New York law firm of Breed Abbott &amp; Morgan.


Tornadoes Are His Drug of Choice
THE STORM SEASON
By William Hauptman. 306 pp. New York: Bantam Books. $19.50.


Assistant District Attorney's Forced Resignation Tied to Drug Case
An assistant district attorney in Brooklyn was forced to resign last month after Federal prosecutors said she made more than routine inquiries into a Federal drug investigation targeting a friend, senior law enforcement officials said yesterday.
The attorney, Pamela D. Hayes, resigned as chief of the sex crimes bureau in the Brooklyn District Attorney's office on July 14 because of allegations that she tried to "use her influence" in a drug investigation by the United States Attorney in Manhattan, Otto G. Obermaier.
The investigation involved a close friend of hers, the officials said.


Snarled Tether, Dashed Dreams
As much as mission officials tried to put a good face on things, the first large-scale demonstration of tethered space flight last week was a disappointing bust.
It remains to be seen whether two huge objects connected by a long tether can operate smoothly and safely in orbit, affording a new means of generating electricity for space flight.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; This Year It's the Democrats Who Run on G.O.P. Tactics
Slowly but surely, a thought that defies years of conventional wisdom and real-life experience is taking hold in political circles: Is it possible that in 1992 it is the Democrats who are running the tougher, shrewder, closer-to-the-bone Presidential campaign?
That is a notion that is hard even for some Democrats to accept, even here in Gov.
Bill Clinton's tightly wound headquarters.
Over the last few weeks, Clinton strategists have watched with a trace of disbelief as their Republican counterparts have stumbled, stepped on their message, accused the other side of negative campaigning, attacked and apologized and attacked once more.


Making a Difference; E.D.S. Reaches for Japan
The Electronic Data Systems Corporation is the world's biggest provider of computer services, with $7 billion in sales last year, and by the year 2000 it wants to be a truly global company, leading in all major markets.
By that measure, E.D.S. has to move quickly in Europe and Asia.
Eighty percent of its sales last year were in North America, with half of that coming from its parent, General Motors.
By contrast, the worldwide market now produces 40 percent of sales in North America and 30 percent each in Europe and Asia.


Paris Sewers
H.
THEODORE COHEN  Cambridge, Mass.


Little Takes the Place of Fresh Summer Corn
THE fresh corn season is now in full swing.
Farms in the region are selling white, golden and mixtures of white and yellow corn at their stands, at country markets and even in some supermarkets.
With corn the simplest is often the best.
Quickly cook the shucked ears in a pot of boiling water for a minute or just until the water returns to the boil after the corn has been added, then drain it and serve with butter, salt and pepper.
Additions of sugar, milk or other ingredients to the water do nothing to enhance the corn because it does not cook long enough to pick up these flavors.
The freshest summer corn on the cob can be enjoyed plain, without any of the usual trappings of butter and salt.
Yet despite concerns about fat and sodium it seems that when it comes to fresh corn on the cob, indulging in a gloss of butter and sprinkling of salt on the kernels is irresistible.


Birding Olympics in Bonaire
The Caribbean island of Bonaire is holding its first Birdwatching Olympics, a program to encourage experienced and novice birders to spot some of the 190 species found there, from Sept. 20 to 26, a peak migration period.
The competition will provide birders with opportunities to see such rare birds as the Caribbean Eleania, the Amazona parrot and the Caribbean parakeet during access to private property and expanded hours at the Washington-Slagbaai National Park, a 13,500-acre wildlife preserve.
Medals and prizes will be awarded at a weekend barbecue to the three individuals who spot the most species.
A committee comprised of Bonaire and foreign birding experts will oversee the competition.
The committee has identified 10 sites, including 3 in the national park, as prime locations for birdwatching.
They range from arid flatlands and mangroves to fresh-water wells and coastal crags.
The Dutch island, 50 miles north of Venezuela, is a noted nesting site for flamingos.


Corrections
Because of a booking change, a review on page 5 of the Arts and Leisure section today, about three Greek plays at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis, includes an outdated schedule for "Les Atrides" in Brooklyn.
The Theatre du Soleil cycle of Greek plays being presented by the Brooklyn Academy of Music opens Oct. 1 at the Park Slope Armory.


Rules Wouldn't Have Stopped B.C.C.I.
To the Editor:
The world's leading banking regulators want to amend the rules to prevent more such cases as that of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Surely, they don't believe that a few more rules would have prevented the disaster of B.C.C.I., with horrendous fallouts throughout the world on a million-plus innocent depositors and 14,000 employees from 83 countries?


A Tire That Runs on Empty
TOP to bottom, this year's hot technology ranges from BMW's versatile station-wagon sunroof that opens over either front or rear seats to the run-flat tire introduced on Thursday by Bridgestone/Firestone Tires of Nashville.
The new tire adds convenience at the same time that it eliminates weight and the need to carry a spare.
Unfortunately, it is also expensive and, for the moment, is available only to people who own or plan to own Corvettes.


Elizabeth Brous and Charles Guevara
Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Brous of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Brous to Charles Gregory Guevara, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlos Guevara-Scott of Fairfax, Va.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Brous, 27 years old, graduated from Duke University, as did her fiance.
She is an associate beauty editor at Vogue magazine.
Her father, the retired president of Miller-Wohl Inc. in Secaucus, N.J., a chain of clothing stores, is an adjunct professor of retailing at Columbia University.


Who Painted This Picture?
The painting that changed everything for Norman Wasserman -- the one he calls his "possible Pollock" -- insinuated itself into his life in the spring of 1954.
Over the next 38 years it would lay claim to his affections, propel him into a bruising, apparently hopeless, battle with the art establishment and, finally, win the support of one of the most influential art critics of the 20th century.
Mr.
Wasserman belongs to a species all too familiar to art dealers and auction houses.
He is a prime example of the collector with a single artwork that has become an all-consuming obsession, a kind of stage parent who knows in his heart that his child possesses talent and genius, regardless of what the so-called experts might say.
More than sensitive feelings are at stake.
Pollocks fetch millions at auction.
Sometimes lots of millions.
In 1989, "No. 8, 1950" sold for $11.55 million at Sotheby's.


The Underwater World of Sulawesi
WITH a flash, the silver and black sea snake darts out from behind a pink fan coral, its six-foot body shimmering vertically past my nose.
I freeze as it comes up for air, breaking the water's surface with its tiny head and then retreating as rapidly as it has appeared.
Though highly poisonous to humans, the sea snake is more curious than threatening, I later learn: apparently the prime attraction is its own reflection in my snorkel mask.
Off the coast of Sulawesi, the dragon-shaped island in Indonesia that used to be known as Celebes, the sea snake inhabits an underwater universe still largely unspoiled by interlopers.
With its spectacular coral reef gardens and walls that drop off 3,000 feet, this outstanding diving and snorkeling spot -- known as the Bunaken-Manadotua Marine Reserve -- is home to hundreds of varieties of fish.
Several sunken World War II wrecks share the ocean floor with dolphins, pilot whales and other species.
The area was discovered by tourists 10 years ago, and since then the Indonesian Government has applied wildlife protections, prohibiting dynamite fishing, spearfishing and coral collection.


Snaring the Butterfly Called Color
PHOTOGRAPHERS are always searching for perfect color and trying to control it.
But color is as elusive and quirky as it is powerful.
Nature abhors stabilized color schemes.
When a cloud sweeps in and blocks the sun, miles of landscape changes color suddenly: a brilliantly blue lake, for instance, takes on a gray cast, a forest loses its lusty green and winter's snow turns blue.
As the sun moves through the sky during the day, colors continue to change kaleidoscopically.


GUATEMALA RIVALS IN RIGHTS ACCORD
Guatemala's rightist Government and leftist guerrillas have reached a partial agreement on human rights issues, marking the first progress in months toward ending one of Latin America's oldest and most violent civil wars.
The Roman Catholic Bishop who is mediating the negotiations at a Mexico City hotel said Friday night that the agreement represented a "significant step" toward an eventual cease-fire.


A Showdown on Workers' Compensation in Maine
What if the law required everybody to buy insurance, but no one wanted to sell it?
That may soon happen in Maine, where after 77 years the workers' compensation insurance system appears to be dissolving.
Its failure would be the first collapse of this basic form of social insurance since workers' compensation systems were established early this century.


Social Cause As Weapon And Shield
It is a long way from Cosima Wagner to the National Endowment for the Arts, but this column proposes to take a shortcut.
Cosima's diaries, as you may remember, constitute an adoring wife's daily reportage of a composer's life.
Included in its 2,000 pages is a gold mine of music criticism.
The opinions seem startlingly up to date, not so much for the conclusions drawn as for the reasoning processes that set them in motion.
Listen to a few of the gems:
*
Richard Wagner on Heine (on Schiller): "The Jew is an outsider. He notices what is raw and flat, but he has no feeling for the ideas of our nature."


Kara Leverte, Daniel H. Farley
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Leverte of Belvedere, Calif., have announced the engagement of a daughter, Kara Leverte, to Daniel Hugh Farley, a son of Joseph H. Farley of Greenport, L.I., and Catherine Healy of Garden City, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Leverte, 29, is a senior editor at Simon &amp; Schuster in New York.
She graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father, who is retired, was a group vice president at Cutter Laboratories, Berkeley, Calif.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
July nonfarm productivity, percent change
2.7
2.0
Wednesday
July producer prices, percent change
0.2
0.1
Thursday
July retail sales, percent change
0.5
0.5
July consumer prices, percent change
0.3
0.2
Late July auto sales, millions, annual rate
6.7
6.5
Friday
July industrial production, percent change
-0.3
0.2
July capacity utilization, in percent
78.5
78.9
July business inventories, percent change
0.1
0.1
Tuesday: Treasury auctions new three-year notes *
Labor Secretary Lynn Martin releases a report on barriers to workplace advancement by women and minorities  Wednesday: Treasury auctions new 10-year notes  Thursday: Treasury auctions new 30-year bond


McMillan's Millions
I'VE HAD 1,500 PEOPLE SHOW UP for a reading for 'Waiting to Exhale,' " the novelist Terry McMillan says. "Twelve hundred in Chicago, a thousand people waiting in line in Washington.
I think I've signed more than 10,000 books, and the people who come are 90 percent black.
In some cities 98 percent."
At her reading in Oakland, loudspeakers and television monitors had to be rigged outside Marcus Books to accommodate the crowds.
At a sold-out Waldenbooks signing on the edge of South-Central Los Angeles, the company says, the police had to control the throngs.


The Rot From Decaying Windowsills Can Spread to Framing and Walls
WOOD windowsills can decay if they are not regularly maintained by painting or treating with waterproofing sealer, or if storm-window frames are so tightly sealed that they prevent sills from draining.
Repairing decayed windowsills is important, because rot can spread to adjacent parts of the framing and cause moisture damage to walls.
The spread of minor or even moderate decay can be halted and the damaged areas restored by applying epoxy or acrylic wood filler.
Two popular varieties found are Minwax High Performance Wood Filler, which should be used after applying Minwax High Performance Wood Hardener, and Mr.
Mac's Wood Fix, which does not require hardener before application.


WHY PARIS WORKS
There are many reasons why Paris runs well, but one is clearly an abundance of money.
In his article "Why Paris Works" (July 19), Steven Greenhouse points out that the national Government contributes more than half the city's revenues.
In the United States, we've been moving in the opposite direction.


Dream Team Clinches the Gold


Public &amp; Private; Wives For Wives' Sake
I've been thinking about the speeches Barbara Bush and Marilyn Quayle are scheduled to give at the Republican National Convention.
The women behind the men, out front and on their own at the podium -- can you imagine the uproar if Hillary Clinton had done the same?
There's lots to look forward to before the wives take the stage in Houston on the third night.
There are the right-wing Pats, retro White House wannabes: Pat Robertson, who says he has no intention of turning America over to radical homosexuals, in case that was keeping you up nights, and Pat Buchanan, who has said that women are "less equipped psychologically" to handle the big bad world of business.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
GIRLS OF SUMMER In Their Own League. By Lois Browne. HarperCollins, $19.


Mutual Funds; The Funds With the Big Promises
Given today's rock-bottom interest rates, mutual funds that promise higher yields than money market funds or certificates of deposit but less fluctuation than long-term bond funds have hit on a winning combination.
In fact, shares in short-term global income funds are selling like hotcakes.
At the end of 1989, five funds held a total of $480.5 million.
Midway through 1992, 40 funds held an eye-popping $22.5 billion, a nearly 50-fold increase in less than three years, said Lipper Analytical Services Inc., of Summit, N.J.


De La Hoya Wins but Cubans Dominate
On a day when Cuba continued its dominance and Ireland won its first gold medal ever in boxing, Oscar De La Hoya and Chris Byrd took the sting out of one of the United States' most disappointing performances in 36 years.
De La Hoya won the gold in the 132-pound division while Byrd had to settle for the silver at 165 pounds, bringing the United States' medal count in boxing to one gold, one silver and one bronze, the lowest total for the country since 1956, when it won two golds and one silver.


Rookies Have Good Shot To Make Giants' Grade
After three weeks of training camp, the Giants' roster is shaping up with several potential surprises.
Ottis Anderson, at age 35 the oldest running back in the National Football League, seems sure to make the team.
So do most of the other veterans who helped win Super Bowl XXV two seasons ago and slumped to an 8-8 record last year.


Black History
To the Editor: After reading "Ontario's Rich Lode of Black History" (June 28), I thought your readers might be interested how some of the escaping slaves reached Canada and freedom.
One common route through upstate New York crossed the village of Peterboro in Madison County, settled in 1795.
This was one of the last stations on the Underground Railroad before Canada, in use from the 1825's through the Civil War.
Peterboro was my family's home for many generations.


Royals Not Clubby, So Jefferies's Bat Is
The social note never made the society pages of any newspaper, not in Kansas City, not in Florida and certainly not in New York.
But one day early in spring training last March, Gregg Jefferies played golf with George Brett.
"That never would have happened in New York," Jefferies remarked, meaning golf with a teammate, not with Brett.
"I'm playing golf with these guys. I'm going out to dinner with them. It's nice to be part of a team. I'm not acting any different than I did in New York. There the guys acted like I had a disease. Guys would say, 'You don't play golf, do you?' hoping I would say no. It's fun being part of a team. For three years, I felt like an outsider."


Getting Your Share In the Air Antitrust Suit
WITH 8.5 million other airplane travelers, I got a form late last month inviting me to file for my part of the $450 million that airlines are setting aside to settle a antitrust lawsuit charging that they illegally collaborated to fix ticket prices.
All of us who got the form were people who between Jan. 1, 1988, and June 30, 1992, bought at least one domestic plane ticket for a flight from, to or through at least one of 34 major United States airports.
The airlines involved are American, Continental, Delta, Midway, Northwest, Pan American, Trans World, United and USAir.
Others who did not receive the form because they did not come up in the airlines' computerized net can request one by writing Airlines Antitrust Litigation, Box 267, Pennsauken, N.J. 08110-0267.
If the settlement is approved, people whose claims are verified will receive vouchers; there is cash in the settlement but it will probably be used in administering the agreement and in legal fees.


WHY PARIS WORKS
I have a love-hate relationship with France, and with Paris in particular, where I lived and worked for three years.
I was intrigued by Greenhouse's article because the city he describes is not the Paris I know.
Paris works well?
Tell that to the people who are trying to get a phone installed, their mail forwarded or the electricity turned on.
French red tape is no myth.


Business Diary/August 2-7
THE ECONOMY A Trade Treaty With Mexico or a 'Transfer of Wealth'?


Jetsy Torre, Joseph Reid
Jeanne Elizabeth Torre, the daughter of Dr.
Douglas P. Torre of Rowayton, Conn., and the late Sylvia S. Torre, was married yesterday to Joseph McClure Reid, a son of Miriam A. Reid of Winchester, Mass., and the late Robert P. Reid.
The Rev.
Joseph A. Appleyard performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Saint Ignatius of Loyola in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Mrs.
Reid, 27 years old and known as Jetsy, is a kindergarten teacher at the Fessenden School in West Newton, Mass.
She and her husband graduated from Trinity College in Hartford, where Mrs.
Reid was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in elementary education from Manhattanville College.
Her father is a dermatologist in New York and a clinical professor of dermatology at Cornell University Medical Center there.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on July 19 referred incorrectly to two hotel chain programs that reward guests who are frequent patrons.
The Sheraton Club International fee does indeed charge a membership fee, but it is not the only such program to do so.
The Holiday Inn Priority Club charges a fee of $10; it is not free.


Cinderellas For Solidarity
THE political fires that burned down Communism in Eastern Europe were kindled in Poland in 1980 when the Solidarity labor union began a series of strikes at the Lenin shipyards in Gdansk.
The strikes eventually crippled the Government and brought the union's leader, Lech Walesa, to the presidency in 1990.
In its long years underground, Solidarity's supporters produced hundreds of propaganda stamps, also called labels or cinderellas, that chronicled the strikes and celebrated events and people that the Communist Government preferred to ignore, including Mr.
Walesa, of course, as well as Pope John Paul II.


WHY PARIS WORKS
It will save me time to be able to give your article to friends rather than having to explain to them why I enjoy Paris.
Please don't forget two other quality-of-life assets -- the marvelous buses that stay in the bus lanes and keep to a timetable, and the telephone-card system that is so handy.
When I go to Paris, I feel as if I am entering the 21st century.
ANITA KARIMIAN
New York, N.Y.


Finding Light Meals: Three for the Road
PASSING through an unfamiliar town at mealtime can be an adventure fraught with peril.
How does one find a satisfying breakfast, lunch or other light meal?
How to make a pleasant experience out of expediency?
Here are three pleasant places to have lunch or a light meal.
SOUP'S ON in Westport has been going strong since the end of 1977, sustaining a consistent performance day in, day out, year after year, in tiny irregularly shaped quarters that seat 27 guests at most.
The restaurant turns out a variety of imaginative soups, sandwiches, salads, a few entrees and desserts so successfully that it now operates a catering service elsewhere in Westport.


The Olympic Truce
In ancient times, warring city-states declared a truce while their young athletes, all male, went off to the Olympic Games.
Those Games focused on foot races, in the nude because runners discovered they ran faster that way.
The modern Games are bigger and better -- and the athletes, male and female, at least minimally clothed.
But the essence of the Olympic truce survives.
For two weeks every four years, the Games focus world attention on human achievement.
Even warring Serbs and Bosnians competed in Barcelona.
South Africans were back for the first time since 1960.
And the splintered Soviet Union had one last impressive moment as the Unified Team.


Picasso, but Not Always a Masterpiece
A SHOW that filled the Museum of Modern Art to capacity, the 1980 Picasso retrospective was, in terms of mileage, an endurance test worthy of a commemorative T-shirt.
Yet its catalogue weighed in at a mere four pounds, a pound less than that for "Picasso and Things," which itself numbers scarcely more than 100 items, all of them still lifes.
On view at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, this joint production by the Cleveland Museum of Art, the Philadelphia Museum and the Musee Picasso in Paris is making its last stop before departing for Paris and the Grand Palais.
Its guest curator is Jean Sutherland Boggs, a former director of the Philadelphia Museum and a scholar renowned for -- among other things -- a book on the portraits of Degas and the 1988 retrospective of his work.


In the Run to Daylight Players Are Winning
Nearly all American workers including those in major league baseball and pro basketball -- enjoy more freedom of movement in their employment than do players in the National Football League.
Through the first six weeks of its trial over free agency for its players, the N.F.L. has argued that extreme limits on free agency are essential to the survival of a flourishing league because a) the league is a joint venture among its 28 teams, b) competitive balance remains alive primarily through its restrictive rules on player movement, and c) these and other factors put the league in a different world from that of normal businesses.


Choosing The Right Mortgage
MORTGAGE interest rates, which have zigged down and zagged up during the past 12 months, have zigged down again this summer, sparking a new flurry of inquiries and loan applications.
This time, though, many of the customers are looking to buy a home, often a first home, rather than refinance an existing mortgage, as was often the case last winter, the last low point for interest rates.


Campy and Risque but Very Serious
CHARLES BUSCH toys with the issues of artistic, social and cultural perceptions in his very clever comic melodrama "The Lady in Question," which is at Studio Theater in Lindenhurst through Saturday.
In this play nothing is as it seems.
A stage drama that does a takeoff on 1940's Hollywood war movies, it is also a risque comedy with a serious intent.
"The Lady in Question" takes place in 1940 in the Bavarian Alps near the manor house of Baron Wihelm von Eisner.
A famous American concert pianist and her best friend have arrived at the train station only to discover there has been a glitch in their accommodations.
The baron, who just happens to be strolling by the station terrorizing the townsfolk, offers the pianist lodging in his home.


Yes, the Dream Team Romped, but Was It Worth It?
LONG after the record setters and medal winners are forgotten, the XXV Olympiad will best be remembered as the one where National Basketball Association players made their Olympic debut -- and ushered a new era of commercialism into the Games.
As predicted, the professionals made a shambles of the competition, winning their first seven games by an average margin of 57 points, and seemed assured of reclaiming the gold medal that got away in 1988 when the Americans settled for a bronze.


U.S. Has Entered a New Age: More and More Older Athletes Fill Rosters
America's Olympians are getting older they are a year older than the 1988 team, two years older than the 1984 squad -- yet stronger and faster than their predecessors.
The United States went into the final day of competition with 105 medals, 4 behind the Unified Team of the former Soviet Union.
It has been the strongest showing by an American team since 1968, excepting the 1984 Olympics which the Soviets boycotted.


After the Los Angeles Riots: Searching for a Killer and Searching for a Son
The name "MAE II" is everywhere on the graffiti-covered walls of Eric Fleming's neighborhood in South-Central Los Angeles.
It was not until after the riots that Mr.
Fleming learned that MAE II had been the "tag" for his oldest son.
"He kept that from me," Mr.
Fleming said.
"He probably assumed I wouldn't understand. I looked upon it as trashing buildings. We'd walk down the street, and I'd say, 'Oh, look at that,' like it was wrong. Now I see the art in it, but he's gone."


Black Cemetery Yields Wealth of History
When a few human bones were uncovered during work on a Federal construction site last summer, they were hardly more than a minor curiosity.
But in recent months, as hundreds of skeletons were unearthed, experts have come to conclude that the site in lower Manhattan may be one of the nation's most important archeological finds of this century.
The site, a Colonial-era burial ground mostly for enslaved Africans, was the focus of a political dispute in recent weeks as Mayor David N. Dinkins and others fought successfully to halt a Federal construction project.
Efforts are being made to designate the cemetery a Federal historic site.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Brick 743,000
228 Squan Beach Drive
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 18-year-old ranch; bayfront, 150-foot bulkhead, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $10,873.
Edison 171,000
24 Richard Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old ranch; bay windows, new water heater and furnace, French doors; taxes $3,109.
Howell 150,000
9 Quailtree Lane
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, deck, c/a; taxes $2,372.
Paramus 157,000
282 West Drive
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old ranch; c/a, new furnace and water heater, large property; taxes $2,680.
Ramsey 218,500
7 Snyder Avenue
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; fireplace, chestnut trim, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,047.
Short Hills 325,000
77 Old Hollow Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; 1-car garage, full basement, fireplace in living room; taxes $5,107.
OTHER AREAS Scarsdale, N.Y. 300,000
2 Inverness Road
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, den, living room, terrace; taxes $8,215.
Essex, Conn. 170,500
8 Sunset Terrace  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 19-year-old contemporary; living room with fireplace, loft room with stall shower, 1.7 acres; taxes $1,826.
Bay Shore, L.I. 1.1 million
80 South Saxon Avenue  6-bedroom, 6-bath, 50-year-old English Tudor; barn, guest cottage, stables, 9.6 acres; taxes $24,900.


Walking the Edge
THE best fashion accessory is a well-groomed child.
Next best is a towering headdress, a galleon concealed in tulle, like the three-foot-high confections that Marie Antoinette wore seductively in the 18th century.


So, Do You Like My Sauce?
NAME: Jerry Della Femina
IDENTITY: Former chairman of Della Femina McNamee, the advertising agency.
It is now owned by Euro RSCG, a French company.
CURRENT ACTIVITY: Opening Della Femina, an Italian restaurant, this week at 99 Main Street, in East Hampton.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; Clinton Bus Tour Woos And Wows Local Press
"We interrupt 'Family Feud' to bring you special coverage," a sober-voiced announcer alerted viewers of WKBT-TV, the CBS affiliate in western Wisconsin.
Was it a war? Was it a tornado? A major address from the Oval Office?


Wall Street; Picking the Worst Stock Pickers
No one in the business of giving investment advice in a newsletter gets a perfect 10.
Indeed, it's the rare adviser who can even match the no-brainer performance of the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 with any regularity, raising the question of whether it's worth buying the pricey letters to begin with.
For whatever reason, though, investors continue to part with as much as $525 a year to glean the wisdom of the folks who write letters.
Locating the top-performing advisers is easy: Mark Hulbert, editor of Hulbert Financial Digest in Alexandria, Va., recently published his 12-year anniversary issue, highlighting the Olympic-quality letters that did best in the 5- and 12-year periods ended June 30, 1992. (As it gives no investment advice, H.F.D. is not among those ranked.)


Barbara Mundy, Robert Mason
Barbara Joanna Heath Mundy, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Laurence R. Mundy of Mendham, N.J., was married Friday to Robert Emmet Mason, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Mason of Atlanta.
The Rev.
George Chorba performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in New Vernon, N.J.


Veterans Relive Guadalcanal's Terror and Heroism
The island has changed in 50 years, all the survivors said after their first glance around.
The dense tropical jungles around the famous airstrip are thinner now, and a crowded port town has grown up around the Quonset huts the Americans left behind.
Still, the instant Jeff DeBlanc saw the blue-green shoals of the South Pacific surrounding the island where he spent six months of terror, he got his bearings.
"It was right over there that I shot down three Bettys," said Mr.
DeBlanc, 71 years old, referring to the fearsome waves of Japanese bombers.


Allison Weinberger, Jeffrey Berman
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Weinberger of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Allison Beth Weinberger to Dr.
Jeffrey Owen Berman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sanford S. Berman of Pittsburgh.
An October wedding is planned.


Caitlin Craig Lynch, Daniel W. Gracey
Caitlin Craig Lynch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Lynch of Irvington, N.Y., was married yesterday in Cornwall, Conn., to Daniel Wadsworth Gracey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Gracey of Granby, Conn.
The Rev.
Peter Hammond, a minister of the United Church of Christ, officiated at the bridegroom's home.
Mrs.
Gracey, 28 years old, is a health teacher at Marvelwood High School in Cornwall.
She graduated from Denison University.
Mr.
Gracey, also 28, is the owner of the Coltsfoot Construction Company in Cornwall.
He graduated from Skidmore College.


The Neighborhood Celebrates Sylvia's
In Harlem, a renowned restaurant marked its 30th anniversary, on Aug. 4.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Bronxville, N.Y. 633,900
83 Warwick Road  7-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 84-year-old colonial; vaulted ceiling, 3 fireplaces, sun room, terrace; taxes $7,050.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 332,000
26 Begg Drive
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 65-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, family room, patio; taxes $7,649.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 300,000
2 Inverness Road
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, den, living room, terrace; taxes $8,215.
Essex, Conn. 170,500
8 Sunset Terrace  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 19-year-old contemporary; living room with fireplace, loft room with stall shower, 1.7 acres; taxes $1,826.
Old Saybrook, Conn. 122,500
65 Chalker Beach Road  2- bedroom, 1-bath, 51-year-old cape cod; slate entry, deck, close to beach, 40- by 124-foot lot; taxes $1,113.
Simsbury, Conn. 143,500
471 Firetown Road  5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old colonial; living room with raised hearth, woodstove, hardwood floors, 2.6 acres; taxes $2,410.
OTHER AREAS Bay Shore, L.I. 1.1 million
80 South Saxon Avenue  6-bedroom, 6-bath, 50-year-old English Tudor; barn, guest cottage, stables, 9.6 acres; taxes $24,900.
Brightwaters, L.I. 425,000
120 Concourse East  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 71-year-old colonial; dining room, sunporch, basement, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $11,600.
Brick, N.J. 743,000
228 Squan Beach Drive
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 18-year-old ranch; bayfront, 150-foot bulkhead; taxes $10,873.


Brooklyn Siblings Unite Fresh Air Families
The McBrides and the Leslies live just a few miles from one another in this comfortable Connecticut town but they would probably never have met if it weren't for two children from the Red Hook section of Brooklyn.
The two families are among the thousands who give needy inner-city youngsters a free summer vacation by being hosts for two weeks or more as part of a program of the Fresh Air Fund.
The youngsters that brought the Westport families together are George Gibbs, who is 12 years old and is spending the summer with the McBrides, and his sister, Raquel, who is 10 and is with the Leslies.
Hosts Are Enthusiastic
While the children from Brooklyn rave about the Westport beach, the town pool, the McBrides' pets (two puppies named Fergie and Di) and having their own rooms (at home they share with other siblings and cousins), it is their hosts who really wax enthusiastic.
"The experience is by far better for us than it is for them," said Jack Leslie, a communications consultant.
"There is no other way we would have come into contact with kids like these," said his wife, Laura.
"And they are great kids."
Jane McBride, speaking for herself and her husband, Otto, an electrical engineer, puts it plainly when asked about why they serve as summer hosts.
"We did it for ourselves."
The two families talked as they sat around a picnic table at Compo Beach during a picnic for the 30 Fresh Air families in the Westport area.
The water was at high tide and the youngsters strolled out on the beach under a setting sun that cast its brilliant light over the water.
Yachts and sailing boats bobbed just beyond reach.
Under the Fresh Air program, families who participate for a second summer have the option of inviting their initial guests again or of having new visitors.
The McBrides and the Leslies are what are known as repeaters.
The McBrides have invited Geroge five times; the Leslies have invited Raquel four times.
The two host families were at different stages of their lives when they first volunteered.
The McBrides' two sons were already out of the house; the Leslies' children were not yet born.
"I wanted to get involved before I had my own children," Mrs.
Leslie said.
"I felt that once I had children of my own I'd find too many excuses."
Her husband added: "Raquel's part of the family. She came to us as a little girl and now she's helping us take care of our own little girl." The Leslies have two children: Web, 2, and Finn, 2 months.
The McBrides' son Adam is a senior at the University of Vermont and their son William lives in Philadelphia.
George and Raquel see each other every day at what they call "beach camp," a summer program run by the town of Westport.
Their host families also get together for barbecues and picnics.
The host families also keep in touch with the children during the school year.
They try to keep track of how they are doing in school, to remember their birthdays and to bring them to Westport for special occasions, like Christmas and Thanksgiving.
Two years ago when George and Raquel's mother died, the McBrides went to the funeral in Brooklyn.
The children now live with their grandmother.


Don't Box Him In
George Bellows is best remembered for his boxing paintings, especially "Dempsey and Firpo" (1924), in which a stricken Jack Dempsey is shown falling through the ropes.
But Bellows, who died in 1925 at the age of 42, produced more than 600 oil paintings, as well as lithographs, drawings and magazine illustrations, in his short career.
THE PAINTINGS OF GEORGE BELLOWS (Abrams, $49.50) and GEORGE BELLOWS AND URBAN AMERICA (Yale University, $45) offer a valuable reconsideration of Bellows's life and art.
A member of the Ashcan School, Bellows shared with such painters as Robert Henri and John Sloan a fascination with the hurly-burly life of the New York streets.
But Bellows found equal inspiration in the rugged terrain of Monhegan Island, off the coast of Maine, where he produced dozens of striking seascapes.
His portraits -- whether of street children or members of his family -- are painted with quick, fluid brushstrokes that give a sense of emotional immediacy and psychological insight.
Bellows was concerned with trying to establish logical underpinnings for his art, and was forever trying out new systems of composition and color.
The result was that he changed his style more or less markedly every two years or so.
Of the two volumes, "The Paintings of George Bellows" -- written by Michael Quick, a curator at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art; Jane Myers, a curator at the Amon Carter Museum in Fort Worth; Franklin Kelly, a curator at the National Gallery of Art in Washington; and Marianne Doezema, an official at the National Endowment for the Humanities -- offers the fuller examination of the artist's work, and includes 76 color plates as well.
Along with Ms.
Doezema's study "George Bellows and Urban America," it throws new light on an artist widely considered the leading American realist of his generation.


Is 'The Real Inspector Hound' a Shaggy Dog Story?
Most playwrights who have suffered indignities at the hands of critics -- and who has not? -- lie awake at one time or another inventing clever forms of revenge and then think the better of it in the morning.
Tom Stoppard wrote "The Real Inspector Hound."
In this broad -- very broad -- swipe at the enemy, two critics of dubious stripe, Birdboot and Moon, bumble their way through and finally into the play they are supposed to be reviewing, to find in the end that an ignominious fate awaits.
Together, they cover the spectrum of critical response: the highbrow Moon looking for "the nature of identity," while the lowbrow Birdboot throws himself on a box of Black Magic chocolates and tries to guess who the murderer is.
In his romp through commonplace, Mr.
Stoppard -- who once worked as a critic himself -- gives Moon lines like this: "There are moments, and I would not begrudge it this, when the play, if we can call it that, and I think on balance we can, aligns itself uncompromisingly on the side of life."


Kimberly Calise, Jeffrey T. Veber
Kimberly Elizabeth Calise, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Calise Jr. of Allendale, N.J., was married yesterday in Paramus, N.J., to Jeffrey Todd Veber, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gayle Veber of Portland, Ore.
The Rev.
Thomas E. Daly of the Federation of Christian Ministries officiated at the Ridgewood Country Club.
Mrs.
Veber, 25 years old, graduated from Colgate University, as did her husband.
Until recently she was an associate product manager at Polo/Ralph Lauren in Lyndhurst, N.J.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Chadbourne &amp; Parke.


By Lava Possessed
THE VOLCANO LOVER
A Romance. By Susan Sontag. 419 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.


KEEPING CONTROL
Marion Hart's article might have evoked a measure of empathy had she not referred to "the biological process I'd
unwittingly
begun."


An Artist Looks at Other People's Paintings
In a season that by now is just about running on empty, there is a place for an intelligent little show that cost virtually nothing to put on, cannot afford a catalogue and yet includes more than one landmark in the development of American art.
The show in question is at the National Academy of Design, on Fifth Avenue at 89th Street, and it is called "The Artist's Eye: Philip Pearlstein Selects Paintings From the Permanent Collection." Mr.
Pearlstein is not only a widely admired painter but a man who looks at other people's paintings, past and present, with quirky good sense.


World Markets; Going 'Floorless' in Canada
For Canadian stock exchanges, floorlessness seems to be the wave of the future.
The Vancouver exchange at the Pacific Center Complex was completely computerized 19 months ago, and Marc A. Foreman, its vice president of trading operations, calls it "the best thing here since sliced bread in providing accurate, instantaneous transmission of orders."


Ex-Senator Thomas J. McIntyre, a New Hampshire Democrat, 77
Thomas J. McIntyre, a Democrat who became an influential Senator from a Republican state, died yesterday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 77 years old and lived in Laconia, N.H., and Tequista, Fla.
He died of Alzheimer's disease, pneumonia and heart failure, his family said.


A Survey of a California Artist
VISITORS to the exhibition by Roland Reiss at the State University's Neuberger Museum here have a choice: they can survey the art, which spans the last 17 years, or they can study the catalogue.
To do both is difficult without a solid grounding in semiotic esoterica.
Mr.
Reiss, a California artist born in Chicago, appeared in the Whitney Biennial of 1975 and has shown in Washington, D.C., Florida and the Middle West.
His reputation, otherwise, is confined to the West Coast, where he has attracted much critical attention and where, for 20 years, he has been chairman of the art department at Claremont Graduate School, in Claremont, Calif.


A Salute to the Quiet Heroines
Average women seldom steal the fire.
It's the ones with all the drama, the warriors and the victims, who end up in the newspapers, the television movies and the country songs: the battered women, the thieves and adventurers, the defiant ones.
But Mary-Chapin Carpenter's fourth album, "Come On Come On" (Columbia CK 48881; CD and cassette), is a testament to the women who don't usually make headlines.
Her characters are the housewives, the car-pool drivers, the kid sisters, the drugstore counter girls and others who live out their lives on linoleum instead of on stage or in battle.
Ms.
Carpenter herself is a model of modesty.
The winner of a Grammy for the song "Down at the Twist and Shout," from her 1990 album "Shooting Straight in the Dark," she has risen through the country ranks without flash or bravado: no big hair, sequined gowns, teary performances.
It's hard to imagine her in a tabloid.
When she sings, she doesn't flirt with the notes but addresses them directly; her voice is framed by a smile and wink, not a grimace of operatic angst.


Kelly Is Moved to Left; Yanks Just Move Down
On the field, it was just another loss for the near-hopeless Yankees, the 11th in 14 outings, sending them a miserable 10 games under .500 for the second time this year.
Oh, for a while it looked promising.
For seven innings, in fact, it looked as if starter Scott Kamieniecki might outduel the mighty Roger Clemens for his first victory in exactly one month.
Pipe dreams.
With two outs in the eighth, Kamieniecki gave up a hit to Herm Winningham.
Then another one to Jody Reed.
Then, after an intentional walk, there were singles by Bob Zupcic and Tom Brunansky, good for three runs.
By the time Kamieniecki left the mound, the Yankees were in a 3-1 hole.
By the time the game was over, the Red Sox had won, 4-2.


At Work; While the Men Wait at Home
Layoffs are mounting at such a relentless pace this summer that the once securely employed may wonder who put the work force abacus in the hands of the devil.
Nervous employees who really want to stare fear in the face should watch the documentary "Fast Food Women" tomorrow night (check local listings) on the public television series "P.O.V." Anne Lewis Johnson's film on women forced by chance and necessity into low-paying, no-benefits jobs in the fast-food industry is a cautionary tale in downward mobility.
It may be going too far to say that Eastern Kentucky, one of the most chronically impoverished regions of the country, could be a bellwether for the American economy in general.
But on the topic of jobs, the area is much like many elsewhere in the nation, devastated by the decline of an industry -- coal -- and the consequent reverberations throughout communities and families.


Carrie O'Connor, Robert Stanley
Jane Shiring O'Connor of Waterbury, Conn., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Carrie Frances O'Connor, to Robert Scott Stanley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Reuel Stanley of Boston.
The bride-to-be is also the daughter of Robert T. O'Connor of Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss O'Connor graduated from Manhattanville College.
She is a marketing executive for Tim Miller Sales Company Inc., a hosiery manufacturer, in New York.


Corrections
A caption on July 19 with a photograph of Czar Nicholas II and his family in 1913 misidentified his four daughters.
From the left, they were Maria, Tatyana, Olga and Anastasia.


A Fishing Expedition As Wide as Montana
There's always another place to fish in Montana if things are slow where you start.
This trip had started in the east central part of the state, with a lively day and a half of dry fly action on a friend's section of the West Boulder River near McLeod.
It was solitary fishing, except for a Labrador puppy who watched the water more steadily than most fishermen and splashed after one trout that impudently rose a few feet from him.
It was difficult wading but satisfying catching, with long casts taking browns up to 17 inches on Pale Morning Duns.


Painting Times Square
Describe a section of Tokyo or London or Sydney as that city's Times Square and the image is immediate.
The listener visualizes neon signs and theater marquees, tourists and hustlers, lowlifes and high-fliers, sleaze and glitz, squalor and luxe.
That's because Times Square is as much an idea as it is a place.
It is also many things to many people -- a pass-through usually, a stopping place sometimes and, all too often, a dead end.
What it represents to some of the young single mothers at Covenant House, a nearby refuge for runaways and throwaways, is visible in a mural at the corner of 43d and Broadway.
The Times Square they drew for Bill Moskler, an artist who pulled their work together, is as exaggerated and as vividly colored as a cartoonist's.
It's all rush and traffic and big-eyed people.
It is, for better or worse, excitement.


WHY PARIS WORKS
It is fascinating that Greenhouse could write the article he did and never once use the word "socialist." He came close when he said, "France's activist Government works hard to improve living conditions." Yet the content of the essay clearly spells out the advantages, to all, of a national Government committed to something beside profit and power for the few.
JIM MORGAN
Brooklyn


7 Arrested at Park Protest
Seven people were arrested on Friday near Tompkins Square Park during a demonstration to mark the anniversary of the 1988 disturbances at the East Village park, the police said yesterday.
The demonstration drew about 60 people who marched through the streets and around the park, at Seventh Street and Avenue A, the police said.
The five men and two women were arrested for hanging up signs on the park fence, which is prohibited by city regulations.
They also refused to remove their signs, and blocked police from taking them down, said Sgt.
Ed Burns, a police spokesman.
The park area, for years home to an eclectic mix of people, became a battleground between civilians and officers on Aug. 7, 1988.


Peruvian Wins Reshevsky Memorial
JULIO GRANDA ZUNIGA won the Samuel Reshevsky Memorial Tournament held in Manhattan from July 13 to 24.
The 25-year-old Peruvian grandmaster scored 7-2 to take the $2,500 first prize.


Anxiety Attack
To the Editor:
It is regrettable that Nigel Nicolson, an Englishman and the son of Vita Sackville-West, has joined our chaperones in Washington in presuming to decide just how explicit a lesbian scene America is ready to see on television, as he has done with the "Masterpiece Theater" presentation of "Portrait of a Marriage"  [ "Love, Infidelity and Commitment in Bloomsbury," July 19 ] .


Beethoven sur l'Herbe
The New York Philharmonic's free concert on the Great Lawn of Central Park, Aug. 3.


U.S. and Allies Divided Over Role of U.N. Forces
President Bush's call for a mandate to use force if necessary to provide relief supplies in the Balkan conflict has opened a three-way split at the United Nations over the role of its peacekeeping forces in the region, diplomats and United Nations officials say.
While the United States has pressed for blanket authorization from the Security Council for the use of force to insure that relief supplies get through, Britain and France favor a more graduated response that would initially authorize light military protection for the supply convoys.


Injury Inc.: Magadan Fractures His Wrist
The images of doom and defeat for the Mets have become a sad blur.
The fresh frames, though, keep being fed into the 1992 reel of regret, and today there were added ones of injury and insult.
There was the scene of Dave Magadan, on his knees at second base in an explosion of dirt in the fifth inning, his right wrist broken.
And in the ninth, there was the scene of Doug Dascenzo, in a second detonation of dust, sliding safely across the plate, another broken afternoon of effort for the Mets left in his trail.


Grand Finale


IRON BONDING
I am always struck by the way men on construction sites in the city communicate with one another.
They pat or lay their hands on various parts of the other's anatomy; they point, smile, grimace; they pass beers and cigarettes -- in an elaborate and fascinating display of body language that nearly resembles a dance, or a pantomime.
Perhaps they do this because construction sites are noisy, but, perhaps, that's the way men are most comfortable communicating.
ANITA S. HECKER
New York, N.Y.


Senate Passes Bill to Preserve Pine Barrens
In a major step toward protecting the environment and water supplies of eastern Long Island, the Senate voted today to protect from commercial development 3,200 acres of the last remaining pristine pine barrens in Suffolk County.
"The pine barrens are a thing of beauty, and here's an opportunity to preserve something of beauty and of necessity to our environment and drinking water," said Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the New York Republican.
And, he said, "There's no cost to the taxpayer."


Mission Accomplished, For Better or Worse
"I don't think that you'll see another team like this," Chuck Daly said tonight after the United States won the gold medal it couldn't possibly lose.
Magic Johnson, Larry Bird and Michael Jordan, who would soon follow the Dream Team coach into the interview room, were his three reasons why.
"This team has a mystique that was built over 15 years," Daly said after the 117-85 gold-clinching victory over Croatia.
"This is a majestic team."


Algeria's Boulmerka Outruns Her Limits
This was the easy part.
A closely packed field in the women's 1,500-meter final, coming around the final turn at the Olympic Stadium.
A sprint to the finish.
There were no problems now for Hassiba Boulmerka of Algeria; nobody harassing her about her uniform or depriving her of needed practice time.
She took the turn, passed Lyudmila Rogacheva of the Unified Team, and kicked home in 3 minutes 55.30 seconds.


Tamara N. Sax, Scott S. Stuckey
Mr. and Mrs.
Maurio M. Sax of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Tamara Nicolette Sax to Scott Sherwood Stuckey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman S. Stuckey of Richardson, Tex.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Sax, 30 years old, is a Spanish teacher at Hamilton Park Pacesetter Elementary School in Richardson.
She graduated from Trinity University and received a master's degree in elementary education from North Texas State University.
Her father is a social studies teacher at Rye High School.
Her mother, Alexandra T. Sax, is a senior reference librarian at the mid-Manhattan branch of the New York Public Library.


Patching Up L.A. -- A Corporate Blueprint
The headquarters of Rebuild Los Angeles, the nonprofit group established after last spring's riots to bring jobs and hope to the city's poorest neighborhoods, is a one-story brick building set between the gleaming corporate towers of downtown and the slums just a few blocks to the south.
Casting wary glances in both directions from his office there, Peter V. Ueberroth is issuing perhaps the most direct challenge yet to the business world to tackle the problems of the inner city.
The strategy he is pursuing as the group's chairman is as risky as it is ambitious.
Mr.
Ueberroth, the former baseball commissioner, said he is counting on considerable help from residents of the community and from the state and Federal governments.
But his thrust is clearly to prove that companies, motivated not solely by civic duty but also by cold profit-and-loss calculations, can revive urban America in a way that governments by themselves have failed to do.


Candlewood Brings Back 'Mame'
FUNNY how Auntie Mame, the very model of 1920's bohemian free thinking, is commonly played with more restraint than flamboyance.
Such largesse and wit as defined the performance of Rosalind Russell, the role's originator, remains matchless.
Then the great Beatrice Lillie, one of Ms.
Russell's replacements in the play, set a standard that amounts to an impossible dream.


Betsy Morgan, Charles Robinson
Elizabeth Griswold Morgan, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John L. Morgan of Chestertown, Md., was married yesterday to Charles Paul Robinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles R. Robinson of New York and Washington, Conn.
The Rev.
Bertrand de Margerie performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at l'Eglise St.
Louis en l'Ile in Paris.
Ms.
Morgan, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, is known as Betsy.
She is a consultant for Metropolitan Life in Paris.
She graduated from Haverford College, as did her husband.
Her father is a pediatrician in Chestertown, where her mother, Bonnie Morgan, is a social worker.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on June 21 referred incorrectly to the convertibility of Czechoslovak currency.
Although it is illegal to take crowns out of the country, visitors report exchanging them in Hungary, Austria and some German border towns.


Tigers Sale Moves Along
The proposed sale of the Detroit Tigers from one pizza magnate to another is fairly zipping through the baseball bureaucracy.


FADED GLORY
Arthur Schlesinger Jr. is right when he speaks of "the spreading fear that our politicians are baffled by . . .  the long-term crises of our age" ("Faded Glory," July 12).
But he is wrong when he says that "this fear will be stilled not by structural improvements in the political process but only by analytical improvements in the way we think about our problems."
We are awash in "analytical improvements" churned out by think tanks.
What is missing is accountability.
Neither the President nor Congress can be held accountable, each being free to blame the other for deadlock to which both contribute.
"Structural improvements in the political process" are precisely what we do need, in the direction of an executive accountable to a legislature that is accountable to the public.


'Second Front'
To the Editor:
In his review of my book, "Second Front" (July 5), Michael Janeway writes that I "agree" that "the Iraqis (and allied bombing) killed many innocent civilians, including babies in hospitals." This is a curious construction because I most emphatically do not agree that Iraqis killed babies in Kuwaiti hospitals, nor do I state that allied bombing directly killed babies in hospitals in Iraq.


Jill E. Horwitz, Todd Hixson
Jill Elizabeth Horwitz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Horwitz of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Todd Milton Hixson, the son of Richard Hixson of Flemington, N.J., and the late Cynthia Hixson.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Ms.
Horwitz, 26 years old, is a teacher at the Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her father is a partner in David J. Greene and Company, an investment advisory concern in New York.
Her mother, Marjorie Horwitz, is a senior vice president of Marsh &amp; McLennan, an insurance brokerage in New York.


AUGUST 2-8: Oregon's Experiment; Federal Rejection Blocks Health Care Rationing Plan
The Bush Administration sent Oregon officials back to the drawing board last week to revise their innovative proposal for rationing health care.
The plan would have expanded Medicaid to cover all residents below the poverty level ($10,857 for a family of three in 1991).
To help pay for this change, the state would have eliminated coverage of certain services judged to be less effective or less valuable than others.
On a "priority list" of 709 medical treatments, Oregon would have refused to pay for those ranked below No. 587.


Brass Quintet Gives New Flavor to Old Favorites
ALMOST since the Summer Music Festival began nine years ago, one of its most eagerly anticipated groups has been the Empire Brass Quintet.
Entertainment is at the heart of the group's repertory choices, with an emphasis on arrangements of orchestral favorites that take on new meaning in their pure brass colorings.
"It's a fun-filled evening of musical dash and virtuosity," said the festival's artistic director, Peter Sacco, "with a new program of golden standards done as only these magnificent five can."
One of the five -- the trumpeter Rolf Smedvig -- will stay in Waterford long enough to play the Haydn Concerto with Mr.
Sacco and the Connecticut Orchestra at the regular 8 P.M.
Saturday concert in Harkness Park.
It's an all-Haydn program, also presenting two of the nicknamed symphonies, "Le Soir" and "Surprise," plus the Sinfonia Concertante, with four of the first-chair players stepping forward into the solo spotlight.
For reservations, call 442-9199.


Cristina D. Sage, Jeffrey Peters
Cristina Davidson Sage, the daughter of Barbara F. Sage of New Canaan, Conn., and Louis D. Sage of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Franklin Peters, the son of Jane Estey Peters of New York and Ralph W. Peters of Sarasota, Fla.
The Rev.
Richard Mayberry performed the ceremony at St.
Francis Episcopal Church in Stamford, Conn.
Mrs.
Peters, 26 years old, is a legal assistant with Burns &amp; Levinson, a Boston law firm.
A graduate of Mount Holyoke College, she is about to begin work on a master's degree in counseling psychology at Boston College.


Senate Battle Is Simmering In New York
Just five weeks before the New York Senate primary, the campaign is barely a whisper in the public ear: no television advertisements, no debates, no banners, no hoopla.
But behind the calm is a quiet struggle that has been waged across the state for months and is building toward a late-summer storm.
Former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro, whose candidacy some dismissed a year ago as a quixotic comeback attempt, has instead ridden her fame to a solid lead in the polls.
Now she is avoiding joint appearances with her two chief rivals for the Democratic nomination, State Attorney General Robert Abrams and the New York City Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, who are struggling in vain to win attention and starting to turn up the heat.


POSTINGS: 25 Roslyn Houses; Abandoned Development Resurrected
An abandoned 25-house development that had been left in shambles by vandals, has been brought back to life by new developers in Roslyn, L.I.
The developers, Bernard Janowitz and Jason Cohen of Roslyn Park, L.I., acquired the 10.5-acre property and the remains of six houses in July, following a foreclosure proceeding against the original developers, Park Ridge at Roslyn.


Sports of The Times; Giant-Dodger Rivalry Is on Its Deathbed
ONCE a Giant and now a Dodger, Brett Butler understood the rivalry.
And feared it.
The little center fielder didn't want to let last year's National League West race boil down to the Los Angeles Dodgers having to win against the San Francisco Giants at Candlestick Park on the final weekend.
"The Giants are out of it," Butler kept telling his teammates, "but they'll be ready for us."


Mow Better Electrically
To the list of environmental villains, add the lowly lawn mower.
Spewing hydrocarbons, nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide, the mower can do as much mischief to the air as its bigger neighbor in the family garage, the car, even if the car is 30 times more powerful.
The Environmental Protection Agency is moving toward emissions regulations for mowers and their sidekicks, including weed eaters, chain saws and leaf blowers.
On Friday William Reilly, the E. P. A. Administrator, appeared on a postage-stamp sized lawn in Washington, in front of the office of the Edison Electric Institute, a trade association, and demonstrated a cleaner alternative: an electric mower.


Carol Chamberlin, Robert Orr Jr.
Carol Frances Chamberlin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen J. Chamberlin of Topsfield, Mass., was married yesterday in Branford, Conn., to Robert Dunkerson Orr Jr., the son of Ambassador and Mrs.
Orr of Indianapolis and Singapore.
Edward Reynolds, a justice of the peace in Branford, performed the ceremony on Cat Island.
Mrs.
Orr, 32 years old, is a partner at Chamberlin &amp; Devore Landscape Architects in Fairfield, Conn.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire and received a master's degree in landscape architecture from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a retired executive for the jet engines division of General Electric in Lynn, Mass.
Her mother, Jean Chamberlin, is an artist.


Capitol Deadlock Leads a Senator to Step Down
Scores of members are leaving Congress this year -- already voted out by unhappy constituents, or choosing not to seek re-election at all.
Some have cited the sour relationship between the President and Congress and the resulting dearth of effective legislation.


Ariana Tadler, David Paterson
Ariana Joyce Tadler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Tadler of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to David Lord Paterson, a son of the Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
John B. Paterson of Barre, Vt.
The Rev.
Leslie C. Hughs was assisted by the bridegroom's father in the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Paterson, 25 years old, graduated from Hamilton College and received her law degree in May from Fordham University.
She is to become an associate at the New York law firm of Kaplan &amp; Kilsheimer next month.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Clayton Funding Corporation, an equipment-leasing concern in Mineola, L.I.


All About/Composting; Two Towns Experiment With the Alchemy of Trash
Earlier this year, about 400 households in Greenwich and Fairfield, Conn., took a big step forward in their longstanding trash-recycling program.
For a month, they set up "wet bags" to collect table scraps, soiled paper and yard clippings.
While such garbage is unsuitable for the usual recycling sorting bins, it can be composted.
The results, measured in the further reduction of trash that would otherwise clog landfills and incinerators, make conventional recycling of cans, bottles and paper seem like only a half measure.
But the time and space needed for large-scale composting make the chances slim that any but the most dedicated of communities will even experiment with the process.


Allison B. Trani, Robert A. Kellan
Mr. and Mrs.
Salvatore J. Trani of Brookville, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Allison Beth Trani to Robert Andre Kellan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Kellan of North Andover, Mass.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Trani, 23 years old, is an actress in New York.
She graduated from Boston College, as did her fiance.
Her father is the chairman of Mabon Securities Corporation, an investment bank in New York, and IMI International Inc., a bank based in Rome.


Corrections
An article on July 12 about Branson, Mo., referred incorrectly to the document issued to honorary Kentucky Colonels by the Governor of Kentucky.
It is a commission certificate.


Beating Bears to Alaska Berries
WHEN they're not eating salmon, Alaskan bears go for berries, up to 50 pounds a day.
For humans, especially hikers in late summer, the portions may be smaller but the diet is strikingly similar.
Some days during our two-week trip to Alaska it seemed like half of what we ate wasberries, either gathered in the wild or as part of regular meals and snacks.
Berries are the trail food and the road food of Alaska.
But, unlike pretzels in Manhattan or tacos in Texas, an ample supply is free for the taking.


WHY PARIS WORKS
Ironically, I found myself in Washington Square Park on Sunday morning, after reading Steven Greenhouse's article.
To my surprise, there
were
sweepers, albeit sweeping up about 60 percent of the trash with push brooms that just would not stay together.
As the sweepers dumped the debris into a can, an older man subconsciously threw his muffin wrapper practically at their feet.
No one seemed to notice or care.
ROBERT CUCUZZA
New York, N.Y.


The View From: Hosmer Mountain in Willimantic; Bottlers Who Keep On Making Soda With Old-Fashioned Fizz
THE Hosmer Mountain Bottling Company in Willimantic has quenched thirsts since 1910, when an entrepreneur began bottling water from Hosmer Mountain's spring and delivering it, in horse-drawn wagons, to local mills.
By the 1930's the company, like scores of independent bottlers all over Connecticut, was turning out assorted sodas.
Today such operations are mostly gone because supermarkets sell cola in plastic.
But Hosmer Mountain is still putting its own flavors into traditional reusable glass bottles, and even makes home deliveries.
The family that has run the operation for decades hopes that Hosmer and its few fellow survivors can keep bubbling along for decades more.


A Test of Mr. Clinton's Backbone
Trade policy is about to burst into the Presidential campaign.
President Bush is expected to announce this week a free-trade pact with Mexico and Canada that, he promises, "will mean more jobs, more growth . . ."
But powerful Democrats, led by the House majority leader, Richard Gephardt, have threatened to oppose the agreement.
They claim it could destroy jobs and the environment by spurring American corporations to flee to Mexico "to take advantage of cheap labor, lax enforcement of health, safety, environmental and labor laws . . ."


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Falls Township, Pa.; New Highway, New Business
ACRES of auto dealers are still the first signs of commerce motorists see as they leave Interstate 95 at Route 1 in this community of about 42,000 people near Langhorne and about 40 miles north of Philadelphia.
But now a highway bypasses the car lots and new enterprises, among them shopping malls, hotels and theme parks, are moving in.
Almost six years have passed since a 14-mile segment of Route 1 was completed, letting motorists bypass the older two-lane, stop-and-go road.
The road joins the Pennsylvania Turnpike at Trevose, Pa., extending to Trenton, N.J., with an exit for I-95 in between.
Old Route 1 remains intact, with much of the development near its intersection with Oxford Valley Road.


The Watchword Is ARF
At the Animal Rescue Fund's ball, held on Aug. 1 at Whitefield, by Stanford White, in Southampton.


Black History
To the Editor: In "Ontario's Lode of Black History," Clyde H. Farnsworth gives readers the impression that all abolitionists were white.
Not so.
A sizable number of free blacks lived throughout the then United States, and up North, in particular, they actively engaged in efforts to end slavery -- forming their own societies or joining with white groups.
Also, free blacks along the routes of the Underground Railroad offered their homes as stations where escaping slaves found rest and refuge during the run for freedom.
There are many sources for substantive information on this subject, among them the historian John Hope Franklin's "From Slavery to Freedom."  SHYRLEE DALLARD New York, N.Y.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL National League
NEW YORK METS -- Optioned Pat Howell, outfielder, to Tidewater of the International League.
Placed Dave Magadan, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Howell from Tidewater.
FOOTBALL National Football League
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Troy Vincent, cornerback.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Signed Rich Gannon, quarterback.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Agreed to terms with Tony Woods, defensive end, on a one-year contract.
HORSE RACING
SARATOGA -- Fined trainer Gasper Moschera $1,000 for scratching Carli's Command on Friday after wagering had begun.
COLLEGE
ARIZONA STATE -- Suspended Grady Benton, quarterback, and Derrick Land, wide receiver, for one game after pleading no contest to the fraudulent use of a credit card.


The Rot From Decaying Windowsills Can Spread to Framing and Walls
WOOD windowsills can decay if they are not regularly maintained by painting or treating with waterproofing sealer, or if storm-window frames are so tightly sealed that they prevent sills from draining.
Repairing decayed windowsills is important, because rot can spread to adjacent parts of the framing and cause moisture damage to walls.
The spread of minor or even moderate decay can be halted and the damaged areas restored by applying epoxy or acrylic wood filler.
Two popular varieties found are Minwax High Performance Wood Filler, which should be used after applying Minwax High Performance Wood Hardener, and Mr.
Mac's Wood Fix, which does not require hardener before application.


WHY PARIS WORKS
Our Jeffersonian heritage may be responsible, in part, for why New York, unlike Paris, does not work.
Jefferson, like most of the founding fathers, thought of cities as evil places.
The tradition persists.
STEPHEN B. ADLER
Brooklyn


How to Go From All Thumbs to Green
MANY gardeners believe they cannot grow anything.
These gardeners feel that they have the wrong touch, that perhaps they are all thumbs when it comes to growing things, and so they usually give up after several efforts fail.
But just as many gardeners keep trying.
Granted, gardening does not have a fixed set of rules since there are so many variables.
And there is no one way to grow anything.
What works for one gardener may not work for another.
Gardeners share their hits as well as their misses.


Europe Looks at Iraq and Shrugs
EVEN THOUGH Saddam Hussein appeared once again last week to be planting new obstacles in the path of United Nations inspections of his weapon capacity, and President Bush was reiterating his vow that Iraq would submit, much of the saber-rattling was barely noticed in Western Europe.
In fact, it has been that way all during this summer of threats and bluffs and compromises.
Even during the tensest moments last month, when American aircraft carriers were heading for the Persian Gulf while Mr.
Hussein was still resisting any inspection of his Agriculture Ministry by a United Nations team looking for documents on weapons, the same European countries whose armies and navies fought in the war only two years ago largely yawned.


Familiar Voices Enhance Nursery Tales
JOSHUA GREENE of Old Westbury is a storyteller.
Unlike conventional storytellers, he uses animated films and audio cassettes to tell stories to children.
He is the creator and producer of "Stories to Remember," a series of award-winning audio and video programs for children up to the age of 11 that are adapted from successful children's picture books or based on well-known tales.


POSTINGS: Moderate-Income Project; 59 Mott Haven 2-Families
The Mott Haven section of the Bronx has benefited recently from a miniboom in the development of housing for moderate-income families.
One of the initiatives under way is the development of 59 two-family homes on scattered sites near St.
Mary's Park in an area bounded by 145th and 148th Streets and St.
Ann's and Brook Avenues.
The houses are being developed by Sandy Loewentheil and Ron Moelis of Rye, N.Y.
The New York Housing Partnership and the South Bronx Community Corporation served as the project's sponsors.


A Suit Over Lead at a Firing Range
FOR 37 years, shooters have gone to the Blue Mountain Sportsman Center in Cortlandt to draw a bead on the clay pigeons whooshing overhead.
Recently, they have been joined by scientists with a different target -- environmentalists who watch the fallout below and complain that tons of lead are contaminating the county-owned reserve.
Late last month, a coalition of environmental groups led by Robert F. Kennedy Jr. filed suit against the county and its Parks Department for violating Federal statutes by failing to remove an estimated 500 tons of lead at the center, part of the 1,500-acre Blue Mountain Reservation. 'A Threat to Humans or Wildlife'
Calling the levels of lead found at the Sportsman Center "unprecedented," Mr.
Kennedy said: "You won't find such levels at the most contaminated Superfund sites in the United States. If industry did this kind of thing, they'd go to jail."


Bending the Thin Blue Line
Long before he had ever heard of community policing, Officer Pete Mulroy's job on the Lower East Side of Manhattan had become a nightly chore.
Drive down 10th Street.
Head south.
Pop out of the car to make an arrest.
Pop back in.
After 18 years in the Ninth Precinct, he felt he was "running on automatic."
Now as a prototype of the Police Department's vision of the future, he can point to dozens of buildings, apartments and storefronts he has cleared of addicts and dealers.
He has mapped a year of arrests on his office computer and with the help of residents, led prosecutors to valuable seizures of property and drugs.
In Officer Mulroy's view he has done "more in the last one year on the job than I did in the first 18."


Housebound


Ah, to Wallow In a Public Place
INSTEAD of pulling weeds this afternoon, why not take off and visit someone else's garden?
Bring a little notebook and a pencil, or just take your senses with you -- and wallow.
Last week, I chose the Conservatory Garden in Central Park (the front gate is on Fifth Avenue and 105th Street) and headed straight for the South Garden to drown myself in the perennial beds.
That's what all the bees were doing.


Artistic Relief From Summer Doldrums
IN a large, high-ceilinged workshop where the grinding of saws mingled with the pungent smell of wood chips and construction glue, Anna Hodgson peered intently at the interior of a scale-model California-style house -- complete with pool -- as she struggled to insert painstakingly crafted balsa steps.
A few tables away, Nile Williams added some finishing touches to his model of a home for an intergalactic alien.
The soaring circular structure, punctuated by a series of ramps, bore a surprising resemblance to the Guggenheim Museum.
For those who associate summer camp with swimming, canoeing, hiking and the kinds of arts and crafts that come home as beaded bracelets or highly varnished wooden picture frames, the summer arts camp at the Boces technical center campus in Valhalla is a distinctive riff on a familiar theme.


Solarz Opponents Resist Calls for Unity
When Representative Steven J. Solarz announced last month that he would run in New York City's new 12th Congressional District, one drawn specifically to maximize Hispanic voting strength, Hispanic candidates and their supporters groaned in frustration.
Well connected and flush with cash, Mr.
Solarz immediately became the man to beat.
But as the Sept. 15 primary nears, it is not so much Mr.
Solarz's fame and fortune that have helped his cause as the turmoil his candidacy has created among Hispanic candidates seeking the Democratic nomination.
This has served to expose both the strengths and weaknesses of the premise that minority communities, especially newly empowered ones, can or should elect one of their own.
Refusing Calls to Unify
Ambitious and driven, the four major Hispanic candidates are refusing calls to unify to keep from splintering the Hispanic vote in the spindly district that snakes through Brooklyn, Queens and lower Manhattan.


Man Fatally Stabbed Outside Dance Club
Outside a midtown Manhattan club yesterday morning, one man was stabbed to death and two others were injured when fighting broke out between two groups of young people, the police said.
The man, who was not identified because his relatives had not been notified, was a Mexican immigrant in his 20's who had gone to the Roseland Ballroom to attend Mexican Night, said Sgt.
Edelle James, a police spokeswoman.


A Design That Taps Into the 'Informational City'
The financial trading firm of D. E. Shaw &amp; Company cannot be accused of asserting too high an urban profile.
Lodged on the top two floors of a skyscraper on West 45th Street in midtown Manhattan, the company's new offices are invisible from the street.
Inside, it is the city that fades from sight.
Though most of the windows command stunning skyline views, this vista is highly selective.
It offers no sign of the social disarray that the phrase "urban America" has conjured up in recent months.
Yet Steven Holl, who earlier this year received an award from the American Institute of Architects for his design of the Shaw offices, has something important to say about the links between offices and cities.
He shows that even an office interior can enlarge our picture of the social and economic forces at work in the city today.
Firms like D. E. Shaw are only partly located in New York.
They conduct their business in what Manuel Castells, a professor of planning at the University of California at Berkeley, calls the "informational city" -- the international network of electronic communications that keeps the global economy humming.
The "streets" of this city have no potholes.
They are paved not with asphalt but with telephone lines and radio waves that stretch between cities and leap across national borders.
Plugged into this grid by faxes and modems, executives may have stronger economic and social ties to offices halfway around the world than to crumbling communities on their doorsteps.


Sue Levy and Camm Sublette
Sue Levy, a daughter of Frank Levy of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Myra Levy, was married yesterday at Sequoia National Park, Calif., to Camm Sublette, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Sublette of Bradenton, Fla.
Judge Glade Roper of the municipal court of Porterville, Calif., performed the ceremony atop Dome Rock.
Mrs.
Sublette, 31 years old, graduated from Pennsylvania State University and is a computer designer in Hermosa Beach, Calif.
Her father owns the J. S. &amp; M. Company, a textile brokerage in New York.


Assistant District Attorney's Forced Resignation Tied to Drug Case
An assistant district attorney in Brooklyn was forced to resign last month after Federal prosecutors said she made more than routine inquiries into a Federal drug investigation targeting a friend, senior law enforcement officials said yesterday.
The attorney, Pamela D. Hayes, resigned as chief of the sex crimes bureau in the Brooklyn District Attorney's office on July 14 because of allegations that she tried to "use her influence" in a drug investigation by the United States Attorney in Manhattan, Otto G. Obermaier.
The investigation involved a close friend of hers, the officials said.


Cup Is Now Just a Memory, but Match Racing Isn't
It has been three months since Paul Cayard, the skipper for Il Moro di Venezia yachting syndicate of Italy, failed to win the America's Cup from Bill Koch's America
team. But Cayard hasn't stopped sailing since then, nor is he through winning races.
"I'm pretty practiced up and tuned up with the actual procedures and details of match racing," Cayard said during a telephone interview from San Diego.
"But on the other hand, I find myself less motivated than in the past, partly because nothing seems as important as the America's Cup, and partly, because I'm still tired."


Moscow's Noble Ruins
OLD MOSCOW IS FALLING APART.
ON STREET after winding street, tokens of prerevolutionary elegance -- pastel 19th-century mansions, turn-of-the-century apartment buildings with high windows and rounded corners, old-fashioned shops -- are crumbling, their paint peeling, walls cracking, windows missing.
Some have been gutted by fire, vandals or both.
Legal confusion, economic uncertainty, inflation, corruption and a severe cash shortage are among the reasons for the pitiful state of Moscow's old buildings, those that survived seven decades of ruthless Communist urban planning.
Old Moscow has yet to benefit from the collapse of Communism even though Western investors and Russian entrepreneurs are engaged in an unruly, often unseemly, scramble for its real estate.
So far, hopes for large-scale renovation have been lost amid a string of broken leases and broken promises.


Jacalyn M. Binder, Ira B. Polikoff
Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard A. Binder of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jacalyn Michel Binder, to Ira Bernard Polikoff, a son of Gerald Polikoff of Woodmere, L.I., and the late Joan Polikoff.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Binder, 27 years old, is an account executive for Omega Fashions, a belt manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the president of Binder Industries Inc., a textile company in New York.
Her mother, Carol Binder, teaches English at the Berlitz Language Center in White Plains.


Shuddering at Camp Reports, Israel Plans Aid
Reports of atrocities in detention centers set up in what was once Yugoslavia have struck a sensitive nerve in Israel, evoking memories of Nazi concentration camps and leading many people to say that their country has a special moral obligation to send help.
On Wednesday, the Israeli Parliament met specifically to discuss the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres announced that Israel would supply food and medical assistance to the war-torn region.


Little Takes the Place of Fresh Summer Corn
THE fresh corn season is now in full swing.
Farms in the region are selling white, golden and mixtures of white and yellow corn at their stands, at country markets and even in some supermarkets.
With corn the simplest is often the best.
Quickly cook the shucked ears in a pot of boiling water for a minute or just until the water returns to the boil after the corn has been added, then drain it and serve with butter, salt and pepper.
Additions of sugar, milk or other ingredients to the water do nothing to enhance the corn because it does not cook long enough to pick up these flavors.
The freshest summer corn on the cob can be enjoyed plain, without any of the usual trappings of butter and salt.
Yet despite concerns about fat and sodium it seems that when it comes to fresh corn on the cob, indulging in a gloss of butter and sprinkling of salt on the kernels is irresistible.


Maureen Donnelly, Dan Ingram
Maureen Donnelly, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William A. Donnelly of Lake Worth, Fla., was married Wednesday to Dan Ingram, a son of Dorothy T. Ingram of Palm Harbor, Fla., and the late John H. Ingram.
Jack Turret, a retired justice of the New York State Supreme Court, officiated at the Skylounge in the Colonnade in New York.
Ms.
Donnelly, who is keeping her name, graduated summa cum laude from St.
Cloud State University.
She is an actress in New York and the national vice president of the Screen Actors Guild.
Her father is a professor emeritus of journalism at the State University of New York College at Buffalo.
Her mother, Marion K. Donnelly, retired as a vocational rehabilitation counselor for New York State.


Water, Water, Everywhere
THE GREAT DEEP
The Sea and Its Thresholds.
By James Hamilton-Paterson.
Illustrated. 300 pp.
New York: Random House. $23.


No Headline
I learned what my son was up against to be a teen-ager on the streets of Los Angeles.
I didn't know how bad it was. -- ERIC FLEMING, whose son was killed in the riots.  [ 26:1. ]


Streetscapes: 125-139 West 93d Street; Housing Authority Gets A+ for Effort
THE architectural pilgrim will find unlikely exhilaration in a trip up to a New York City Housing Authority project, the nine 1897 rowhouses at 125-139 West 93d Street.
The agency has a track record for modest housing of the most utilitarian finish and intent -- institutional green paint, fortified steel doors and scratched plexiglass windows, all constituent elements of bare brick boxes.
But it has turned what could have been a ruthless modernization into a sensitive near-restoration, as the red brick rowhouses are carefully cleaned and their slate mansards and damaged brownstone are repaired.


WHY PARIS WORKS
According to your article, Paris "works" because it receives lavish subsidies from the French Government and because it excludes the poor, who are let into the city only to sweep its streets (by hand!) and to collect its garbage.
So what else is new?
Have you been to Beverly Hills, Palm Beach or similar affluent enclaves lately?
Have you noticed their immaculate streets, beautiful landscaping and low crime rate?
Even in our much maligned Manhattan, Park Avenue and Sutton Place compare favorably with any Parisian boulevard.
The article made passing reference to ordinary French workers and immigrants who live in the stark high-rise squalor of the suburbs.
Their growing problems of drugs, crime and unemployment sound a lot like those of our American cities.
The only difference is that the French have ghettoized their suburbs instead of their cities.


Ashford Hands Off And Then Signs Off
The hand of experience grabbed for the arm of youth, just to be certain.
Evelyn Ashford, at age 35, had seen too many bad relay handoffs.
A baton can slip, it can slide, and a race is lost.
An Olympic experience is sabotaged.


Corrections
A report in the Political Notes column last Sunday about fund raising for Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican mayoral candidate in New York City, misidentified one of his supporters, David Dobson.
He is vice chairman of the Italian chapter of Republicans Abroad.


Hanoi Official Sees M.I.A. Searches as Spying
Charging that the United States is making "excessive" demands in its search for servicemen still unaccounted for from the Vietnam War, Hanoi's chief delegate to the United Nations said yesterday that the Vietnamese had begun to fear that American inspections of prisons and archives are cloaks for espionage.
"It seems that the intention of the U.S. side is not only seeking M.I.A. information, but also seeking something else -- for example, information on the internal situation of Vietnam, state secrets of Vietnam," said Trinh Xuan Lang, Hanoi's top envoy in the United States in the absence of diplomatic relations.


A Style of Music And a Style of Life
A letter to the New Jersey editor, entitled "Community Bands and Community Spirit" (July 26), describes nostalgically the pleasant atmosphere at band concerts in turn-of-the century Wisconsin.
The writer, living in Eatontown, N.J., seems to think the community band is a thing of the past.
Not so; band concerts abound in New Jersey.
In Bergen County this summer, community bands in Teaneck, Upper Saddle River, Ridgewood, Rutherford, Mahwah and Waldwick are busy giving park concerts.
The repertory includes everything from old warhorses like von Suppe's "Poet and Peasant" to excerpts from the musical "Les Miserables."


It All Began With Ardor and Persistence
THE place is Toronto.
The time is the 1950's.
A long-suffering Mary puts up with Jacob, a blowhard and a loser, who throws their son, Ben, out of the house.
The play is "Leaving Home."
Returning years later for the funeral of an aunt, Ben recalls Jacob's death.
In flashback, a thorny, never-to-be-resolved father-son relationship is relived.
The play is "Of the Fields, Lately."


With Speed to Burn, U.S. Wins 3 Relays
Capping the last big day of the Olympic track and field meet, the United States left the world one more calling card of speed.
The American teams won three of the four relays, with both men's teams blasting away world records.
The three gold medals gave the United States 12 golds and 30 medals over all in track and field here-- the most ever in a non-boycotted Olympics since 1956, and the same totals as the Unified Team and Germany combined, with one event left, the men's marathon on Sunday.
The victory in the men's 400-meter relay also gave Carl Lewis, who ran a sensational and talkative anchor leg, his eighth gold medal in three Olympics and ninth medal over all.
The women's victory in the 400 presented the 35-year-old Evelyn Ashford with her fourth gold in three Olympics.


Anne Southworth, David R. Marsh
Anne Dwight Southworth, a daughter of Hamilton and Eleanor Southworth of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
David Richard Marsh, the son of Leonard and Ann Marsh of Lincoln, Lincolnshire, England.
The Rev.
Robert W. Estill performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Atonement in Quogue, L.I.
Mrs.
Marsh, 28 years old, graduated cum laude from Williams College and received a master's degree in forest science from Yale University, where she is a Ph.D. candidate in ecology.
Her father is a senior technical officer at Chemical Bank in New York, where the bride's late grandfather, James H. M. Ewart, was a senior vice president.
Her mother is alumnae affairs coordinator at the Chapin School in New York.
Mrs.
Marsh is also a granddaughter of Dr.
Hamilton Southworth, a former president of the medical board at Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital.


A Caution on Rationing Health Care . . . And Three Points to Focus On
To the Editor:
Dr.
Schwartz indicated that cost containment just won't work in a world of medical breakthroughs.
But rationing medical technology is no magic bullet in bringing down costs.
If we ration a technology after it is developed, we will be guilty of a form of elitism that is contrary to the core values of this country.
If we ration technology by freezing its development, we will deprive patients of their hope for a better life -- even for life itself.
Here are three suggestions for putting medical technology into proper focus.


Portugual
To the Editor: In the article "Portugal's Great Plains" by D. Keith Mano(July 5), Mr.
Mano advises that guidebooks should be taken because the Portuguese are not "considerate enough to provide a museum label in English."


Cagey Soprano


Carolyn Speidel, Robert Denholm
Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Speidel of La Jolla, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Carolyn Theresa Speidel, to Robert Keith Denholm, a son of Alyn Denholm of Stirling, Scotland, and the late Robert F. Denholm.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Speidel, 30 years old, is a freelance travel writer in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of Southern California.
Her father is the president of Pelagos Corporation, an ocean engineering and survey company in San Diego.


Times Square Plan Is on Hold, but Meter Is Still Running
Although state and city officials are prepared to postpone indefinitely construction of the four Times Square Center office towers, interest continues to grow on the multimillion-dollar loan that the public will eventually have to repay to the developers for site acquisition costs.
Officials are seeking to stop the clock on the interest obligation to the developers, Park Tower Realty and the Prudential Insurance Company of America.
Otherwise, the public might be left owing tens of millions of dollars in interest alone, in addition to at least $153 million for condemnation awards and tenant settlements.


North American Trade Talks Focus on Car Parts
The free-trade talks among the United States, Canada and Mexico dragged on today, as negotiators continued to sort through and resolve the manytechnical details of a North American free-trade agreement.
During the 11th consecutive day of the talks, negotiators focused on how to count the North American components of cars and trucks.
Vehicles with three-fifths of their parts produced in North America will qualify for duty-free treatment under the new agreement.


Margaret Sanger, Eugenicist
To the Editor:
In that Ellen Chesler is apparently quite devoted to Margaret Sanger, starting with the title of her biography, "Woman of Valor," it is not surprising that your reviewer, Daniel J. Kevles (June 28), uses but a few sentences to dismiss the contention that Sanger was seriously involved with the eugenicists of her day.
For insight and details, I suggest "The Legacy of Malthus," by Allan Chase.
For all her ingenuity in the field of birth control, for which she deserves proper credit, and for all her understanding of the role of choice in a woman's life when it came to abortion, Sanger's great failing as a eugenicist did her in.


Clammers and A.T.&amp;T. Battle Under the Sea and in the Courts
A battle is underway on the ocean floor and in the courts between fishermen who drag sea clams and quahogs out of the sand and companies that have been stringing telegraph and telephone cables to Europe for more than a century.
Despite the availability of charts showing the location of the cables, dredges of clammers occasionally snag them, resulting in the loss of expensive equipment.
The cables involved are usually old, unused lines that were laid before the emergence of the sea clam industry after World War II, cables that fishermen say have often drifted miles from their charted positions.


Rules Wouldn't Have Stopped B.C.C.I.; Clifford and Truman
To the Editor:
"Indictment Charges Clifford Took Bribes" (front page, July 30) reports on criminal charges filed against Clark M. Clifford, former Secretary of Defense, in the Bank of Credit and Commerce International case.
You credit Mr.
Clifford repeatedly for Harry S. Truman's election success over Thomas E. Dewey in 1948.
The architect and mastermind of that campaign was Truman himself.


Diane Janofsky, Gavin Rooney Jr.
Diane Gayle Janofsky, an associate in the Newark law firm of McCarter &amp; English, was married in Tarrytown, N.Y., yesterday to Gavin John Rooney Jr., an associate with the law firm of Lowenstein, Sandler, Kohl, Fisher &amp; BoylRooney an in Roseland, N.J.
Judge William R. Crosbie of Tarrytown Town Court officiated at Tappan Hill.
Mrs.
Rooney, 25 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton.
The bride received a law degree from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Paul Janofsky of the Bronx and Carmen Landry of Hollywood, Fla.
Her father is a clerk for the United States Postal Service in Manhattan.
She is a stepdaughter of Gregory Landry of Hollywood.


Bush's Plan Puts Stress On Harried U.N. Troops
By proposing that the United Nations authorize the use of force to keep relief supplies flowing into Bosnia, President Bush is putting new demands on the United Nations military command here at a time when its relations with the Bosnian Government are strained to the breaking point.
Alija Izetbegovic, the Bosnian President, said his people appreciated the airlift of food and medicine, which resumed today after a 72-hour suspension.
But he expressed some reservations about the United Nations approach to the struggle in Bosnia.


POSTINGS: Century Clubhouse; A Dazzling Cleansing
Shrouds of grime darken many New York City landmarks and have obscured for generations the vibrancy of the original architectural compositions and materials.
When structures like Trinity Church emerge from cleaning, it is almost as if whole new buildings stand in their place.
Today, another landmark is coming into view: the 101-year-old Century Association clubhouse at 7 West 43d Street, a work in the Renaissance style by McKim, Mead &amp; White.
A monochromatic gray blanket is giving way to a cream-colored facade so dazzling that it looks as if it has been bathed in spotlights.


Serbs Prepare for Invasion of 'Republic' in Bosnia
Twenty-foot surface-to-surface missiles on portable launchers point menacingly at Croatia from a military base outside this garrison town, the capital of the Krajina autonomous region of the so-called Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Overhead, helicopters and several dozen jet fighters rip through the balmy summer air, presumably heading to targets on the nearby front.
Like the missiles, the helicopters and airplanes were gifts from the National Yugoslav Army.


SURFACING
STATUS SYMBOL --
Hermes "friendship" bracelet:
What certain women give to their nearest and dearest.


Horse Destroyed After Spill
Two jockeys were slightly injured and one horse had to be destroyed at the Del Mar race track in California on Friday.


Pillow Talk
WHEN two people agree to have sex, what do they have to reveal to each other?
That question, basically, was the point of contention between Robin Williams and Michelle Tish Carter, who in 1986 sued the actor and comedian for $6.2 million.
She claimed that he did not tell her he was infected with the herpes simplex virus before he embarked on a sexual relationship with her in the mid-1980's, during which, she said, he transmitted the virus to her.


Digging Into History on Vacation
INDIANA JONES was the only archeologist Elizabeth A. Flesche had ever heard of, before she signed up to work on the excavation of an Indian settlement on the banks of the Housatonic River in New Milford.
After spending a week of her summer vacation squatting in the rich alluvial soil, dusting off pot shards and stone chips, Ms.
Flesche, a first-grade teacher from Colorado, has a slightly different view of the profession.
Instead of a quest for a Holy Grail, she was seeking a post mold, a round and barely recognizable discoloration of the soil indicating a post, once used to support a house or fence, had rotted away.


Kosar Establishes Scholarships
When a highly paid professional quarterback starts throwing his money around, it can have a powerful impact.
So when the word got around that Cleveland Browns quarterback BERNIE KOSAR was going to establish some scholarships at Cleveland State University, college officials could be forgiven if dollar signs started dancing in their eyes.
By that measure, however, Kosar's charity pass fell a bit short.
He announced that he would give two $2,500 scholarships to Cleveland public school students attending the local university.


KEEPING CONTROL
The story Hart tells reveals a great deal about why so many people are opposed to legalized abortion on demand.
Hart says, "I conceived a child I knew I couldn't keep." It might be fairer to say that she
wouldn't
keep, or did not want to keep, the child.


Home, Home On the Range
Oprah Winfrey has hired Robert A. M. Stern, the New York architect known for building grand seaside cottages in the Hamptons, to design a house in Telluride, Colo., a person close to the project said.
Last winter, the Chicago-based talk-show host paid $3 million for an 85-acre ranch in the fancy ski resort, whose part-time residents include Oliver Stone and Sylvester Stallone.
She also bought a log-and-stone house nearby for $1.3 million, to be used for guests.


In a World of Instant Copies, Who Pays for Original Work?
THERE are yawning potholes on the road to the information age.
Computer executives, publishers, artists and authors are trying to reconcile 21st-century computer technology with 19th-century laws protecting intellectual property.


New &amp; Noteworthy
MARIETTE IN ECSTASY, by Ron Hansen. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Mariette Baptiste, a young postulant in a contemplative convent at the turn of the century, experiences religious passion so intense that it threatens as much as it fascinates.
"The greatest beauty -- and the fundamental success -- of this gripping novel is that its author has managed to find a voice that is entirely at the service of its strange and elusive subject," our reviewer, Patricia Hampl, said last year.
REFLECTIONS OF AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION BABY, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $12.) Stephen L. Carter, a professor at Yale Law School, argues that affirmative action programs sometimes hurt the very individuals they mean to help.
Drawing from his personal experience, he notes that blacks risk being treated as if they obtained their successes through favoritism rather than merit.
He also finds troubling the idea of upholding racial distinctions in the ultimate search to eliminate them.
" 'Reflections of an Affirmative Action Baby' is a resolutely thoughtful book that will leave every reader better informed," David J. Garrow said in The Book Review last year.


States Get Reckless With Pension Funds
To the Editor:
You report July 22 that unions representing state and local government workers in New Jersey are challenging a move to help balance the budget by allowing the state to make lower payments to public employee pension funds.
As a retired professor from Southern Illinois University with 28 years of credit in the Illinois university employees pension fund, I face, along with thousands of others, the continued probability that our system will be completely without funds within five years.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-22  BUSH CONFERS ON BOSNIA


F.D.A. Steps Up Effort to Control Vitamin Claims
In Texas, state health inspectors raided health food stores across the state in May and, as startled customers and bystanders watched in amazement, removed hundreds of products, including vitamin C, aloe vera products and herbal teas.
In Kent, Wash., armed agents of the United States Food and Drug Administration burst into the Tahoma Clinic, where practitioners of alternative medicine used injections of vitamins, minerals and amino acids to treat a variety of ailments.


Motor Homes' Floating Base
Motor home and travel trailer owners can take their R.V.'s on a cruise along the Mississippi and other Southern waterways aboard specially equipped barges.
The company that runs these trips through the bayous of southern Louisiana and along the Tennessee River is adding more barges for the fall-to-spring season starting next month.
R.V. owners can sit back while a tugboat captain steers a floating campground made up of three 250 by 50 foot barges operated by R.V.
River Charters of New Orleans.
The three new barges are being equipped to provide deck space for R.V's., and fresh water, electricity and sewage service as well as on-board parties and cookouts.
Each of the 39 R.V.'s on a trio of barges gets a parking space 16 feet wide and 40 feet long, room enough for passengers to lay carpet outside their doors and pull out their awnings.
The rigs become private staterooms.
Pets can go along, too.


Q and A
Studying Russian in Russia


Emotional Toll of the Family That Heals Together
Although Mario Andretti will be physically whole when he claims Indy-car racing's longevity record today in Cleveland, there is still a part of him that has not recovered -- emotionally or mentally -- from that accident-filled day last May in Indianapolis.
Andretti's broken toes, suffered in a crash during the Indy 500 on May 24, have long since healed enough for him to resume racing, and today he will break A. J. Foyt's career record by starting his 370th Indy-car race.


More Seeds Of Excess
To the Editor:
As a person able to remember the 1960's, I recall how "cool" I thought drugs and sexual permissiveness were.
While some really positive attitude changes resulted from that exhilarating decade, the aftereffects of the excesses are evidenced by the current drug scourge and the horrible disease AIDS, both of which are eating away at the roots of our society.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
127.50
127.15
136.55
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4665
1.4745
1.7280
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1840
1.1841
1.1468
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9307
1.9275
1.6945
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$351.00
$357.50
$358.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


BEST SELLERS: August 9, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman chained to a bedpost after her husband has a heart attack.
2
2
11
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
3
3
22
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
4
8
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
5
5
7
SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $22.) Continuing the story of the crowd that frequents an ultrachic Beverly Hills store. (LP)
6
6
4
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $20.) A 90-year-old South Carolina woman recalls what she saw while becoming the doyenne of a Maine summer retreat.
7
14
5
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Random House, $21.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
8
12
4
EYE OF THE STORM, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) An American is hired by the British to thwart an Iraqi agent's attempt to kill Margaret Thatcher during the gulf war.
9
7
10
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) An insane Jedi threatens Luke Skywalker in the second volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
10
8
3
IMZADI, by Peter David. (Pocket, $20.) The U.S.S.
Enterprise's Comdr.
William Riker discovers a new form of love in a "Star Trek" adventure.
11
9
13
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones. (LP)
12
10
12
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) On a mission to Africa, Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
13
13
16
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
14
11
120
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
15
7
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
6
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
2
2
11
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
3
3
8
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
4
9
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses the environment.
5
5
7
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who created Wal-Mart.
6
7
4
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
7
6
6
A BRILLIANT MADNESS, by Patty Duke and Gloria Hochman. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress talks about living with manic-depressive illness.
8 *
15
14
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
9
1
THE LAST TSAR, by Edvard Radzinsky. (Doubleday, $25.) The life of Nicholas II and his family, and their assassination in 1918; based in part on newly available material.
10 *
11
28
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
11
14
13
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How powerful monied interests dominate the Government.
12 *
13
8
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $20.) Essays on the pleasures of high living.
13
9
4
THE HAPPY ISLES OF OCEANIA, by Paul Theroux. (Putnam, $24.95.) An 18-month exploration of the South Pacific in a kayak.
14 *
8
3
DIANA: A PRINCESS AND HER TROUBLED MARRIAGE, by Nicholas Davies. (Birch Lane/ Carol, $21.95.) A life of the Princess of Wales.
15
12
12
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) The first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
16 *
10
11
DIANA IN PRIVATE, by Lady Colin Campbell. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A life of the Princess of Wales.
17 *
35
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist describes a war against women's rights.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) The head of the Children's Defense Fund offers rules to live by for her own children and others'.
2
1
25
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
3 *
2
36
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
4
3
4
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
5
4
35
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
OSKAR KOKOSCHKA LETTERS: 1905-1976, selected by Olda Kokoschka and Alfred Marnau. (Thames and Hudson, $40.) The great Expressionist shows himself an uninhibited and gifted writer, much concerned with the state of civilization; also a profound egotist, not less concerned with his love life.
THE SELECTED LETTERS OF BERTRAND RUSSELL.
Volume One: The Private Years, 1884-1914, edited by Nicholas Griffin. (Houghton Mifflin, $35.) Russell shines here first as lover (especially of Lady Ottoline Morrell), only secondarily as the mathematical philosopher and logician.
THE RISE OF GOSPEL BLUES: The Music of Thomas Andrew Dorsey in the Urban Church, by Michael W. Harris. (Oxford University, $29.95.) How a preacher's son transported blues rhythms and showmanship into the black churches in the 1930's.
EVENING CHATS IN BEIJING: Probing China's Predicament, by Perry Link. (Norton, $24.95.) A cheerless survey of today's China as seen in conversation with its despairing intellectuals.
TURNING BACK THE SUN, by Colin Thubron. (Edward Burlingame/HarperCollins, $20.) Racism, exile, memory and lost identity are the running themes in this thoughtful novel, set in a nameless outback where a disease is turning white people brown.
AFTER MOONDOG, by Jane Shapiro. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $22.95.) A first novel about a smart, young New Jersey couple who end their marriage and find that without it, nothing coheres.
DOWN FROM TROY: A Doctor Comes of Age, by Richard Selzer. (Morrow, $20.) An arresting, idiosyncratic, lyrical memoir of Troy, N.Y., by a man whose parents battled for his soul, one wanting a doctor, the other an artist; both got what they wanted.


A Cover-Up on Iraq?
President Bush's re-election effort is still haunted by criticism of steps taken by his Administration to shore up President Saddam Hussein before Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990.
Documents and testimony offer a complex picture of which accusations in the affair may involve criminal violations.
Article, page 18.


Law Would Classify Drunken Boating as a Crime
EACH boating season thousands of pleasure boats worth millions of dollars cruise -- or bump along -- the waterways of Long Island.
There could be fewer bumps as a result of a measure awaiting Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's signature.
The measure would increase the powers of state and local officers to restrict intoxicated boat operators.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LA BELLA MAGELLONA AND THE LITTLE CAVALIER
Written and illustrated by Oscar de Mejo.
Unpaged.
New York: Philomel Books. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)
OSCAR DE MEJO'S ABC
Written and illustrated by Oscar de Mejo.
Unpaged.
New York: A Laura Geringer Book/ HarperCollins Publishers. $17. (All ages)
OSCAR DE MEJO
The Naive Surrealist.
By Oscar de Mejo and Robert C. Morgan.
Illustrated by Oscar de Mejo. 143 pp.
New York: Nahan Galleries/Harry N. Abrams Inc. $49.50.


Mad About The Hat
Dr.
Seuss's "The Cat in the Hat" is to today's hat makers what Franz Lehar's "The Merry Widow" was to milliners of 1910.
Some of the amazing hats being worn these days in Greenwich Village, with almost yard-high crowns, resemble Dr.
Seuss's stovepipe creation.
These lightweight cotton creations with wired brims are sold at street fairs and Village boutiques.
Another chapter of the tall hat tale is the explosion of the inflated crowns that Reggae musicians often wear at a capricious angle at the back of the head.
Made of natural straw braid, these hats were a standout at Caribbean music concerts held this summer in Central Park's Summerstage series.


A Gallery By Another Name
To the Editor:
As director of the gallery called Daedalus Ancient Art, I would like to clarify a point in Rita Reif's article on our recent exhibition "Prehistoric Eskimo Ivories"  [ "Mystical Eskimo Antiquities and the Tales They Tell," July 26 ] .


Numbers Are No Problem For Pollsters. Words Are.
AFTER nearly 60 years of modern opinion polling, pollsters have shown that 1,000 carefully chosen Americans can speak for the country, that the answers they give will be the same as if every American could be polled -- plus or minus three percentage points.
As George Gallup used to point out, an accurate blood test requires only a few drops of blood.
Choosing those 1,000 is the science of polling, but framing the questions and interpreting the results are the arts of the game.
And pollsters are never in perfect agreement on how to practice those arts.


Megan Healey, John Hagerty
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Healey of New Vernon, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Megan Ruane Healey, to John Coleman Hagerty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry C. Hagerty Jr. of Rye, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Healey, 23 years old, is a special-events coordinator for Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Hobart and William Smith College.
Her father is a partner in Goldman, Sachs and a former Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Domestic Finance.
Her mother is a psychologist in Morristown, N.J.


Opposition Grows to Plan for Westbury Drive-In
A PROPOSAL to demolish the Westbury Drive-In Theater and redevelop the 24-acre site with a 14-screen movie complex and a wholesale store is meeting strong opposition from neighboring residents.
An environmental hearing last month drew more than 900 residentsconcerned over safety, overdevelopment, increased traffic and air pollution.


Mandela Tests His Mandate With a Strike
It was no Prague or Leipzig.
The 50,000 blacks who followed Nelson Mandela to the Union Buildings in Pretoria, South Africa, last week had no immediate intention of toppling the Government at work inside.
But the march on the seat of white minority rule, and the two-day general strike that preceded it, probably hastened the day when South African blacks can lay claim to the building.
When negotiations on South Africa's political future bogged down in May, it was, in a sense, because they were so near success.
Both sides flinched before the frightening reality of a deal: Whites balked at surrendering power; blacks, at accepting it with all the encumbrances designed to protect minority interests.
Mr.
Mandela, in particular, feared that he had nearly been lured into a bargain that exceeded the mandate from his people.


Martha Beyer, Albert Lovett Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Beyer of HoHoKus, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha A. Beyer, to Albert B. Lovett Jr., the son of Eleanor Lovett of Ridgewood, N.J., and the late Mr.
Lovett.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Beyer, 34 years old, is the executive assistant at Ballantine, Del Rey, Fawcett, Ivy, a publishing company in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Fairleigh Dickinson University.
Her father, now retired, was the president of P. R. Dreyer, a cosmetic manufacturing company in New York.


How to Go From All Thumbs to Green
MANY gardeners believe they cannot grow anything.
These gardeners feel that they have the wrong touch, that perhaps they are all thumbs when it comes to growing things, and so they usually give up after several efforts fail.
But just as many gardeners keep trying.
Granted, gardening does not have a fixed set of rules since there are so many variables.
And there is no one way to grow anything.
What works for one gardener may not work for another.
Gardeners share their hits as well as their misses.


ABOUT LONG ISLAND
WHAT Horatio Alger could have done with Pat Struk.
Although she wasn't quite in rags when her story started and selling tomatoes may not qualify as riches in today's society, Ms.
Struk's rise to capitalistic fame would have made great fodder for an Alger success tale.
Hers is the American Dream -- farm-stand style.
"I started with a card table in front of the house," said Ms.
Struk, of Amagansett.


Jolie's Halo Wins Iselin As Strike the Gold Is 4th
Jolie's Halo surged to victory in the $500,000 Philip H. Iselin Handicap at Monmouth Park today, marking his return to prominence in the series that first made him a racing star.
The 5-year-old defeated Out of Place by a head in a driving finish, winning the eighth of the nine legs in the American Championship Racing Series.
Jolie's Halo won the Donn Handicap at Gulfstream Park, the inaugural race of the series, in February 1991.
Strike the Gold, who finished fourth, clinched this year's $750,000 first-place series bonus.
He rallied from last place but was never a threat, finishing 2 1/2 lengths behind the leader.
Fly So Free, the second favorite, faded to ninth in a field of 11. 'Ran Very Game'
Jolie's Halo was making only his second start since returning in July from a layoff of more than seven months.
He remained close to the lead throughout the mile and an eighth.
At the head of the stretch he took command from Loach -- Strike the Gold's stablemate -- and then went all out to win by a head over Out of Place.
The winning time, 1:464/5 , equaled the track record for the distance.
Valley Crossing, a 78-1 shot, rallied to finish third, a length behind.
"My horse ran very game," said the winning jockey, Edgar Prado, a Peruvian who rides regularly in Maryland.
"He was sitting pretty good, and when I asked him to run he put in a big run."
Jolie's Halo paid $10.80 for $2 to win.
Robert Camac, his trainer, said he may run in the $1 million Pacific Classic, the final leg of the series, on Aug. 30 at Del Mar.
Nick Zito, Strike the Gold's trainer, does not plan to enter him at Del Mar because the only horse who could catch him for the bonus, Best Pal, is injured and will not run.
Strike the Gold accumulated enough points today to prevent any horse other than Best Pal from winning the bonus.
Zito said the Monmouth surface was "ridiculously fast" and compromised the chances of his stretch-running colt.
Later in the afternoon, Gilded Time, a 2-year-old making his second start, set a track record of 1:074/5 for six furlongs in winning the $200,000 Sapling Stakes.


Lauren Siegler, Eric Muhlheim
Lauren Siegler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Siegler of White Plains, was married yesterday in the Princeton University Chapel to Eric Muhlheim, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilson Muhlheim of Eugene, Ore.
Cantor Raymond Smolover performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Muhlheim, 24 years old, is a Ph.D. candidate in clinical psychology at Rutgers University.
She and her husband both graduated cum laude from Princeton University.
Her father is a partner in Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan, a New York law firm.


Candlewood Offers Revival of 'Mame'
FUNNY how Auntie Mame, the very model of 1920's Bohemian free thinking, is commonly played with more restraint than flamboyance.
Such largesse and wit that defined the performance of Rosalind Russell, the role's originator, remains matchless.
Then the great Beatrice Lillie, one of Miss Russell's replacements in the play, set a standard that amounts to an impossible dream.
Although irrepressible and zany are the most frequently used descriptions for Patrick Dennis's fictional character based on his real aunt, Marion Tanner, who's to say that there is a real Mame type.
But however she is played, the woman who brings up and forgets to send her orphaned nephew to a proper school and starts a home for unwed mothers, must exude inimitability.
That quality is not guaranteed by casting once-upon-a-time stars with theoretical box office (read curiosity) value -- and casting them out there to be outrageous.


At Goodyear, a Turnaround of Spirits as Well as Profits
The quarterly meeting that Stanley C. Gault conducted with his staff at the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company two weeks ago resembled a pep rally before a home team's departure for the big game.
The auditorium at Goodyear's headquarters here was nearly filled with 1,300 people -- senior managers but also secretaries, plant supervisors and accountants.
Updating the audience on the latest company developments, Mr.
Gault never missed an opportunity to emphasize the need for teamwork and the importance of everyone's contributing.
"The way he talks about the company and the role we play, it just makes you feel good all over," said Barbara S. Murphy, the manager of the toll-free telephone line that fields questions and complaints about Goodyear products.


WHY PARIS WORKS
You Americans are a funny lot, at least to us foreigners.
Of course sweeping streets takes money and an army of dedicated street cleaners.
So does recycling, and it takes effort not to throw all your travel garbage out of the car window -- but think of the improvement in the quality of life.
And cleanliness is hardly elitist!


Alison Mills, F. D. LeMaire
Alison Brooks Mills, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Slade Mills Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to F. Dominique LeMaire, a son of Jacques H. LeMaire of Poissy, France, and Francoise J. LeMaire of Chatou, France.
The Rev.
Robert Ficks 3d performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's Church in Washington, Conn.
Mrs.
LeMaire, 28 years old, graduated from Princeton University and Columbia University.
She is studying for a master's degree in pediatric nursing at Yale University.
Her father is the chairman of San Martin Investments Inc. in New York.
Her mother, Phyllis Mills, is a vice chairwoman of the New York Philharmonic and a trustee of the Mary Flagler Cary Charitable Trust in New York.


Fast Forward: The Return Of Vivier
Roger Vivier, the octogenarian shoe designer whose ingeniously shaped creations were favored by the Duchess of Windsor, Marlene Dietrich and Diana Vreeland, is making a comeback.
Next spring, Delman will produce Mr.
Vivier's first collection in eight years.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in the special Education Life section last Sunday about Talmud study among Jewish women quoted one student, Joyce Steg Kosowsky, incompletely.
Although she said she and some classmates were not always happy with Talmudic passages about women, she added, "As Orthodox women we accept the tradition."


The Executive Computer; Far Better Print Quality, but Is There a Market For It?
Desktop laser printers do a generally fine job of producing high-quality business documents that combine text, graphics and photos.
And now a new generation is emerging, promising even better-looking reports -- along with a new round of competition in the printer industry.
The new models are called 600-d.p.i. printers, because they generate 600 dots per inch both horizontally and vertically.
The current standard is 300 dots per inch, set when Apple Computer introduced the original Laser writer in 1985.


Longer Lines and Shorter Tempers
THE sign in the lobby in the headquarters of the State Division of Motor Vehicles in Trenton reads: "Dealing with Motor Vehicles may be your least favorite thing to do. We know that. . . . We know we're not perfect."
And that about sums up the circumstances of the beleaguered agency, whose problems and public image are as bad as they have ever been.
The lines of motorists waiting at Motor Vehicle service centers and inspection stations, it seems, have never been longer.
The reasons are clear enough.


Gurney's 'Fourth Wall' in Westport
ON stage at the Westport Country Playhouse, A. R. Gurney is evidently working through a what's-it-all-about career crisis, otherwise known as the fear of being irrelevant.
The play he's written is about what kind of play he should be writing -- the laid-back drawing room kind that he's known for, or the socially conscious, politically agitated, life-changing sort.
And he's called it "The Fourth Wall," a handy title that means, in conventional theater parlance, the audience.
Ultimately, he's trapped by his own ostensible ambivalence, though the real choice -- to avoid choosing, or if pressed, to choose both -- seems perfectly clear.


Peter Max Is Poised to Replay His 15 Minutes
Close your eyes and imagine a blank canvas filling with bright colors, fluid lines, delicate forms.
That, for the artist Peter Max, is pure creativity.
Now imagine an artist, brush heavy with color, moving with energetic dance steps before the canvas, filling the canvas with sweeping strokes.
That, for Mr.
Max, is creativity made manifest.


Theme Comes True: The Dream Team Captures the Gold
On the gold-medal stand tonight, in their corporate-sponsored suits with logos purposefully hidden, the multimillionaire professionals from the National Basketball Association were flanked by teams from tiny breakaway republics that could barely scrape together the funds necessary to attend.
To their right was the Croatian team it had just defeated for the gold medal, 117-85, in their bland, identification-less uniforms straight out of the 1950's.
To their left were the Lithuanians, jubilant bronze medalists after their 82-78 victory over the Unified Team, in their tie-dyed shirts and shorts that were paid for by a rock band, the Grateful Dead.


One Size Fits All? Not for Birds, Please
Pete Dunne's fine column on the growing of daughters and shore birds ("In the Natural State," July 19) again shows us wonders where human and nature meet.
The accompanying artwork tries to match, stacking human script around nature's birds, but say, aren't those the wrong birds?
Why a one-size-fits-all gullish sort of thing when we're talking of sanderlings, and dunlins outspeeding planes, and godwits, and curlews with recurved bills?
Must they be rarer on newspaper pages than on our shores?


Q and A
Removing Name on Lease  Question: I am a tenant in a rent-stabilized building.
Even though we have been divorced, the lease is still in both my name and my ex-wife's name.
She has given me legal possession of the lease through her attorney.
Can I now request that her name be removed from the lease? . . .
Robert Jones, Manhattan.
Answer: Yes, as long as your ex-wife's decision to give you sole possession of the lease is in writing.
In order to remove your wife's name from the lease, your landlord would need a court order or a written waiver in which she relinquishes her right to the lease.


Data Bank/August 9, 1992


Give Quayle Credit for Support of His Daughter's Decision
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen misses the point in "Suffer the Little Children" (column, July 26), her commentary about Vice President Quayle's statement that he would support his daughter in any choice she may make were she to become pregnant.


Reopening 'Ivan' Case Stirs the Israeli Psyche
No, Eliyahu Rosenberg says, he has no second thoughts.
Five years ago, he stood right in front of the defendant John Demjanjuk in an Israeli courtroom.
This, he said, is "Ivan the Terrible," the monstrous operator of the gas chamber at the Treblinka extermination camp in Poland, where 850,000 Jews were killed by the Nazis in 1942-43.


Michelle Bank and Lee David Stein
Joseph Bank of Manhasset, L.I., and Dr.
Caryl Bank Frisch of Merrick, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Michelle Bank, to Dr.
Lee David Stein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard N. Stein of Allentown, Pa.
A March 1993 wedding is planned.
Dr.
Bank, 28 years old, is a clinical psychologist at the Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow, L.I., where her fiance is a resident in radiology.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received her Ph.D. in clinical psychology from St.
John's University.
Her father is the president of Bank-Miller Company, a textiles concern in New York.
Her mother is a co-founder and the executive director of the Little Village School, a primary school for developmentally disabled children in Garden City, L.I.


Vibrancy to Vacancy: Remaking the Deuce
On 42d Street, near Seventh Avenue, Harry Kakoulides sits in his fast-food restaurant dreaming of Spartan kings and waiting for the sheriff.
"City, I don't have nothing to say, just 'Molon lave,' " said Mr.
Kakoulides, quoting the taunt that King Leonidas of Sparta and his 300 guards shouted at the invading Persian Army in 480 B.C.
"Come and take it."


One Step Ahead of the Nazis
THE JOURNEY
By Ida Fink.
Translated by Joanna Weschler and Francine Prose. 250 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $20.


Cross Colours
WHAT: On the surface, a popular, ultra def (translate as hip or cool or hep, depending on era of your youth) line of manufactured apparel with a decidedly black urban attitude.
It's L. L. Bean for L. L. Cool J.
Produced in natural fabrics, Cross Colours fashions are sold in an array of loosely worn, brightly colored, pan-gender T-shirts, button-down shirts, jeans, jackets, baseball caps and hats.


Japan vs. Lithuania
Two Olympians met on the athletic fields of Barcelona last week, but they weren't competing for medals.
Rather, they were there to see which of the national uniforms they had designed best captured the spirit of contemporary Japanese fashion.
Was it to be seen on the Japanese team, those prim images of propriety defined by Hanae Mori, the reigning Japanese fashion matron: walking Japanese flags in buttoned-down suits?


Conley Garners Another Honor
MIKE CONLEY, who won a gold medal in the Olympic triple jump, did almost as well when he returned to Fayetteville, Ark., where he is an assistant track coach at the University of Arkansas.
In a ceremony in the downtown square that is likely to be echoed over the next few weeks in medalist home towns all over the country, Conley was given a key to the city.
In accepting key and kudos, Conley proved modest.
"There are a lot of great athletes who never get a chance to wear a gold medal," he said.
"Out of 4 billion people in the world I'm sure there are a few who can really jump farther than me, but they haven't had the coaches or the support I've had."


Hers; The Gerbil Mystique
A FEW MONTHS AGO, my son got two male gerbils, little brown unnamed creatures who like to pile cedar shavings in the corners of their cage, chew on toilet paper tubes and leap into the air for no particular reason.
His friend has two female gerbils who like to do all the same stuff.


A Ban Without Bite
When the Republican Legislature repealed the ban on the sale and possession of military-style assault firearms that Gov.
Jim Florio and the Democratic Legislature imposed in 1990, they made several concessions to political reality, calling the repeal an "anti-crime" bill, including a provision for a "gun-free school zone" and continuing the ban on two of the better-known assault weapons, the AK-47 and the Uzi semiautomatic.
On the strength of that, the amended bill passed both houses last Monday by substantial margins, and Republican leaders said they had enough votes to override Governor Florio's promised veto.


Alison L. Gertz, Whose Infection Alerted Many to AIDS, Dies at 26
Alison L. Gertz, who contracted AIDS in a single encounter with a man at the age of 16 and drew international attention by telling her story as a warning to heterosexuals, women and teen-agers, died yesterday afternoon at her family's summer home in Westhampton Beach, L.I.
She was 26 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Her parents, Jerrold and Carol Gertz, said she died of AIDS.


WHY PARIS WORKS
Yes, well-financed Paris works splendidly for the able-bodied, but, unfortunately, not so well for the disabled.
It has no public transportation for the handicapped.
Paris's Metro lacks stations accessible to the handicapped, and not a single of its hundreds of buses has a wheelchair lift.


Iraq Policy Still Bedevils Bush as Congress Asks: Were Crimes Committed?
The players in this complex tale include the man accused of masterminding what may be the biggest bank fraud in history, a bulldog Congressman who seems determined to prove that the President's top aides engaged in a vast cover-up, and a beleaguered President who cannot understand why the issue will not go away.
As President Bush's re-election campaign shifts into high gear, it continues to be haunted by the dispute over United States policy toward Iraq before it invaded Kuwait in August 1990.
The invasion led to the Persian Gulf war.


A Trilogy for Clytemnestra, the Feminist
While Clytemnestra turns up in a handful of Greek tragedies, no trilogy was ever devoted to her ill fortunes.
None that we know of, at any rate -- ancient Greek drama having come down to us in a terribly fragmented state.
Picking among the splendid ruins of what has survived, however, the director Garland Wright has pieced together a forceful version of her saga for the Guthrie Theater.
He's repaired to Euripides' "Iphigenia in Aulis" for the first part of his two-part endeavor, which is being performed through Aug. 30.
The second part is made up of Aeschylus' "Agamemnon," followed by Sophocles' "Electra." All three have been drastically pruned. ("Agamemnon," the shortest, now runs a scant 57 minutes; "Iphigenia" is the longest at 90 minutes.) Mr.
Wright wants no distractions, no digressions.
This is to be primarily a story of women -- Clytemnestra (Isabell Monk) and the three daughters, Iphigenia, Electra and Chrysothemis, who figure in her destruction.


A Caution on Rationing Health Care . . .
To the Editor:
In "The Hard Choices in Health Care" (Forum, July 19), Dr.
William B. Schwartz points out that the tremendous advances in medical technology have become very expensive, to the point of becoming unaffordable in many cases, and raises the specter of rationing.
Although I agree that a form of rationing may eventually become necessary, I think Dr.
Schwartz has overlooked some major opportunities to save money in our health care system.


Ministry Turns Sound Into Fury
No matter how well Ministry plays tonight when the 1992 Lollapalooza tour comes to Jones Beach, the current eight-member band will have to go some way to outdo its 1989-90 tour.
Then, Ministry deployed up to five guitarists, three keyboardists and two drummers.
The musicians performed behind a chain-link fence at the front of the stage and, as braziers flamed and grim film images flickered, band and audience members hurled themselves against that fence with compulsive, thwarted frenzy -- an indelible image to match the band's music.
On Ministry's new album, whose title appears in Greek letters that the band translates as "Psalm 69: The Way to Succeed and the Way to Suck Eggs" (Sire/Warner Brothers 9 26727; CD and cassette), voices howl and rasp, chatter and rant, saying things that are by turns disgusted, wrathful, despondent and blasphemous.
And the music says them even louder, because Alain Jourgenson and Paul Barker, Ministry's core, have perfected ways to turn sound into fury.


Fraise Scores Upset As Saratoga Holds First Big Turf Race
The 125-year-old Saratoga Race Course made some track history today when it ran a major stakes on the grass for the first time.
And in keeping with the track's reputation as the house of upsets, Fraise won the landmark race, the Sword Dancer Handicap, while the heavily favored Quest for Fame ran sixth.
The race had been run at Belmont Park for 16 years, but was switched to Saratoga this year to attract star turf horses, and it did.
With massive help from a T-shirt giveaway, it also attracted a throng of 48,768 people.
And at the Aqueduct track in Queens, where 6,500 more T-shirts were handed out, a remarkable crowd of 11,095 watched and bet via simulcasting.


The Total Resort, Catskill Style
PEOPLE reacted intensely when I mentioned I was about to spend two summer weekends in the Catskills.
Some got misty-eyed, recalling childhood vacations filled with baseball, horseback riding and, no doubt, dirty dancing.
"I take my own kids there now," a nostalgic Westchester psychologist told me.
"It's a great family place."
Others sounded appalled.
"All that heavy food," murmured a wraithlike friend.
Having grown up in California, I had no Catskill memories to contend with, cherished or otherwise; my recollections of the region consisted of seeing the padlocked entrance to Grossinger's (which closed in 1986 and filed for bankruptcy four years later) when I'd driven from New York to Ithaca years ago.


Talking: Leaseholds; Buying Land Under A Co-op
SHAREHOLDERS in leasehold co-ops -- which sit on leased land rather than on lots owned by the co-ops -- have always faced special issues.
Selling an apartment can be difficult, because potential buyers tend to be wary.
The lease may have a clause allowing sharp increases in the ground rent, which can play havoc with maintenance charges, and a smaller part of the maintenance charges may be deductible from taxable income because the portion going to pay ground rent does not qualify.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 9, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
17
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Isand/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
2
4
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
3
28
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
4
6
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
5
5
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
6
3
THE DUCHESS, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) An American woman, in Scotland to marry a duke, finds a mysterious man more attractive.
7
28
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
8
8
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
9
7
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $5.99.) Attending a family funeral, a woman lawyer finds new understanding and love.
10
12
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
11
6
THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman insurance investigator probes the murder of a millionaire.
12 *
1
A WHOLE NEW LIGHT, by Sandra Brown. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman is invited to Acapulco by the business partner of her late husband, with romantic consequences.
13
2
THE PIRANHAS, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket, $5.99.) A young man discovers the ways of Hollywood, Wall Street and organized crime.
14
5
THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $5.99.) Sam McCready recalls his years in the British secret service.
15
10
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
16
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
64
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
4
56
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
5
7
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
6
457
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
7 *
12
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
8
12
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series, as recollected by the actor who played Greg.
9
18
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by a producer.
10
1
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Several hundred examples of waste authorized by the White House and Congress, with suggestions for curbing it.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
52
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
100
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
81
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
16
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
5
20
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Making a Difference; Bringing Foreign Banks Into the Fold
Foreign banks have long been a black hole in the American financial system.
They account for half of all bank loans to American businesses and are major traders in foreign exchange and securities markets, but have avoided many of the accounting rules and regulations covering American banks.
Roberta J. Puschel, recently appointed executive vice president at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, is at the center of efforts to improve supervision of foreign banks.
In a global financial system where money and credit effortlessly cross national borders and policies of bank regulators vary widely, it is a daunting task.


Foreign Affairs; The West's Scam In Bosnia
There is no sure solution to the Bosnian horror, short of massive Western military intervention.
Even that might not work, or work soon enough.
So my quarrel with President Bush, and especially with European leaders and U.N. officials, is not their failure to find a magic formula.
It is their unwillingness to do what they can that
might
lessen, or perhaps even end the bloodshed.
Within a week or two, they could and should take all or most of the following steps:


Plumes of Smoke and Revelations
INCENSE vendors are as ubiquitous on New York's sidewalks during summer as carts selling hot dogs and soda.
Last Sunday, six of them -- more than one a block -- were on the east side of Broadway between Houston Street and Astor Place in NoHo.
In white skullcaps and robes or saffron-colored monk's attire, hunched over religious tracts in the lulls between customers, they are clearly men and women of faith.
But which faith?
There is no simple answer.


They Play on Wayside, but Gold Is Same
They are about to strike the big tent.
The 1992 Summer Games are almost over, but there is that terrible vague feeling of, "Great googamooga, have we possibly missed something?"
So many sports.
Quick.
Put on the special television.
Click, on one channel, field-hockey players are bending over their hooked sticks.
Don't their backs hurt in that position?
The Netherlands leading Pakistan.
Is that an upset?
What's the point spread?


Big Shots
YOU know certain things.
You know there will be German tourists in New York in August, and they'll be wearing sandals.
You know that where there are overpriced restaurants that play loud music there will also be models.
You know that when the name Madonna attaches itself to a party, business-as-usual goes right out the window.
That's why last Friday nine police officers and four barricades were guarding the entrance to Cafe Tabac, where Madonna and her friend Kelly Cutrone were giving a birthday party for Alek Keshishian, who directed "Truth or Dare." Nobody except Madonna was allowed to take pictures.
"I'm the only paparazzi here tonight," said the ambitious provocateur, who had brought along a tap dancer to entertain her guests, among them David Geffen, Lorna Luft, Angela Janklow and Calvin and Kelly Klein.


Some Fine-Tuning
If azalea leaves are yellowish with green veins, chances are they have an iron deficiency.
Spray them with iron chelate.
Don't prune or fertilize trees or shrubs because the new growth encouraged by clipping would not have a chance to toughen up before the freeze.


A Corps of Teen-Agers Aids the County
THE climbers stood on the granite cliff and gazed at the miles-wide view.
Below, dragonflies darted in the midday sun, and the faint sounds of hammering could be heard.
Work on the quarry trail was proceeding, not in the wind-swept West as the vista suggested but here in central Westchester at the county-owned Cranberry Lake preserve.
Eighty years ago, laborers scaled these heights to quarry granitic gneiss for the Kensico Dam, a short crow's flight from here.
Many were immigrants who found a new foothold in life as they toiled amid the rocks.
When the dam was done, and the blasted rock had left hollows in the hillside, Hollywood arrived, filming silent Westerns in the vast, rugged quarry.


Ms. Cochrane, Mr. Carey
Catherine Ann Cochrane, a daughter of John and Carolyn Cochrane of St.
Paul, was married there yesterday to Gregory Buckley Carey, a son of Robert and Joan Carey of Rockville Centre, L.I.
The Rev.
Bruce Christie conducted the Methodist ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Carey, 25 years old, was until recently an associate in the public finance department of Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, the New York securities company, where her husband is a vice president.
She graduated cum laude from Colgate University and next month will enter the master's degree program in journalism at Columbia University.
Her father is a senior partner in the St.
Paul law firm of Cochrane &amp; Bresnahan.
Her mother is a former chairwoman of the Minneapolis-St.
Paul Metropolitan Transit Commission.


Tot Spots
WHETHER THEIR IDEA OF A GOOD TIME IS TO HANG OUT AT A GAME arcade in Chelsea, visit the polar bears at the Central Park Zoo, go on a fantasy fishing trip in a SoHo loft or even flop in the living room, children have very definite ideas about where they want to be -- especially when they're with their parents.
They also know what they want to wear, which usually means dressing like Mom and Dad.
Here, six New York families gave in to the younger generation and were photographed at the children's favorite spots around town, wearing a few of their favorite things.


Ann-Louise Hittle, T. C. Constable
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Hittle of Old Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ann-Louise Hittle, and Timothy Cheston Constable, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Cheston Constable of Essex, Conn.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hittle is a senior oil and gas analyst at Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated cum laude from St.
Lawrence University and received a master's degree in Middle East studies from Harvard University.
Her father, an oil consultant, was the vice president of international government affairs for Conoco Inc. in Wilmington, Del.


The Raw and the Cooked
FOR NEARLY A THOUSAND SUMMERS, SALADS HAVE been tossed and turned.
One era asks them to be sprightly bites of freshly plucked lettuce meant to invigorate and refresh.
Another demands that salads be foils for more substance -- beds for chicken, tuna or lobster; counterpoints to grilled meat, fried bacon, poached eggs, baked cheese.
Since the Renaissance, when trade with the Far East and the discovery of America brought hundreds of new vegetables to gardens, salads have mirrored the social appetite.
Wild tumbles of greens and herbs, lightly dressed and minimally arranged, usually accompany periods of romanticism, when nature is honored as a transcendent force.
More constrained and arranged salads proliferate when humans become suspicious of nature's caprice.
As the salad is tossed, so goes the culture.


Leisure Time Is Meant to Be Just That
To The Editor:
Barbara Mackoff's instructions about how to put leisure to use in "Keep the Work Place in Its Place" (July 26) raise an obvious objection: Isn't leisure time, by definition, the time you're not obliged to put to use?


General Powell, Why Not?
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, isn't talking, but it seems clear he's not interested in running for Vice President if Dan Quayle is removed from the ticket.
While some Republicans would prefer the General, he is not even planning to attend the Republican National Convention in Houston.


Shari L. Wilgard, Mark P. Behar
Mr. and Mrs.
Sanford A. Wilgard of Plainview, L.I., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter, Shari Lynn Wilgard, and Mark Philip Behar, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Behar of Forest Hills, Queens.
Miss Wilgard, 26 years old, is an exercise physiologist at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
She graduated magna cum laude from the State University of New York at Albany and received a master's degree in exercise physiology from Queens College.
Her father is a lawyer in Plainview.


Jennifer Mitchell, Jerome Johnson
Jennifer Mira Mitchell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Mitchell of London, was married yesterday to Jerome Alden Johnson, the son of Wayne Johnson and Dorothy Johnson, both of Williston, N.D.
The Rev.
Allen Parker Jr. performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Seattle.
Mrs.
Johnson, 27 years old, graduated from Vassar College.
She is studying for a master's degree in education at Seattle University.
Her father is an executive vice president of the Bank of America and the manager of its global payment services in London.
Her mother, Carol Mitchell, is a principal in Grosvenor Square Guides, a London tour-guide organization.


Believe It or Not, Athletics Didn't Just Pull Success Out of a Hat
By next season, this might be the only city by the bay with a major league baseball team.
The San Francisco Giants could really bolt for Florida, but the Oakland Athletics -- suddenly in first place in the American League West -- seem inexorably bonded to their city and their ball park.


Veronika Herman, Todd Bromberg
Veronika Herman and Todd Andrew Bromberg were married yesterday at Opus 40, a private sculpture garden in Saugerties, N.Y.
Sid Slaten, a justice of the peace in Woodstock, N.Y., officiated.
Mrs.
Bromberg, 30 years old, is an independent television and film producer in New York.
She graduated from Oberlin College, as did her husband, and is studying for a master's degree in instructional technology and media at Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Franta Herman and Ema Janderova Herman of New York.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of Televideo Productions in New York.


Jill Paley, Richard Busch
Dr.
Marlene Winter and Dr.
Stephen Paley, both of Huntington, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jill Elizabeth Paley, to Richard Todd Busch, a son of Kenneth and Nikki Busch of Merrick, L.I.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Paley, 28 years old, is a dress buyer for Stern's, the department store, in Paramus, N.J.
She graduated from Pace University.
Her father is an orthodontist in East Northport, L.I.
Her mother is a psychoanalyst in Huntington and the director of the Long Island Center Inc., a psychotherapy center there.
Ms.
Paley is the stepdaughter of Dr.
Jacques Winter and Jill R. Paley.


Fire Spreads Through Row Houses in Jersey City


Kristine Simpson And Brian Kopan
William and Joyanne Simpson of Manhasset, L.I., have announced January wedding plans for their daughter Kristine Marie Simpson and Brian Joseph Kopan, the son of Chester and Madeline Kopan of Lancaster, Pa.
Miss Simpson, 26 years old, is a tennis instructor at the Wynfield Club in York, Pa.
She graduated from Providence College.
Her father is a vice president and a floor trader for Kidder Peabody &amp; Company, the New York securities brokerage.
Her mother is a saleswoman at the Liz Claiborne store in Manhasset.


BUSH AND THE U.N. FAIL TO FIX ACCORD ON BALKANS CRISIS
Despite intensive negotiations, President Bush and leaders of other Security Council nations failed to reach agreement today on further measures to take in response to the Balkan crisis because no country wants to commit itself to sending ground troops to a war zone, officials said.
In their discussions on how to get relief to the war-besieged peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the members of the Security Council also could not agree on the specific wording of a resolution that would authorize the use of force to help relief deliveries -- both in terms of the scope and type of force that it would authorize and whether the resolution would also go a step further and commit the Security Council to action.


The Changing American Family
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's article puts into clear focus exactly what Vice President Dan Quayle fails to understand: the American family has changed, and it hasn't all been for the worse.


Just Don't Drop It!


U.S. Female Shot-Putter Banned After Drug Test
A second United States athlete was disqualified from the 1992 Summer Olympics today, for using the same performance-enhancing substance the first penalized American had.
Bonnie Dasse, a 33-year-old shot-putter who failed to advance to the finals, produced a urine sample showing traces of Clenbuterol, a stimulant that contains muscle-building properties.
She became the fourth athlete to be expelled from the Barcelona Games and the sixth to have failed a recent drug test for Clenbuterol.
Earlier in the week, Jud Logan, an American hammer thrower who finished fourth, was disqualified and sent home because of a positive test for Clenbuterol.


Judith A. Wall, Joseph Dirnfeld
Judith Atkins Wall, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Craig Wall Jr. of Conway, S.C., was married in New York yesterday to Joseph Bonivento Dirnfeld, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Manfred Dirnfeld of Monte Carlo, Monaco.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert Anderson performed the ceremony at the Brick Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Dirnfeld, 26 years old, is an assistant vice president in the investment banking department of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, a New York securities brokerage.
She graduated from Davidson College.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Canal Industries Inc., a forest products company in Conway.


United Offers '800' in Spanish
United Airlines, which has expanded its service to Latin America this year, has opened a Spanish-speaking reservations line for North America and the United States Virgin islands and Puerto Rico.
The toll-free number, (800) 426-5561, based in Los Angeles, is available from 6 A.M. to 1 A.M.
Pacific standard time (9 A.M. to 4 A.M. Eastern standard time).
A United spokesman said the line was getting about 250 calls a day after it opened in late July and that the number of calls is expected to rise to about 450 a day.


In Russia, a Familiar Chill in the Political Air
IN this sped-up, fast-forward century, it's already necessary to ask whether Russia's latest lurch toward the West and all its pretty promises is beginning to come to an end.
Amid increasing disillusion with the West, the $1.2 billion in bilateral aid finally approved by the American Congress last week with such self-satisfaction seems to many here a paltry response, and it comes very late.


Environmental Fight in Prime Time
SENATOR AL GORE, the Democratic nominee for Vice President, visited a motor oil recycling plant in California last week and extolled tough environmental regulations as the key to increasing the efficiency of business, spurring technological innovation and generating millions of new jobs.
Three days later, Vice President Dan Quayle flew to Columbus, Ohio, and delivered a broadside against environmental regulations, declaring that many are unnecessary and that they slow the economy and cost jobs.


Corrections
An article on July 26 about the marketing of Marilyn Monroe, with a front-page essay about her, misidentified a beneficiary of her estate.
Anna Strasberg, not the Lee Strasberg Institute, is a beneficiary.


Cash-Poor Defendants May Soon Lack Lawyers
FOR years, Congress and the White House have directed billions of dollars for thousands of prosecutors to chase down drug dealers and savings-and-loan plunderers.
Washington even created laws to make those efforts easier.
But last month one consequence of that full-scale attack on crime became apparent when the Federal courts announced they had run out of money to pay for lawyers assigned to represent indigent defendants.
It was the second shortage in two years.


An Emotional Subtext in the Sexy New Shows
Fluff.
Beautiful people.
Sex.
Wisecracks.
On the surface, it's business as usual on television this summer, only more so.
The surprisingly busy schedule of new series is top-heavy, especially over at Fox Broadcasting, with exposed musculature, splendidly toned and preferably tanned.
The characters are very young, very attractive and seemingly driven by their need for frequent intimate contact with one another and with occasional guest stars.
But something new can also be detected, even if only dimly in some instances.
The message is clearest on the shows designed for teen-age viewers, but it also comes through on some series clearly created for broader audience appeal.
It's what our politicians have discovered blowing in the wind: people want change.
Call it a sense of yearning.
Yearning to connect, to consolidate, to discover, sometimes to move on, at other times to go back to a past that might have been less threatening than the present.


Susan C. Anrig, Robert Lichten Jr.
Dr. and Mrs.
Gregory R. Anrig of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Charlotte Anrig, to Robert M. Lichten Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lichten of Port Washington, L.I.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Anrig, 25 years old, was until recently a teacher at the Dutch Neck School in West Windsor-Plainsboro, N.J.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father is the president of the Educational Testing Service in Princeton.
Her mother, Charlotte Anrig, is a retired kindergarten teacher in Dover, Mass.


Corrections
A listing in the Arts and Leisure section on July 12 with an essay about Presidential candidates' cultural choices misidentified a book by Carl Sandburg.
The book was "Abraham Lincoln: The War Years," not "Young Mr. Lincoln," which was a 1939 film.


Yvonne E. Lee and Everett Clayton 4th
Yvonne E. Lee, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Chi Meen Lee of Fairmont, W. Va., was married yesterday to Everett McCord Clayton 4th, the son of Kathy Clayton of Los Angeles and Mr.
Clayton 3d of Baltimore.
The Rev.
James Johnson performed the ceremony at the First Baptist Church of Fairmont.
Ms.
Clayton, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her husband, and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She plans to join the New York law firm of Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan as an associate in September.
Her father is the chief of surgery at Fairmont General Hospital.
Her mother, Jung J. Lee, is a nurse in Dr.
Lee's private urology practice in Fairmont.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidates' Records; Bush and Congress: Rising Feud Produced a Legislative Deadlock
At almost every campaign stop these days, President Bush blames Congress for the nation's problems: the weak economy, the poor state of public schools, crime and violence and urban decay.
On Capitol Hill, meantime, the President is attacked daily from all directions.
Liberal Democrats accuse him of pandering to the wealthy.
Conservative Republicans say he has no principles.
And moderates in both parties maintain that he has failed to offer the programs or to provide the leadership that the times require.


Barton Captures a Bronze Along the Lonely Waters
They call themselves paddlers in the same way that marathon runners might call themselves joggers, but they know that to "paddle" canoes and kayaks in the Olympics takes a combination of strength, technique and determination that separates them from any crowd.
They are also loners, these brawny men and women typically from northern climes, who usually race each other before a handful of spectators and who have dedicated years of solitary training to the goal of reaching the Olympics finals this week at a newly built canal near Barcelona.


Passengers Are Evacuated After QE2 Runs Aground
Ferryboats evacuated 1,815 passengers and most of 1,000 crew members from the Queen Elizabeth 2 yesterday after the luxury liner ran aground off the south coast of Massachusetts and tore a gash in its double hull below the waterline.
No one was injured and the Coast Guard said the ship was not in danger of sinking.
The 963-foot flagship of the Cunard Line -- a glittering city afloat and one of the last of the world's great ocean liners -- was bound for New York on the final leg of a five-day Canadian cruise when it struck what was believed to be an undersea ledge at 9:58 P.M.
Friday.


Abidjan
A few years ago, a best-selling series of French travel guides cautioned would-be visitors that Abidjan is not really an African city.
Go elsewhere, it urged, if you want an "authentic" African experience: Abid jan, with its concrete and glass high-rises, neatly landscaped streets and villas and expensive restaurants, would be likely to disappoint those looking for the exotic and the picturesque.
It is a complaint that Abidjanians have heard again and again, and for the most part, find patronizing or absurd.
It is certainly true that parts of the city seem to have more in common with Paris than with any other place in Africa.
There are no nearby wildlife preserves or, for that matter, little that is particularly striking about the terrain or vegetation.
And while prosperity has given the city an impressive sheen of modernity, it has also brought traffic jams, pollution and high prices.


Assistant District Attorney's Forced Resignation Tied to Drug Case
An assistant district attorney in Brooklyn was forced to resign last month after Federal prosecutors said she made more than routine inquiries into a Federal drug investigation targeting a friend, senior law enforcement officials said yesterday.
The attorney, Pamela D. Hayes, resigned as chief of the sex crimes bureau in the Brooklyn District Attorney's office on July 14 because of allegations that she tried to "use her influence" in a drug investigation by the United States Attorney in Manhattan, Otto G. Obermaier.
The investigation involved a close friend of hers, the officials said.


Rebecca Martin, Frank Connard 3d
Rebecca Dunn Martin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Newkirk Martin of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to Frank Leavenworth Connard 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Connard Jr. of Fairport, N.Y.
The Rev.
Henry Millan performed the ceremony at the West Granville (Mass.) Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Connard, 26 years old, is a graduate of Middlebury College.
Her father is a senior vice president of Aetna Capital Management in Hartford.
Her mother, Alice Dunn Martin, is the director of human resources at Distributor Information Systems Corporation, a computer software company in Farmington, Conn.


AUGUST 2-8: Los Angeles; Officers in King Beating Indicted on Federal Charges Of Violating His Civil Rights
The Los Angeles police officers who were videotaped beating a young black man, Rodney G. King, were indicted anew last week, this time by a Federal grand jury.
Their acquittal on assault charges in state court earlier this summer led to days of civil violence in Los Angeles.


Boot Camp For the Toe-Shoe Set
It's Summertime.
But the living isn't easy at the School of American Ballet.
An affiliate of the New York City Ballet, the school is housed in gilded headquarters on West 65th Street.
There, some 200 summer students between the ages of 12 and 18 attend what Lincoln Kirstein, who helped found the school in 1934, has called the West Point of ballet academies.
For four decades it has offered a summer course in which 10 months of study undertaken during the school year are distilled into an intensive five weeks.
Some 20 students are asked to stay on in an accredited program of training, though academic high school studies are completed at outside institutions.
The competition is fierce, particularly for the girls, who number four to every boy this summer.
The happy agony of this annual ritual is endured by selected candidates from 40 states and 12 foreign countries -- gifted young dancers who hope to perform with the world's best companies after training at one of the world's best schools.


Wall Street; Names Securities Analysts Love . . . And Hate
Wall Street securities analysts insist they don't hold it against a company they follow when the company takes on what they consider a dopey name.
But that doesn't keep analysts from telling which names they love and which they hate.
The Schechter Group, a corporate identity consulting firm, made an informal survey of 20 well-known analysts to see which name changes they liked and which they loathed.
Analysts had good things to say about new names of the past decade that included Dole Food Company (formerly Castle &amp; Cooke), Chevron (formerly Standar Oil Co. of California) and Cullinent Software (formerly Cullinane Database Systems) -- all names that better identified what a company did.


There's Growth, But Not Nearly Enough of It
Anemia is defined in the dictionary as "lack of vigor or vitality; lifelessness."
That is not a bad definition of the current economic picture.
And so it was admirably honest when George Bush told a news conference Friday that the economy "has been anemically growing."


Does Television Itself Nurture Violence?
To the Editor:
The statistics David C. Anderson presents in "The Television Time Bomb" (Editorial Notebook, July 27) are indeed dynamite: a certain number of years after television's introduction, the crime rate surges.


Belgrade Frees 2 Americans Who Served in Croatia Army
Two American mercenaries captured by Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina were handed over to United States consular officials today.
The Americans, Colton Perry, 25 years old, of Portsmouth, Va., and Marin Pesha, 22 years old, of Livingston, N.J., were accompanied by the Yugoslav Prime Minister, Milan Panic.


Little Takes the Place of Fresh Summer Corn
THE fresh corn season is now in full swing.
Farms in the region are selling white, golden and mixtures of white and yellow corn at their stands, at country markets and even in some supermarkets.
With corn the simplest is often the best.
Quickly cook the shucked ears in a pot of boiling water for a minute or just until the water returns to the boil after the corn has been added, then drain it and serve with butter, salt and pepper.
Additions of sugar, milk or other ingredients to the water do nothing to enhance the corn because it does not cook long enough to pick up these flavors.
The freshest summer corn on the cob can be enjoyed plain, without any of the usual trappings of butter and salt.
Yet despite concerns about fat and sodium it seems that when it comes to fresh corn on the cob, indulging in a gloss of butter and sprinkling of salt on the kernels is irresistible.


Give Quayle Credit for Support of His Daughter's Decision; A Change Since '88
To the Editor:
Dan Quayle's statement that he would reluctantly support his daughter if she became pregnant and decided to have an abortion (news article, July 24) is the more surprising contrasted with his position in the 1988 campaign.
Mr.
Quayle was being interviewed by three 11- to 13-year-old reporters for Children's Express, a television news magazine:


The Rot From Decaying Windowsills Can Spread to Framing and Walls
WOOD windowsills can decay if they are not regularly maintained by painting or treating with waterproofing sealer, or if storm-window frames are so tightly sealed that they prevent sills from draining.
Repairing decayed windowsills is important, because rot can spread to adjacent parts of the framing and cause moisture damage to walls.
The spread of minor or even moderate decay can be halted and the damaged areas restored by applying epoxy or acrylic wood filler.
Two popular varieties found are Minwax High Performance Wood Filler, which should be used after applying Minwax High Performance Wood Hardener, and Mr.
Mac's Wood Fix, which does not require hardener before application.


How to Go From All Thumbs to Green
MANY gardeners believe they cannot grow anything.
These gardeners feel that they have the wrong touch, that perhaps they are all thumbs when it comes to growing things, and so they usually give up after several efforts fail.
But just as many gardeners keep trying.
Granted, gardening does not have a fixed set of rules since there are so many variables.
And there is no one way to grow anything.
What works for one gardener may not work for another.
Gardeners share their hits as well as their misses.


New Airline Says Its Fares Will Be Lower
KIWI International Air Lines, an employee-owned airline formed by airline veterans -- primarily from Eastern, Pan American and Midway -- plans to begin service from its base at Newark Airport to Chicago, Atlanta and Orlando by the end of the month.
It has opened reservations for travel starting Aug. 30, but expects to begin flying before then. (KIWI's founders named it for the flightless bird because they couldn't fly when their old airlines ceased operations.)
The airline has received final Department of Transportation approval to provide scheduled domestic passenger service and plans one-class flights aboard B-727-200 aircraft at what it calls low unrestricted fares.
The planes, a KIWI spokesman said, have been reconfigured for only 150 seats to provide more comfort and legroom than typical layouts of 162 to 177 seats.


In Sarajevo, the Cavalry Seems Far Away
THE climb up the mountain took 40 minutes, along a winding forest path that seemed close to vertical at times.
In peacetime it was a route for hikers, an ascent up Trebevic Mountain on the southeastern flank of Sarajevo that led to the bobsled run built for the 1984 Winter Olympic Games.
But now it is the way to the front for some of the fighters in Bosnia's ragtag army, men in jeans and running shoes with too few Kalashnikov rifles to go around and ammunition so scarce that one of their band clambered up the mountainside with a steel tray carrying a few precious hand grenades and cardboard boxes of spare 7.62-millimeter bullets.
Nobody talked much during the climb, and at the bunkers about halfway up the mountain it was plain to see why.
For two weeks, these men had been contesting a few hundred yards of ground, pushing forward to a position above the bobsled run, then being forced back down again by mortar and tank fire.
Some of their fellow fighters' bodies still lay on higher ground, too exposed to risk attempts at recovery.
In the mortuary at the Kosevo Hospital complex, other Bosnian fighters killed on Trebevic were laid out two to a steel-topped morgue table, some of them on the floor, almost all killed by shrapnel from shells.
One had his throat cut, apparently a victim of a gruesome practice among Serbian nationalist irregulars of using long-bladed knives to kill their enemies.


Driver Gets a Firsthand Look
ROBBIE GROFF, the No. 4 man in the Indy development series, had some advice for drivers returning to the new temporary Cleveland Grand Prix road course laid out on the runways and taxiways at Burke Lakefront Airport.
"The new pavement changes have really changed this track," he said after a practice session Friday.
"The corners will call for the drivers to be very precise."


Torrence Won't Face Charges for Drug Remarks
No action will be taken against Gwen Torrence for comments the American sprinter made about drug use among Olympic competitors, the president of the world governing body for track and field said yesterday.
Primo Nebiolo, said the International Amateur Athletic Federation had accepted a report from the United States Olympic Committee and a letter from Torrence as an apology.


Notes With Pleasure
Turning Back to the Classics
Robertson Davies urges us to turn, and turn again, to the great books we first encountered in our youth, in this excerpt from a talk included in "The Tanner Lectures on Human Values: Volume 13, 1992," edited by Grethe B. Peterson (University of Utah).


CRIME
"You know, I'm very near to bein' normal, but I just can't get over the hump," confides Rene Shade, the Cajun cop who provides the moral center for Daniel Woodrell's down-and-dirty crime novels set in the Louisiana bayous.
Now that we make the acquaintance of Shade's daddy, in THE ONES YOU DO (Holt, $19.95), we can understand his problem.
John X. Shade, an alcoholic pool hustler with a terminal case of the shakes, comes crawling home to the Mississippi River delta town of St.
Bruno when his luck runs dry in Mobile.
His young wife, who sings a bit and fancies herself "the 'Bama Butterfly," fluttered out of town with $47,000 belonging to a mad-dog killer by the name of Lunch Pumphrey.
With the cool and crazy Lunch on his heels and his frighteningly precocious 10-year-old daughter in tow, John X. isn't looking for a hide-out in St.
Bruno as much as confirmation that his raggedy life was worth the living.
"I guess I did this, I did that, and now and again some other thing altogether," he admits to the family he abandoned, but at least his "pockets didn't have no fishhooks in 'em" and some people liked him some for that.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THIS QUIET LADY.
By Charlotte Zolotow.
Illustrated by Anita Lobel.
Greenwillow. $14. (Ages 3 and up) In this meditation on family links, a secure little girl traces her mother's life in family pictures till she finds her own beginning.
The illustrations sustain the serenity of the text.


'Intentions' That Don't Go Astray
There is nothing remarkable about the fact that Ingmar Bergman spent a lifetime feeling angry at his stern, controlling parents.
But the way he has come to terms with their memories is an extraordinary tale, on artistic and personal terms.
In writing "The Best Intentions," a tough-minded yet generous depiction of his parents' tortured courtship and early marriage, Mr.
Bergman has turned the ghosts of the real Karin and Erik Bergman into the slightly fictional Anna and Henrik Bergman.
They are complex, stubborn, well-meaning people who share a heartbreaking inability to be happy no matter what they try.


Little Takes the Place of Fresh Summer Corn
THE fresh corn season is now in full swing.
Farms in the region are selling white, golden and mixtures of white and yellow corn at their stands, at country markets and even in some supermarkets.
With corn the simplest is often the best.
Quickly cook the shucked ears in a pot of boiling water for a minute or just until the water returns to the boil after the corn has been added, then drain it and serve with butter, salt and pepper.
Additions of sugar, milk or other ingredients to the water do nothing to enhance the corn because it does not cook long enough to pick up these flavors.
The freshest summer corn on the cob can be enjoyed plain, without any of the usual trappings of butter and salt.
Yet despite concerns about fat and sodium it seems that when it comes to fresh corn on the cob, indulging in a gloss of butter and sprinkling of salt on the kernels is irresistible.


Tennis Group's Move Cheers Realtors
THE United States Tennis Association's purchase last month of a four-story office building off Westchester Avenue here is good news for the county's commercial real estate market, which has been hit hard by difficult economic times.
It is part of a trend that has begun to counter the moves of some corporations out of Westchester and the restructuring of others, officials and real-estate agents said.
"In this economic climate, with all the downsizing of corporations, we have been experiencing a high vacancy rate," said Margaret S. Soter, the county's director of Commerce and Economic Development.
"But we also have been seeing a trend of mid-size companies moving in."


Deirdre Hobson, Kent A. Skrivan
Deirdre Kelly Hobson, the daughter of Mrs.
Clair L. Farrand Jr. of Rye, N.Y., and the late William H. Hobson 3d, was married yesterday to Kent Arthur Skrivan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Skrivan of Bonita Springs, Fla.
The Rev.
Vance Polley performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Skrivan, 25 years old, and her husband, 26, graduated from Eckerd College.
She received a master's degree in education from the University of Florida, from which her husband received his law degree.


'Unique Yet Quintessential'
To the Editor:
Overlooked in the many tributes to Alfred Drake, who died on July 26, were some of his less well-known performances, which broke ground and will live in the memory of anyone who was privileged to see/hear them.
He was a stunning Larry Foreman in the first important revival (1947) of Marc Blitzstein's play-with-music "The Cradle Will Rock." He led the cast in two of the most important folk-song-influenced American musicals: Kurt Weill's "Down in the Valley" and Elie Siegmeister's "Sing Out, Sweet Land!"


How a Precinct Puts Theory Into Practice
The emergency call crackled across the police car radio, telling of a cardiac arrest.
But there was little the two officers could do when they reached the Brooklyn apartment house.
A 47-year-old man had died, apparently hours ago, and was not discovered until his companion returned home from work.
Wails and screams filled the small apartment and a little girl cried silently on the stairwell.
For Officers Hanna Tonuzi, 26 years old, and her partner Nicole Medico, 23, it was a routine 911 emergency call.
Officer Tonuzi stopped to comfort the little girl and then began the long process of preparing a death report, gently questioning the relatives, calling the medical examiner and waiting for the morgue truck.
But as with any emergency the officers have been trained for, the overall philosophy was community policing.


About Cars; Safety Drives the New Technologies
MY favorite reading when I was a kid -- other than Red Ryder comics, of course -- was in the pages of Popular Science and Popular Mechanics, and it had to do with coming automotive attractions.
Things like cars that could fly.
Or cars that rode on cushions of air.
Or whose wheels turned sideways to ease parallel parking.
There used to be lots of that sort of stuff, because cars as they stood were fairly boring.
They were appliances, and the editors of the day figured they needed the hype if automobiles were going to be made interesting.


New Mexico
To the Editor: Having returned from a visit to La Luz, N.M., I was thrilled to read Bruce Selcraig's article on the Tularosa Basin (June 21).


Terri A. Austin and Peter C. Keogh
Bernadette Castro Guida of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., and David F. Austin of Ocala, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Terri Ann Austin, to Peter Clarke Keogh, a son of Peter K. and Julia C. Keogh of Old Brookville, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Austin, 24 years old, graduated from Georgetown University and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is a model and a spokeswoman for Castro Convertibles.
Her father is a real-estate broker in Ocala.
Her mother is the president and chief executive of Castro Convertibles in New Hyde Park, L.I.


KEEPING CONTROL
I have always been pro-choice, although I am a Roman Catholic.
Yet the title of Marion Hart's Hers column (July 12) was "Keeping Control," and keeping control is what it is all about.
If you have unprotected sex, you may get pregnant.


IRON BONDING
I was 40 years old the first time I said to my father, "I love you." It took a lot of courage to say those words to another man.
Another 10 years went by before I understood why.
In his About Men column "Iron Bonding" (July 19), Alan Buczynski intimates that men have other ways of saying I love you.
It's more complicated than that.
When I was growing up in the early 1940's and 1950's, "love" meant romance, passion, sex.
So it was only natural that a father did not say, "I love you," to his son.
Fathers didn't even say, "I love you," to their daughters.


SPORTS PEOPLE: FOOTBALL
TROY VINCENT, the first-round draft pick who is expected to bolster the Miami Dolphins' suspect defense, signed a contract yesterday and reported immediately to training camp.


BUSH AND THE U.N. FAIL TO FIX ACCORD ON BALKANS CRISIS
Despite intensive negotiations, President Bush and leaders of other Security Council nations failed to reach agreement today on further measures to take in response to the Balkan crisis because no country wants to commit itself to sending ground troops to a war zone, officials said.
In their discussions on how to get relief to the war-besieged peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the members of the Security Council also could not agree on the specific wording of a resolution that would authorize the use of force to help relief deliveries -- both in terms of the scope and type of force that it would authorize and whether the resolution would also go a step further and commit the Security Council to action.


Nagle Gets the Super Bowl Treatment
O.K.
The honeymoon is over.
After an upbeat performance in his first preseason game, against the Eagles last week, Browning Nagle took a beating against the Redskins here tonight in his second outing and struggled for everything he got.
The Redskins, the Super Bowl champions, saw all they needed of their regulars in the first half, while the Jets needed a longer look.
The net result was a defensive shutout and a methodical offense by the Redskins in the first half that forced the Jets into sloppy offense and defense.
But the Jets snapped alive in the second half, against the Redskins' second unit, and came away with a 14-13 victory.


Tia Cudahy, Philip Deutch
Theresa Ellen Cudahy, a daughter of Judge Richard D. Cudahy of Winnetka, Ill., and the late Ann F. Cudahy, was married yesterday to Philip Joseph Deutch, the son of Prof.
John M. Deutch of Cambridge, Mass., and Samayla D. Deutch of Lexington, Mass.
The Rev.
James F. Bresnahan, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Reid Hall of Lake Forest (Ill.) Academy.
Ms.
Cudahy, 28 years old and known as Tia, is to become a clerk for Judge Joseph H. Young of the Federal District Court of Maryland in Baltimore this month.
She graduated from Amherst College, as did her husband, and received her law degree from the University of Chicago.
Her father is a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago.
Her stepmother, Dr.
Janet Cudahy, is an internist at the Women's Health Resources Clinic of Illinois Masonic Hospital in Chicago.


BARCELONA
U.S SPRINTERS EXCEL The American men set world marks in the 400- and 1,600-,eter relays, while the women won a gold and a silver in relays.
CUBANS DOMINATE BOXING Oscar De La Hoya became the only U.S fighter to win a gold as the Cuban boxers continued to overshadow all others.
ALGERIAN WOMAN PREVAILS Hassiba Boulmerka, harassed in her native country, earned redemption with an inspiring victory in the 1,500 meters.
SportsSunday, section 8.


A Style of Music And a Style of Life
In response to the article about the Jack Daniel's Silver Cornet Band, performing at Stockton State College ("Brass Band Brings the 1890's Back to Life," July 12):
As the vice president of one of New Jersey's oldest amateur community bands, the Bloomingdale Cornet Band, I'm gratified to learn that the music of the turn of the century is enjoying a resurgence.


Corrections
An article on page 20 of The Times Magazine today about the novelist Terry McMillan misstates the title of a film in which Whoopi Goldberg will appear as a bookstore owner.
It is "Made in America," not "Maid in America."


Big Names Are No Big Deal, but Spain Still Beats U.S.
In a frenzy of flag-waving by home-country fans and a post-game barrage of anti-United States comments by its Croatian-born coach, Spain defeated the United States today and assured itself of its first Olympic medal in water polo.
The quicker, smaller Spaniards produced a 6-4 semifinal victory and will meet Italy on Sunday for the gold.
The Americans face the former Soviet Union for the bronze medal.


Bush's Plan Puts Stress On Harried U.N. Troops
By proposing that the United Nations authorize the use of force to keep relief supplies flowing into Bosnia, President Bush is putting new demands on the United Nations military command here at a time when its relations with the Bosnian Government are strained to the breaking point.
Alija Izetbegovic, the Bosnian President, said his people appreciated the airlift of food and medicine, which resumed today after a 72-hour suspension.
But he expressed some reservations about the United Nations approach to the struggle in Bosnia.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Two Share Buick Open Lead  Steve Elkington shot a 67 and Mike Sullivan shot a 68 yesterday to tie for the lead at 10-under 206 heading into the final round of the Buick Open in Grand Blanc, Mich.
There was a logjam of four players two strokes behind the leaders at Warwick Hills Golf and Country Club.
The defending champion, Brad Faxon, shot 70, Keith Clearwater 70, Wayne Grady of Australia one-over 73 and John Huston 71.
The start of the third round was delayed 2 hours 24 minutes by heavy overnight rains that soaked the course.
When starting times were redone, players were grouped in threesomes instead of twosomes and teed off on both No. 1 and No. 10.
The course was whipped by high winds for the rest of the day, but the winds did not seem to bother the leaders.(AP) Rarick Ties Mochrie: Cindy Rarick, one of the Ladies Professional Golf Association's leading birdie producers, rattled in six yesterday and pulled into a tie with Dottie Mochrie for the lead after three rounds of the McCall's L.P.G.A.
Classic at Stratton, Vt.
Rarick, whose 10th-place finish last week is her best showing this season despite her No. 6 birdie ranking, had only one bogey for a change and finished with a 5-under-par 66 for a 54-hole total of 209.
Mochrie, the tour's leading money winner seeking her second straight victory, started the day two strokes off the pace at four under, and climbed into a share of the lead despite an uneventful round.
Rosie Jones, who started five strokes off the lead, had a 69 that brought her in at 210.
She is tied with second-round leader Betsy King. (AP) Hill Catches Zembriski: Walt Zembriski maintained a share of the lead after two rounds of the Digital Senior Classic in Concord, Mass., but was joined by a rejuvenated Mike Hill, who rejoined the Tour after three weeks off.
Zembriski, who held a one-stroke lead at Nashawtuc Country Club after the first round, shot a two-under-par 70 to move to eight-under 136.
Hill, the Tour's co-player of the year in 1991, was three strokes behind Zembriski after the first day but caught him with a five-under 67. (AP)
Azinger Shares Munich Lead: Paul Azinger of the United States and Anders Forsbrand of Sweden shot six-under-par 66's yesterday to tie for the lead after three rounds of the BMW Open tournament in Munich, Germany.
Azinger, the 1990 champion, and Forsbrand both finished three trips over the par-72, 6,887-yard Eichenried course with 17-under 199 totals.
Costantino Rocca of Italy and Bernhard Langer of Germany were each one shot off the pace, Rocca after a 66, Langer after a 65. (AP) TENNIS Krajicek Gains Volvo Final Richard Krajicek of the Netherlands advanced to the final of the Volvo Tennis-Los Angeles tournament yesterday with a 6-2, 6-4 victory over Sandon Stolle of Australia.
Krajicek, seeded second, needed only 57 minutes to win the match, which he finished with a 127 miles-per-hour ace, his 10th of the day.
Krajicek will meet the winner of the Aaron Krickstein-Mark Woodforde semifinal, which was played last night. (AP)


AUGUST 2-8: Going Public; A Real Estate Deal Includes $450 Million in Fine Print
Give A. Alfred Taubman an "A" for tax planning, if investors -- and the Internal Revenue Service -- go along.
The 67-year-old shopping center magnate last week disclosed plans to sell a minority stake in his empire to the public.
The fine print of the offering document revealed that in 1985 Mr.
Taubman and his family took $450 million in cash out of the shopping centers.
They paid no tax on it because it was a loan.
Now there is to be a corporate reorganization, creating two companies.
The first one, with shares to be offered to the public, will have stakes in 19 shopping centers, whose tenants last year sold $2.3 billion worth of merchandise.


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
June 92
May 92
June 91
New York
3,403
2,662
2,966
New Jersey
1,263
1,442
1,515
Connecticut
838
747
754
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.27
8.27
9.64
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.51
5.53
7.26
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.14
8.14
9.49
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.33
5.35
7.20
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.11
8.15
9.57
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.20
5.27
7.09
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.32
8.28
9.78
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.14
6.01
7.66
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.57
3.53
6.18
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.04
8.04
9.12
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


God Is Not Anti-American
To the Editor:
Thank you for your review of my most recent novel, "Humans" (June 28).
Not to be picky, but I feel I must defend one of my characters -- that is, God -- from a misunderstanding in the body of the review, which was unfortunately picked up in the headline: "When God Got Tired of Americans."


BUSH AND THE U.N. FAIL TO FIX ACCORD ON BALKANS CRISIS
Despite intensive negotiations, President Bush and leaders of other Security Council nations failed to reach agreement today on further measures to take in response to the Balkan crisis because no country wants to commit itself to sending ground troops to a war zone, officials said.
In their discussions on how to get relief to the war-besieged peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the members of the Security Council also could not agree on the specific wording of a resolution that would authorize the use of force to help relief deliveries -- both in terms of the scope and type of force that it would authorize and whether the resolution would also go a step further and commit the Security Council to action.


Ordering Coffee Irregular
IF there is one question that confronts the stranger grappling with a new language in a foreign land, it is: how much is enough?
Where, in other words, is the invisible linguistic threshold between hermetic isolation and communication?
In Beirut, in the very earliest days of the civil war, it was regarded as the absolute, irreducible core for American correspondents to be able to master the Arabic for "Don't shoot, I am an American journalist." Over the years, in places like Beirut and Baghdad, this changed to "Don't shoot, I am
not
an American journalist." But the point was the same: how much knowledge of a complex, new language will guard against peril and pitfall?
I have been pondering this question anew in the contemplation of Italian and coffee.
Coffee -- un caffe -- might sound simple enough, but its inherent linguistic risks were brought home to me when a friend recounted the following story.
For weeks after her arrival in Italy to take up residence, she would go to her local bar each morning to be greeted by many smiling men as she ordered what she thought was a milky coffee and a croissant.
Only after many such orders did she realize the reason for the big grins.
Instead of saying "Un cappuccino e un cornetto, per favore" -- a coffee and a croissant, please -- she had been ordering "Un cappu ccino e un cornuto, per favore" -- a coffee and a cuckold, please.


Dinah Levine, Gary Harmon
Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley H. Levine of Cranbury, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dinah Levine to Gary Scott Harmon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aaron Harmon of Manalapan, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Levine, 30 years old, is a marketing specialist in Somerset, N.J., for the ENSR Consulting and Engineering Corporation.
She graduated from Rutgers University and is studying for an M.B.A. at Rider College.
Her father is an optometrist in Metuchen, N.J.
Her mother, Suzanne S. Levine, is a retired child-development specialist for the John Adams School, an elementary school in North Brunswick, N.J.


Dutiful and Doomed


Rockefeller Charity Picks Leader
Twenty years ago, Charles D. Terry turned his back on a promising career in corporate law.
Instead, he joined with a few young idealists to create a refuge for adolescents in an East Side storefront that ultimately evolved into The Door, a youth center that has inspired imitators as far away as Australia.
Mr.
Terry, now 49 years old, was recently picked to direct the Rockefeller family's personal philanthropy.
He will also work to encourage other wealthy individuals to give money for causes that increasingly preoccupy the younger Rockefellers, like housing the homeless, curbing racial violence and protecting the forests of the Northeast.


Olympics Are at a Point To Start Looking Ahead
It is the nature of the Olympic Games, its eternal quality, that every ending is a beginning.
Just as Athens in 1896 begat Paris in 1900, so does Barcelona with closing ceremonies on Sunday turn the world toward Atlanta for 1996.
Yet every summer Olympics is different from its predecessors in style, size and texture, always reflecting the city that presents it, exposing the character of those who live there.
The warm embrace of medieval Barcelona contrasts dramatically with the cool efficiency of modernized Seoul, South Korea, four years ago.


Lithuania Avoids 'Tragedy'
To go home empty-handed would have been, in Sarunas Marciulionis's opinion, "a tragedy."
The Lithuanian basketball team instead will go home as national heroes, with the blessing of their president, Vytautas Landsbergis, who thanked Marciulionis and his teammates in their locker room today, moments after their emotional 82-78 victory in the bronze-medal game with their former Soviet Union comrades of the Unified Team.


Windows
To the Editor:
Contrary to the implications in your "New Guidelines Spur Replacement Work" on June 14, the window guidelines promulgated by the Landmarks Preservation Commission do nothing to address the real abuses of the administrative process, namely the predilection of the commission and its staff to play architect with other people's money.


Christine Emily Zubak, David Barlow Hartzell
Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Zubak have announced the engagement of their daughter Christine Emily Zubak to David Barlow Hartzell, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Hartzell of Wynnewood, Pa.
An October wedding is planned.


From: Subaru. Re: Marketing
To the Editor:
David Essertier's "A Subaru Ad That Should Be Buried" (Forum, July 12) provides an interesting twist on a highly acclaimed print ad.
In fact, it's nice to know that so many people are taking an interest in Subaru's advertising and marketing campaign.
But Mr.
Essertier is the first -- and to date, the only -- person to assert that the common practice of writing a will while you're still very much alive leads to death.
He is confusing sequence with consequence.


Peacemaker's Tribute or Trojan Horseplay?
After months of riding roughshod over the minority Democrats in the Legislature and Democratic Gov.
Jim Florio, the combative Speaker of the New Jersey Assembly, Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, now says he wants to meet regularly with the Governor to plan the course of the ship of state.
In a letter last Wednesday, Mr.
Haytaian invited Mr.
Florio to meet with him and Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco tomorrow and on a "regular, weekly basis" to discuss "various issues of mutual concern."


How to Go From All Thumbs to Green
MANY gardeners believe they cannot grow anything.
These gardeners feel that they have the wrong touch, that perhaps they are all thumbs when it comes to growing things, and so they usually give up after several efforts fail.
But just as many gardeners keep trying.
Granted, gardening does not have a fixed set of rules since there are so many variables.
And there is no one way to grow anything.
What works for one gardener may not work for another.
Gardeners share their hits as well as their misses.


U.S. Warnings On 3 Countries
Americans traveling to the former Soviet republic of GEORGIA are warned by the State Department in Washington to exercise extreme caution because of a high potential for political unrest and sporadic violence, particularly in the western region.
Police authority in many cities in western and central Georgia, including the capital, Tbilisi, has collapsed, and crime, including violent crime, is widespread, says an advisory from the department dated July 10.
Basic medical supplies, it adds, are scarce.
Americans planning to travel outside the city are urged to register at the United States Embassy at 25 Atoneli Street, Tbilisi; telephone 98-99-67.


The Rot From Decaying Windowsills Can Spread to Framing and Walls
WOOD windowsills can decay if they are not regularly maintained by painting or treating with waterproofing sealer, or if storm-window frames are so tightly sealed that they prevent sills from draining.
Repairing decayed windowsills is important, because rot can spread to adjacent parts of the framing and cause moisture damage to walls.
The spread of minor or even moderate decay can be halted and the damaged areas restored by applying epoxy or acrylic wood filler.
Two popular varieties found are Minwax High Performance Wood Filler, which should be used after applying Minwax High Performance Wood Hardener, and Mr.
Mac's Wood Fix, which does not require hardener before application.


Belgrade Frees 2 Americans Who Served in Croatia Army
Two American mercenaries captured by Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina were handed over to United States consular officials today.
The Americans, Colton Perry, 25 years old, of Portsmouth, Va., and Marin Pesha, 22 years old, of Livingston, N.J., were accompanied by the Yugoslav Prime Minister, Milan Panic.


Sponsor Defaults
To the Editor:
In response to a letter on June 21 regarding sponsor default, the cause is the real estate market, not the rent-control laws.
In the 1980's speculators were buying up choice rental buildings at ever-increasing prices and reaping huge profits on conversions to co-ops, with minimum tenant participation.


Jocelyn Campbell, John Palmer
Jocelyn Wight Campbell, a securities analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company in New York, was married yesterday to John Wentworth Palmer, an associate at Chappo &amp; Company, a New York investment bank.
The Rev.
David S. Hoag performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Pelham Manor, N.Y.
Mrs.
Palmer graduated from Smith College.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of William G. Campbell of Pelham Manor and of the late Marilyn K. Campbell.
Her father is a managing director of Campbell, Cowperthwait &amp; Company, an investment advisory concern in New York.
Her mother was a producer for NBC-TV.


Pummeling the Professors
IMPOSTORS IN THE TEMPLE
By Martin Anderson. 255 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


The Vacation Home That's Seaworthy
IT'S summertime, and for live-aboards like Nancy and Paul Dobbin, Patrick Snow and Edward and Carolyn Curtis, the living is easy.
They have unobstructed waterfront views and no lawns to mow.
Their homes are their boats, which are moored at slips at the Imperial Yacht Club on Davenport Avenue in New Rochelle.
It is a practice that communities in many other Westchester waterfront areas forbid.
In Mamaroneck and Rye, for instance, ordinances prohibit people from living year round on boats, although many boat owners spend weekends aboard.


New Districts and Loyalties Fueling Black Political Surge in Mississippi
For many years Ollie Mohammed prospered, presiding over Mohammed's Department Store in the Mississippi Delta city of Belzoni and, after election to the State Senate in 1979, serving in increasingly important posts.
But Mr.
Mohammed, who has been president pro tem of the Senate, lost in the Democratic primary this week, the victim of redistricting and changing voting patterns by blacks.
Mr.
Mohammed, a native Mississippian of Lebanese ancestry, was defeated by a black woman, Barbara Blackmon, who was one of more than a dozen blacks who won in legislative primary races around the state on Tuesday.


INSIDE
Fight for D'Amato's Seat
There are no TV ads yet, but with five weeks to go before the New York Senate primary, four Democrats are waging a quiet struggle.
Page 41.
Insurance Fight in Maine
Insurers are quitting the workers' compensation business in Maine because, they say, the state forces them to absorb huge losses.
Page 36.
Secrets of a Cemetery
A Colonial-era burial ground for black New Yorkers is being hailed as an archeological treasure.
Page 41.


Mutual Funds; What to Track -- Yield or Return?
Most investors evaluate money fund performance in terms of yield, and the Securities and Exchange Commission mandates that performance be measured that way, in a 30-day yield using a standard formula.
That's what funds must use in their advertising.
But some services that gather money fund data report total return, which also tracks capital appreciation and depreciation.
The difference is usually small, but not always.
For example, total return for one of the more actively traded funds, the Harbor Money Market Fund, in December exceeded its yield by more than three-quarters of 1 percent.
In February, return lagged yield by almost the same amount.


Apprehensions Allayed
To the Editor:
I should like to thank Frank Rich for his article "Discovering Family Values at 'Falsettos' "  [ July 12 ] , in which he writes about taking his two young sons to the Broadway musical.


Serbs in Bosnia Allow Red Cross To Visit Camps
Serbian leaders from Bosnia and Herzegovina have given the International Committee of the Red Cross permission to inspect detention centers, Red Cross officials said today.
But the permission comes days after most prisoners were transferred from two centers reported to be among the most brutal.
The Serbian officials agreed on Friday to allow the inspection of a detention center on the grounds of an iron-ore mine at Omarska.
Muslim former prisoners have repeatedly charged that Serbian guards regularly beat inmates to death at Omarska, at the Keraterm ceramic-tile factory outside the town of Prijedor and at other detention sites.


Tip Stevens and John Norman Walker
Rinalda Van Brunt Stevens, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Stevens 3d of Bethlehem, Pa., was married there yesterday to John Norman Walker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Walker of Grafton, Wis.
The Rev.
Keith A. Brown officiated at the First Presbyterian Church.


Joan Hardy, Stephen O'Brien
LAST Saturday afternoon at about 3:30, Stephen O'Brien, 31 years old, stood on the dock of Chapel Island, a one-acre island in Upper Saranac Lake in the Adirondacks, wearing tuxedo trousers and a white double-breasted dinner jacket.
It was a strange sight -- a man in black tie in the middle of the wilderness -- but it perfectly captured the style of his wedding.
As the bride, Joan Hardy, 35, said: "We wanted a formal wedding in natural, rustic surroundings. We'd heard stories about how life used to be in the old Adirondack camps. The women arrived every summer with trunkloads of formal clothes, fine china and silver. At night, they would put on long dresses and jewels and go down to the lake by boat for a dinner-dance."


Where Steaks Once Ruled the Menu
STEAK has always been king at the Palm restaurants.
This summer, in response to 90's eating habits, one of the Palms has changed its name and menu.
The restaurant, at the Hedges' Inn in East Hampton, is now the James Lane Cafe.
Diners expecting hefty portions of beef, in steakhouse tradition, will still find them, but there is lighter fare, as well.
Neither option is a hands-down winner.
The health-conscious and red-meat routes provide contain pleasures and pitfalls.


Making a Difference; Holding the Line on Brazil's Economy
With the political future of President Fernando Collor de Mello of Brazil increasingly in doubt, a showdown is nearing that could determine the future of the country's economy as well.
In the middle of the battle over the economy, Latin America's largest, is a mild-mannered banker who once wrote a book on Machiavelli and Brazilian politics: Marcilio Marques Moreira, the country's 60-year-old economy minister.


AUGUST 2-8: New York City; Police Commissioner Resigns, Citing Wife's Health
In a move that resonated across the country's largest police force, Lee P. Brown stepped down as New York City's Police Commissioner last week only two and a half years into his term, citing the need to spend more time with his ailing wife, Yvonne.
His abrupt resignation, which becomes effective Sept. 1, raised questions about whether the community-policing program he envisioned would be realized.
The program would transform the 28,000-member department by increasing the number of officers on foot patrol and encouraging them to form ties with their communities.
There was speculation that Mr.
Brown was leaving because of recent public disagreements with the administration of Mayor David N. Dinkins.
Mr.
Brown dismissed such notions, saying that he regretted leaving before community policing had become a reality in New York but that his first priority was his family.
Police officials said his wife was suffering from cancer.


Sports of The Times; Dream Team Justified More Dreams
There were many dreams in the arena.
There was Magic Johnson's dream to play again, to slip a pass to a teammate, to hear the crowd roar.
There was the dream of Croatia and Lithuania to compete in the Summer Games, to show the world they exist.
Even cranks like me, who have brooded about bringing hard-bitten millionaire professionals into the formerly amateur Olympics, should be able to see that the Dream Team justified the dreams.
There was, however, no dream of Croatia beating the United States in basketball, certainly not in the 20th century, and who knows about the 21st?


Planning From the Bottom Up
THE NATURE OF DEVELOPMENT
A Report From the Rural Tropics  on the Quest for Sustainable Economic Growth.
By Roger D. Stone.
Illustrated. 286 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Brits in Euroland
While William safire takes a break, this
Brit,
probably to minimal applause, gets a chance to take over.
I detest that designation, with its connotation of "brittle," as though we were cashew nuts, but nobody seems to know what we denizens of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland ought to be called.
The apocope
Brit
looks like a slap in the collective face of those who dared to call their island "Great." Great Britain, of course, stands in opposition to Little Britain, or Brittany; there was never any intention of national aggrandizement in the epithet.
Britain is a very unhandy title for a country that is not predominantly Celtic.
"Britons never never never shall be slaves" is still sung at the last night of our summer promenade concerts, but with deep irony.
As Bernard Shaw put it,
Britons
are free to do whatever the Government and public opinion tell them.
Britons were slaves under the Romans, though they were Welsh Celts -- the woad-wearing Britanni whom the Romans Romanized.


Louise V. Weir, George Creel 3d
Mrs.
Mahlon S. Weir of Delray Beach, Fla., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Louise Vernice Weir, to George R. Creel 3d, the son of Col. and Mrs.
Creel Jr. of Tequesta, Fla.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Weir, 29 years old, is a junior analyst in the high-yield research department at Bear Stearns &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Auburn University, as did her fiance.
Her late father was a real-estate investor in Delray Beach and the owner of Weir Auto Electric Inc. there.
Her mother, Joan Weir, is the president of the company.


Melanie Mier, Joseph Sokol
Dr. and Mrs.
Lino Mier of Tenafly, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Melanie Grace Mier, to Dr.
Joseph Lawrence Sokol, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Sokol of Rockville Centre, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Dr.
Mier, 28 years old, is a pediatric resident at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.D. from Mount Sinai Medical School.


Spar Aerospace reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Karachi Journal; Crusader vs. Mullahs: What Is a Woman's Place?
There are a number of reasons that Akhter Hameed Khan, a willow-thin poet, scholar and social campaigner of 78, may be executed, although in Pakistan's emotion-charged political climate, where Islam is both faith and lash, the reasons are never simply put.
Perhaps it is because Bilquis Begum and thousands of women like her leave their homes in the slums and hurry to work each morning.


A Glossy Olympics Hits the Finish Line
Like all Olympics, the 1992 Summer Games, which ended here tonight, have generated themes for eternal storage.
They have presented the world enduring evidence of fading amateurism, rampant commercialism, a new political order, questionable sportsmanship and the occasional triumph of the human spirit.
Some symbols have been vastly more recognizable than others, such as a father leaping out of his seat in the Olympic Stadium to help his injured son finish a 400-meter race on the track, or the medal tables that reflected the last vestige of a once-great Soviet sports system.


Dynamic American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  ISRAEL CHANGES STANCE ON P.L.O.
The new Israeli Government said it would press for changes in the law prohibiting Israelis from having any contact with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
One senior official called the law "stupid." A1  Jewish settlers acted in defiance of the Israeli Government.
A7  A SECOND SARAJEVO?
In the northwestern corner of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbian forces are cutting food deliveries and escape routes for 300,000 people.
Some relief workers fear that Bihac, the largest city in the Muslim enclave, will be consumed by violence.
A1  WHAT PRICE PEACE?
News Analysis: Not one Western leader has yet determined what price should be paid, in Western lives and money, to halt the barbarity in what used to be Yugoslavia.
A8  ALLIES MAP BALKAN PLAN
After talks among with France and Britain, United States officials said an agreement was near on a Security Council resolution to authorize "all necessary means" to deliver food and medicine to Bosnia.
A8  CLINTON ON THE CAMPS
The Democratic Presidential nominee said the United States should consider using military force to open Serbian detention camps and should also weigh lifting arms embargos against Bosnia and Croatia.
A8  BIRTH PANGS IN SLOVAKIA
As the union of Czechs and Slovaks heads toward its end, opposition politicians in Slovakia fear the nationalist leader is showing signs of authoritarianism.
A3  LEFT OUT AFTER INDEPENDENCE
Many people who helped in the struggle for Estonia's independence have been left without a state: They are non-Estonians, members of other ethnic groups who cannot vote or own property.
A9  Thousands flee Afghanistan's capital as fighting continues.
A5  Discord at the top has the World Health Organization in turmoil.
A3  U.N. inspects a site in Iraq.
A3  From Nigeria, a call for reparations for the slave trade.
A2  Karachi Journal: The ordeal of a poet and social campaigner.
A4  National A10-14  CONTROLLING THE CONVENTION
Republicans have plotted for weeks for their convention in Houston.
But beneath all the plans for images and theatrics, is a single serious goal: to prevent the event from becoming a review of President Bush's campaign problems.
A1  BUSH REUSES FEAR TACTICS
Struggling to revive his campaign, President Bush is returning to his strategy of 1988, portraying himself as the less scary candidate.
A14  REPUBLICANS CALL FOR TAX CUTS
Seven leading Republican conservatives urged President Bush's campaign to adopt a platform that would include tax cuts and limits on growth of entitlement spending.
A14  A PREDATOR'S RETURN
The Rocky Mountain gray wolf is again roaming western Montana, and its return under Federal protection offers a test of how far society is prepared to go to accept a feared predator.
A1  HILLARY CLINTON ADDRESSES A.B.A.
At the annual meeting of the American Bar Association, Hillary Clinton celebrated the recent advances of women in the legal profession.
A10  RACIAL TURMOIL IN A TEXAS CITY
Blacks and whites in Tyler, Tex. have lived together quietly for years.
But now several cases of perceived injustice by the police and the courts has broken the quiet.
A10  NEW WRINKLE IN AIDS DISPUTE
A disagreement between French and British researchers over who should get credit for early research on AIDS may have implications for the French Government's effort to renegotiate a patent royalty agreement with the United States.
A11  QE2 STEAMS TOWARD BOSTON
The Queen Elizabeth 2, a 74-foot gash in its hull, began steaming toward Boston as American and British investigators prepared for a hearing into why the ship hit an underwater obstacle.
A12  A CALLING IN CONGRESS
Washington at Work: Senator John Kerry, who played an active role in the antiwar movement 20 years ago, knew he could not walk away the issue of missing Americans in Vietnam.
A13
Southwestern Bell and Bell South reached pacts with unions.
A15  Metro Digest B1  CAR THEFT AS CHILD'S PLAY
Car theft in Newark and neighboring cities has reached epidemic proportions.
Even the most youthful thieves -- some are as young as 9 years old -- can penetrate any barrier and be behind the wheel in a matter of seconds.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  A challenge for Marisa Tomei.
C13  Music: "Der Rosenkavalier" at Santa Fe.
C13  Critic's Notebook: Tanglewood makes room for rock.
C13  Jazz meets tap.
C13  The Duke Ellington sound.
C18  Dance: In Review C14  Word and Image:  "Crazy in Love." C16  "Young Men and Fire." C18  Sports C1-12  THE OLYMPICS IN RETROSPECT
The Olympic Games presented a host of themes -- fading amateurism, rampant commercialism, political reordering, questionable sportsmanship and an occasional triumph of the human spirit.
But nothing will be more identifiable with the Barcelona Games than the super-celebrities of the Dream Team.
A1  Baseball: Yankee rookie masterful in debut.
C9  Cubs topple Mets.
C9  Tigers romp over Blue Jays.
C9  Glavine, Braves keep rolling.
C9  Columns:  Anderson on Cuban sports.
C2  Vecsey on Barcelona.
C4  Features: Sidelines C2  Football: Giants win exhibition opener.
C11  Jets' rusher making comeback.
C11  Golf: Daly rests on one laurel.
C12  Olympics:  South Korean wins marathon.
C3  Ben Johnson is ejected.
C3  Coach a mystery but Cuban boxers aren't.
C1  Bird and Johnson ponder their futures.
C3  Obituaries B6  Ayatollah Khoei, leading scholar of Shiite Islam.
Thomas J. McIntyre, former Democratic Senator of New Hampshire.
Reinout P. Kroon, engineer who developed American jet engine.
Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  A new opening for Times Square.
America isn't Asia's cop.
David Shipley: Herbert Hoover.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: Record of contempt.
Michael Crichton: Time for tough talk in the land of the rising sun.
David R. Carlin Jr.: The tyranny of the pro-choice snobs.
Steve H. Hanke: The Fed is a failure, so let's get rid of it.


Alpha 1 Biomedicals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jodie Karen, Jeremy Sykes
Jodie Lynne Karen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Karen of Wayside, N.J., was married yesterday to Jeremy Henry Flagg Sykes, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald M. Sykes of Rumson, N.J.
Rabbi Glenn Jacob officiated at the Manor, a catering hall in West Orange, N.J.
Mrs.
Sykes, 20 years old, and her husband, 22, are students at Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is the president of Sonata Bay Development Corporation, a real-estate development company in Bayville, N.J.
Her mother, Barbara Jo Karen, is the head of the English department at Hillel High School in Ocean Township, N.J.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Active Noise and Vibration Technologies Inc., three million common shares.
Paine Webber.


BARCELONA: Sports of The Times; The Cuban Medal Crisis Affects United States
EVEN with Fidel Castro on display in full beard and what passes for full dress uniform, Cuba arrived quietly, confident but not arrogant.
Before the Olympics began, its minister of sport, Conrado Martinez, talked of its athletes winning "20 or more medals" and quoted the poet Antonio Machado.
"We find our way forward," he said, "by moving forward."


Agouron Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Miss Woodworth, John Scheinman
Susan Ellen Woodworth, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Woodworth Sr. of Wellesley Hills, Mass., was married yesterday to John Eric Scheinman, a son of Phyllis Braff of East Hampton, L.I., and Graham M. Scheinman of New York.
The Rev.
Harry Hoehler, a Unitarian minister, and Rabbi Eliott Hurvitz officiated at Babson College in Wellesley, Mass.
Mrs.
Scheinman, 26 years old, graduated from Keene State College.
She is a rehabilitation assistant at the New England Rehabilitation Center in Portland, Me.
Her father is a certified public accountant in Wellesley Hills.


Dividend Meetings


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Placed Kevin Mitchell and Greg Briley, outfielders, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contracts of Mike Blowers, infielder, and John Moses, outfielder, from Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
National League
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Recalled Darryl Kile, pitcher, from Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
Waived Benny DiStefano, infielder.
NEW YORK METS -- Optioned Pat Howell, outfielder, to Tidewater of the International League.
Placed Dave Magadan, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Howell from Tidewater.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Optioned Willam Pennyfeather, outfielder, to Carolina of the Southern League.
Activated Zane Smith, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Football  National Football League
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Troy Vincent, cornerback.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Signed Rich Gannon, quarterback.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Agreed to terms with Tony Woods, defensive end, on a one-year contract.
Canadian Football League
BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Michael Reddick, wide receiver. Horse racing
SARATOGA -- Fined trainer Gasper Moschera $1,000 for scratching Carli's Command on Friday after wagering had begun and jockey Jorge Chavez for 10 days for a careless ride aboard Maudsleigh in the sixth race on Saturday.
College
ARIZONA STATE -- Suspended Grady Benton, quarterback, and Derrick Land, wide receiver, for one game after pleading no contest to the fraudulent use of a credit card.


Car in Clinton Motorcade Has a Collision
Two vehicles in the motorcade of Gov.
Bill Clinton collided yesterday on the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway.
Two people suffered cuts and bruises, but no one was seriously hurt.
A sedan carrying aides in the Clinton campaign, including the press secretary, Dee Dee Myers, was hit from behind by a van carrying reporters and photographers traveling with the Democratic Presidential nominee.


Is Pelican Trying to Tell Us Something?
To the Editor:
"The Pelicans Are Coming! To the South Shore!" (news article, July 22), on the appearance of brown pelicans on Long Island, raises important questions.
Five years ago my wife and I reported what was then probably the northernmost brown pelican rookery, near Maryland's Assateague Island.
Pelicans share this nesting site with egrets, herons, glossy ibis and a variety of henpecked gulls.


Harlem's Witness for the Chancellor
If there is any proof that the smaller, more specialized public high schools proposed for New York City can work, consider the school that Deborah Meier built.
Working with largely poor, minority students whom other schools have written off, Ms.
Meier's project, Central Park East Secondary School, has won widespread praise.
In a city where just 38.9 percent of students graduate high school within four years, Central Park East, which opened in 1985, graduated 71 percent of its ninth-grade class in four years.


Navy Resembles a Fraternity in Its Sexism
To the Editor:
Reading your July 18 front-page article on the Navy's cancellation of the promotions of two senior admirals in the aftermath of the Tailhook Association sexual harassment scandal inspired me in an odd way.


Journalist Takes His Crusade to the Voters
Across America, political candidates are trotting out their heroes: John F. Kennedy as the young leader for a new era, Harry S. Truman as ordinary man summoned to greatness, Horace Greeley as crusading newspaper editor running for President to change the world.
Horace Greeley?


REPUBLICANS FRET ABOUT CONVENTION
The Republicans knew it would be a challenge: turning the renominations of George Bush and Dan Quayle here next week into the kind of drama that would attract positive television reviews the way the Democrats did with their convention last month.
Party officials have plotted for weeks, fine-tuning the roster of speakers, advising prominent delegates when to talk and when not to, even preparing a fireworks display for inside the Astrodome.


Mourning Begins, and Battle Against AIDS Goes On
After watching their only child die from a disease she battled privately and publicly for years, Jerrold and Carol Gertz yesterday took comfort in the company of friends and the knowledge that Alison never wavered in her determination to win both of her fights against AIDS.
"She never gave in to it," Mrs.
Gertz said.
"She never thought she was dying, she never thought about her own death, just about what she could do with those last few years."


Review/Television; A Family 'Paradise' Without Men
There is more female bonding in "Crazy in Love" than even the characters can stand.
Gerald Ayres's two-hour adaptation of Luanne Rice's novel takes place mainly on an island in Puget Sound, where three generations of women live an apparently idyllic life that seethes with past failures and present fears.
Men are much on their minds.
Grandma Pem (Herta Ware) lost her husband to the sea -- or was it to something or somebody else? -- when she was in her 20's.
Now Pem's memory is spotty and her behavior may be odd, but you can count on her coming through with the insights of age when the script requires them.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Farm Credit Bank is offering $280 million of floating-rate notes due in 1993 at par through J. P. Morgan Securities.
The noncallable floating-rate notes were initially priced to float at 275 basis points below the prime rate, currently at 6 percent. *
Norwest Financial Inc. is offering $150 million of 6 percent notes due in 1997 at a price of 99.82 to yield 6.042 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable issue is rated Aa-3 by Moody's Investors Service and A+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
Common Stock  *
Banyan Systems Inc., Westboro, Mass., a computer software company, is making an initial public offering of 2.67 million common shares at $10.50 a share through Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co. *
First CashInc., Arlington, Tex., an operator of pawn shops, is offering 1.37 million common shares at $6 a share through William K. Woodruff &amp; Co. as sole underwriter. *
Rail America Inc., Lake Ridge, Va., a subsidiary of Boca Raton Capital Corp., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an initial public offering of an unspecified amount of units.
Each unit consists of common stock and stock-purchase warrants. *
Southtrust Corp., Birmingham, Ala., a bank-holding company, is offering 2.65 million common shares at $24 a share through Merrill Lynch.
Ratings *
Illinois's general-obligation bond rating has been downgraded to AA-, from AA, by S.&amp; P. *
Jamaica Water Supply Co.'s debt rating is under review for possible downgrading by Moody's. *
Southwestern Bell Telephone Co.'s debt rating is under review for possible downgrading by Moody's. *
Stop &amp; Shop Cos.' subordinated debt rating has been increased to B+, from B, by S.&amp; P.


Review/Music; 'Rosenkavalier' and 'Giovanni' In Santa Fe Opera Productions
It has been interesting these past 20 years to watch opera's two dominant fashions attempt to hold hands while fleeing in opposite directions.
One idea has been the authenticity movement, which takes present performance practices back to past ones; the second is updated opera in which old stories are made to look brand new.
Now this contrary motion seems to be reversing itself.
The Santa Fe Opera's new "Don Giovanni" -- like the New York City Opera's recent "Carmen," "Il Matrimonio Segreto" at Glimmerglass and especially the Metropolitan Opera's current "Ring" cycle -- shows that the partisans of literalism are fighting back.
Miguel Romero's scenic design, with its thick granite-like stucco walls, ponderous statuary and outsized molding fragments, makes us think briefly in the abstract, but inside this heavy frame, Mozart's characters dress and behave as members of Don Juan's world, not ours.


Sea Galley Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 14


Serbian Forces Surround a City In a Muslim Enclave in Bosnia
Serbian forces are tightening a noose around the northwestern corner of Bosnia and Herzegovina, cutting food deliveries and escape routes for 300,000 increasingly desperate residents.
Some relief workers fear that Bihac, the largest city in this Muslim enclave, could soon become a second Sarajevo, an encircled city consumed by violence and human suffering.


Quality Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Equestrian; Shickingly Stubborn Horses Open Door for American Surprise
Jos Lansink went into the individual show-jumping final of the Olympic equestrian competition today strongly favored to win the gold medal, but his chestnut gelding had apparently not been told.
Distracted by a pool of water, the horse refused the eighth fence and the Dutch rider was out of the competition.
On a day that began with heavy storms, surprises were, of course, to be expected.
Yet it was the equestrian variable that repeatedly brought a huge crowd to its feet at the Royal Polo Club here today.
The field included many of the world's best riders, but more than ever the horse had the last word.


Abroad at Home; Record Of Contempt
From a constitutional perspective, the single most striking feature of the Reagan-Bush years in Washington has been contempt for law: contempt not in some technical sense but in a profound disregard for the constraints and balances that have distinguished the American system for 200 years.
The two Presidents were confronted much of the time by laws they did not like and Congresses that would not change the law.
They and their legal advisers dealt with the problem by a number of slippery devices that effectively shifted much of the lawmaking power from Congress, where the Framers of the Constitution put it, to the executive.


British-French Dispute May Affect H.I.V. Patent
A newly disclosed dispute between French and British research institutes over sharing credit for early research on the virus that causes AIDS may have implications for the French Government's effort to renegotiate a patent royalty agreement with the United States over AIDS tests, lawyers said today.
The British-French dispute, outlined in an article in the July 30 issue of the British journal Nature, suggests that the French were not as far along as American researchers in 1984 in developing a test for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, lawyers for the American researchers said.
The lawyers said the disagreement also throws light on how well the French researchers keep their agreements with collaborators in other nations.


Piedmont Management reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


An Influential Nigerian Insists West Owes Africa for Slavery
Chief Moshood Kashimawo Abiola was his parents' 23d child but the only one to live past infancy.
His chances of survival appeared so slim at first that his parents did not bother giving him a full name.
They simply called him Kashimawo, which in Yoruba roughly means, "Let us watch and see whether this one too will die."
Chief Abiola, who is now 54 years old, has not only survived but has also prospered on a grand scale.
Accustomed to getting his way and with an air of confidence that some call arrogant and inflated, he has a single consuming passion: He wants white people in Europe, America and the Middle East to pay the African continent for the damage done during the slave trade.
He dismisses the fact that many blacks also captured and sold slaves.


Regency Bancshares reports earnings for Year to June 30


Despite Its 108 Medals, U.S. Rates Mixed Success
Olympic success is not an easy thing to measure, woven as it is through a loom of human drama and national pride.
So as the United States came to the end of a fortnight in which it won 108 medals, the third-most in its history in the Summer Games, it was not surprising that the yardsticks applied to the experience were varied and occasionally mismatched .
Leroy Walker, the chef de mission for the United States delegation here and the nominee as the next United States Olympic Committee president, today called the Games "very successful" in one breath and then, in another, said, "we were embarrassed" by the fact that two American athletes tested positive for a banned substance and were sent home.


Phoenix Resource Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Time for the Dream To Take Its Flight
It was long after midnight and the party along Las Ramblas was in full swing.
Earlier on Saturday evening, Spain had won gold medals in soccer and the men's 1,500 meters, so there was another reason to raise a glass of vino tinto, if anyone needed one on this mile-long avenue of shops, cafes and nights spent dancing in the street.
The tables were full and the avenue was an obstacle course of mimes, musicians, vendors and night crawlers.
It's hard to make a scene when the whole place is one, but there was a group that could and did: the United States men's basketball team.


Resorting to Blandishments To Fight Image of Blandness
IN A SERIES of trenchant television commercials for Nike, Spike Lee, as the excitable Mars Blackmon, asked Michael Jordan whether his basketball prowess was a result of his choice of athletic footwear: "Is it the shoes?"
Likewise, when a product achieves success in the marketplace, particularly in the always-difficult task of changing consumer perceptions, the question is asked: "Is it the ads?" In one current instance, at least, the answer seems to be yes.


America Isn't Asia's Cop
The Soviet threat is ended.
America has been able to scale down radically its troop strength in Europe.
But in Asia, apart from the unplanned base closings in the Philippines, U.S. forces remain in place -- including 40,000 each in South Korea and and Japan.
Political and budgetary pressures will rightly tempt the next President to scale down these troop levels.
A smaller U.S. military garrison makes good sense, provided Washington also works to build up a new system of regional collective security.
Such a system would provide the best insurance against conflicts between Asian states as Japan raises its military profile in the region.


CGI Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


USBancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Youth Is Served as Americans Grab a Bronze
The match turned on a dime, and it was all too obvious today who had become loose change on the United States volleyball team.
Steve Timmons, ailing and sleep-deprived, went out.
Bob Samuelson, spunky and strong, replaced him.
With the legend gone and with the wild child ripping 18 kills and 6 blocks from the outside hitter spot, the Americans rallied for a 12-15, 15-13, 15-7, 15-11 victory over Cuba for a bronze medal at the Palau Sant Jordi.


Forum Retirement Partners reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


World Economies


For Better Living Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Biscayne Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Deerbank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Spectrum Signal Processing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


3-D Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Peace at What Cost?
As the West weighs action in the Balkans, no leader has determined what price should be paid in lives and money.
News analysis, page A8.


What Price Bosnia?  Atrocity Reports Make West Consider How Far It Should Go to End Violence
So far, not a single Western leader has determined what price should be paid, in Western lives and money, to halt the barbarity in what used to be Yugoslavia.
Until now, the unspoken assumption in the West was that as long as Serbs, Croats and Muslims were determined to fight one another, there was little the outside world could do to stop them.


Could Lasorda Soon Bleed Giant Orange?
Tommy Lasorda might end his 43-year association with the Los Angeles Dodgers and become manager of the Giants if they move to St.
Petersburg, Fla., a published report says.
The Fort Worth Star-Telegram, citing two people close to the situation, reported yesterday that Lasorda could join the Giants before the 1993 season and manage at least one season before becoming general manager.
Under the scenario, the former Texas Rangers manager Bobby Valentine, who was fired July 9, would become Lasorda's third-base coach, then take over as manager when Lasorda moves into the front office.


McElligott Departees Taking Big Accounts
Two partners at McElligott Wright Morrison White, the Minneapolis agency splitting up over intense squabbling among its top executives, will, as was anticipated, leave to join DDB Needham New York.
And they are likely to bring with them a large dowry: two accounts that have constituted $25 million of the splintered shop's $30 million in billings.
Tony Wright, 31 years old, who has been president at McElligott Wright, will become an executive vice president and group account director, reporting to Andy Berlin, president of DDB Needham New York.
And John Morrison, 40, who has been associate creative director at McElligott Wright, will become an executive vice president and group creative director, reporting to Robert Mackall and Jack Mariucci, executive vice presidents and executive creative directors.
Both appointments will take effect on Sept. 1.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Gov.
Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore


Chemfab Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Little Prince Productions reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


University National Bank &amp; Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Treasury Has Big Schedule
A heavy supply of new Treasury securities will affect the market this week as the Government's quarterly refunding gets under way.
The financings will begin with today's regular auction of new three- and six-month bills, followed tomorrow by an auction of new three-year notes.
On Wednesday, the Treasury will auction a new 10-year note and on Thursday a new 30-year bond.


The Tyranny of the Pro-Choice Snobs
The national Democratic leadership has made it plain that there is no room in the party for opposition to abortion.
Being pro-choice is not simply a majority position; it has become a mandatory position.
The Democrats no longer have a big tent.
Instead it reminds me of the tent at a revival meeting of religious enthusiasts.
At the Democratic National Convention there was much talk about the party being the party of "inclusiveness" -- of males and females, whites and non-whites, gays and straights, etc.
Yet Gov.
Robert Casey of Pennsylvania, a pro-life Democrat, was not allowed to address the delegates or present a minority report on the party's abortion position.
A pro-choice Republican was allowed to speak, but the two-term governor of our fifth-largest state was the victim of a gag rule because he didn't follow the party line.


Newsprint Makers' Troubles May Haunt Papers One Day
THE newsprint business has rarely, if ever, seen worse days.
There is a glut of newsprint available for sale, but the demand from newspapers is tepid because of the recession.
This huge imbalance in supply and demand has been the status quo for more than two years.
"It's an unmitigated disaster," said George B. Adler, an analyst specializing in paper companies at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Platform; BUSH GETS A NUDGE ON HIS TAX POLICY
Asserting that their party needs a dramatically bolder economic policy to win in November, seven leading Republican conservatives are urging President Bush's campaign to adopt a growth-oriented platform that would include sharp cuts in taxes and limits on growth of entitlement spending.
"People are willing to forgive past mistakes, but they won't forgive a lack of vision for the future," the seven conservatives said.
Their memorandum was sent Friday to the President and senior campaign strategists as party officials gathered in Houston to craft the platform for next week's Republican convention.


How to Bring About Change in Cuba
To the Editor:
Critics of my Cuban democracy bill claim that tightening the embargo against Cuba would alienate our allies ("Carrots for Castro," Op-Ed, July 8).
Most of our trading partners, from President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico to Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez of Spain, are disillusioned by their failed attempts to persuade President Fidel Castro to embrace minimal reforms.


A Glimpse of History at a Black Burial Ground


Nancy Malfa, Nelson Canter
Nancy Margot Malfa, a daughter of Horace and Carolyn Malfa of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married yesterday to Nelson Evan Canter, a son of Phyllis L. Canter of Purchase, N.Y., and the late Arnold B. Canter.
The interfaith ceremony at the Beckwith Pointe beach club in New Rochelle, N.Y., was conducted by Cantor Raymond Smolover, with the Rev.
Steven Harris, a Roman Catholic priest, attending.
Mrs.
Canter, 27 years old, is a coordinator of the campus speakers' program for the Advertising Educational Foundation in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father, who retired as president of Cunningham &amp; Walsh Advertising in New York, is an independent marketing and advertising consultant.


Dinkins Plans Pay Increase For Managers
Concerned about poor morale among its middle managers, the Dinkins administration is preparing to grant a 4.5 percent pay increase to 3,500 management workers who have not had raises in more than two years, New York City officials said yesterday.
Though it affects only a small percentage of the total municipal work force and will cost a relatively small amount -- $4 million a year out of a $29.5 billion budget -- the raise is of important symbolic value because it gives managers the same increases granted to their unionized subordinates two years ago.


Fate Trips a Filly: Turnback the Alarm Has Fractured Bone
Turnback the Alarm, the country's ranking 3-year-old filly, suffered a fractured bone in her right hind leg while working out this morning on the Saratoga training track and may not race again.
The star filly won the last two races in the Triple Tiara series at Belmont Park this summer and had been training for the Alabama Stakes next Saturday at Saratoga, the next major race en route to the division championship.


Home Intensive Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Medalists
This is the complete list of medal winners of the Barcelona Games.
B-Xiong Ni, China Springboard G-Mark Lenzi, Fredericksburg, Va.
S-Tan Liangde, China B-Dmitri Saoutine, Unified Team WOMEN Platform G-Fu Mingxia, China S-Yelina Mirochina, Unified Team B-Mary Ellen Clark, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Springboard G-Gao Min, China S-Irina Lachko, Unified Team B-Brita Pia Baldus, Germany Equestrian  Ind.
Three-Day Event G-Matthew Ryan, Australia S-Herbert Blocker, Germany B-Robert Tait, New Zealand Team Three-Day Event G-Australia S-New Zealand B-Germany Individual Dressage G-Nicole Uphoff, Germany S-Isabelle Regina Werth, Germany B-Klaus Balkenhol, Germany Team Dressage G-Germany S-the Netherlands B-United States Individual Jumping G-Ludger Beerbaum, Germany S-Piet Raymakers, the Netherlands B-Norman Dello Joio, West Palm Beach, Fla.
Floor Exercise G-Lavinia Corina Milosovici, Romania S-Henrietta Onodi, Hungary B-(tie) Shannon Miller, Edmond, Okla.; Cristina Bontas, Romania; Tatiana Gutsu, Unified Team Uneven Bars G-Lu Li, China S-Tatiana Gutsu, Unified Team B-Shannon Miller, Edmond, Okla.
Vault G-(tie) Henrietta Onodi, Hungary; Lavinia Corina Milosovici, Romania B-Tatiana Lisenko, Unified Team All-Around G-Tatiana Gutsu, Unified Team S-Shannon Miller, Edmond, Okla.
B-Ryohei Koba, Japan Free Rifle G-Lee Eun Chul, South Korea S-Harald Stenvaag, Norway B-Stevan Pletikosic, I.O.P.
Air Pistol G-Wang Yifu, China S-Serguei Pyjianov, Unified Team B-Sorin Babii, Romania Air Rifle G-Iouri Fedkine, Unified Team S-Franck Badiou, France B-Johann Riederer, Germany Free Pistol G-Konstantine Loukachik, Unified Team S-Wang Yifu, China B-Ragnar Skanaker, Sweden WOMEN Air Pistol G-Marina Logvinenko, Unified Team S-Jasna Sekaric, I.O.P.
B-Maria Zdravkova Grousdeva, Bulgaria Three-Position Rifle G-Launi Meili, Cheney, Wash.
S-Nonka Detcheva Matova, Bulgaria B-Malgorzata Ksiazkiewicz, Poland Sport Pistol G-Marina Logvinenko, Unified Team S-Li Duihong, China B-Dorzhsuren Munkhbayar, Mongolia Air Rifle G-Yeo Kab Soon, South Korea S-Vesela Letcheva, Bulgaria B-Aranka Binder, I.O.P.
MIXED Trap G-Petr Hrdlicka, Czechoslovakia S-Kazumi Watanabe, Japan B-Marco Venturini, Italy Skeet G-Zhang Shan, China S-Juan Jorge Giha Yarur, Peru B-Bruno Mario Rossetti, Italy Soccer  G-Spain S-Poland B-Ghana Swimming  MEN 50M Freestyle G-Aleksandr Popov, Unified Team S-Matt Biondi, Castro Valley, Calif.
B-Tom Jager, Tijeras, N.M. 100M Freestyle G-Aleksandr Popov, Unified Team S-Gustavo Borges, Brazil B-Stephan Caron, France 200M Freestyle G-Evgueni Sadovyi, Unified Team S-Anders Holmertz, Sweden B-Antti Alexander Kasvio, Finland 400M Freestyle G-Evgueni Sadovyi, Unified Team S-Kieren John Perkins, Australia B-Anders Holmertz, Sweden 1,500M Freestyle G-Kieren Perkins, Australia S-Glen Housman, Australia B-Joerg Hoffmann, Germany 100M Breast-Stroke G-Nelson Diebel, Highstown, N.J.
S-Norbert Rozsa, Hungary B-Philip Rogers, Australia 200M Breast-Stroke G-Mike Barrowman, Potomac, Md.
S-Norbert Rozsa, Hungary B-Nick Gillingham, Britain 100M Butterfly G-Pablo Morales, Santa Clara, Calif.
S-Rafal Szukala, Poland B-Anthony Conrad Nesty, Surinam 200M Butterfly G-Mel Stewart, Charlotte, N.C.
S-Danyon Loader, New Zealand B-Franck Esposito, France 100M Backstroke G-Mark Tewksbury, Canada S-Jeff Rouse, Fredericksburg, Va.
B-David Berkoff, Huntington Valley, Pa. 200M Backstroke G-Martin Lopez-Zubero, Spain S-Vladimir Selkov, Unified Team B-Stefano Battistelli, Italy 200M Individual Medley G-Tamas Darnyi, Hungary S-Greg Burgess, Jacksonville, Fla.
B-Attila Czene, Hungary 400M Individual Medley G-Tamas Darnyi, Hungary S-Eric Namesnik, Butler, Pa.
B-Luca Sacchi, Italy 400M Freestyle Relay G-United States S-Unified Team B-Germany 800M Freestyle Relay G-Unified Team S-Sweden B-United States 400M Medley Relay G-United States S-Unified Team B-Canada WOMEN 50M Freestyle G-Yang Wenyi, China S-Zhuang Yong, China B-Angel Martino, Tuscaloosa, Ala. 100M Freestyle G-Zhuang Yong, China S-Jenny Thompson, Dover, N.H.
B-Franziska Van Almsick, Germany 200M Freestyle G-Nicole Haislett, St.
Petersburg, Fla.
S-Franziska Van Almsick, Germany B-Kerstin Kielgass, Germany 400M Freestyle G-Dagmar Hase, Germany S-Janet Evans, Placentia, Calif.
B-Hayley Lewis, Australia 800M Freestyle G-Janet Evans, Placentia, Calif.
S-Hayley Lewis, Australia B-Jana Henke, Germany 100M Breast-Stroke G-Yelina Roudkovskaia, Unified Team S-Anita Nall, Towson, Md.
B-Samantha Riley, Australia 200M Breast-Stroke G-Kyoko Iwasaki, Japan S-Lin Li, China B-Anita Nall, Towson, Md. 100M Backstroke G-Kristina Egerszegi, Hungary S-Tunde Szabo, Hungary B-Lea Loveless, Crestwood, N.Y. 200M Backstroke G-Kristina Egerszegi, Hungary S-Dagmar Hase, Germany B-Nicole Stevenson, Australia 100M Butterfly G-Qian Hong, China S-Christine Ahmann-Leighton, Tucson, Ariz.
B-Catherine Plewinski, France 200M Butterfly G-Summer Sanders, Roseville, Calif.
S-Wang Xiaohong, China B-Susan O'Neill, Australia 200M Individual Medley G-Lin Li, China S-Summer Sanders, Roseville, Calif.
B-Daniela Hunger, Germany 400M Individual Medley G-Krisztina Egerszegi, Hungary S-Lin Li, China B-Summer Sanders, Roseville, Calif. 400M Freestyle Relay G-United States S-China B-Germany 400M Medley Relay G-United States S-Germany B-Unified Team Synchronized Swimming  Solo G-Kristen Babb-Sprague, Pleasanton, Calif.
S-Sylvie Frechette, Canada B-Fumiko Okuno, Japan Duet G-Karen Josephson, Concord, Calif., and Sarah Josephson, Concord, Calif.
B-Samson Kitur, Kenya 800M G-William Tanui, Kenya S-Nixon Kiprotich, Kenya B-Johnny Gray, Santa Monica, Calif. 1,500M G-Fermin Cacho Ruiz, Spain S-Rachid El-Basir, Morocco B-Mohamed Ahmed Sulaiman, Qatar 5,000M G-Dieter Baumann, Germany S-Paul Bitok, Kenya B-Fita Bayisa, Ethiopia 10,000M G-Khalid Skah, Morocco S-Richard Chelimo, Kenya B-Addis Abebe, Ethiopia 110M Hurdles G-Mark McKoy, Canada S-Tony Dees, Tampa, Fla.
B-Jack Pierce, Cherry Hill, N.J. 400M Hurdles G-Kevin Young, Los Angeles S-Winthrop Graham, Jamaica B-Kriss Akabusi, Britain 4x100M Relay G-United States S-Nigeria B-Cuba 4x400M Relay G-United States S-Cuba B-Britain Shot-Put G-Michael Stulce, College Station, Tex.
S-James Doehring, Fallbrook, Calif.
B-Viacheslav Lykho, Unified Team Triple Jump G-Mike Conley, Fayetteville, Ark.
S-Charles Simpkins, Aiken, S.C.
B-Frank Rutherford, Bahamas Javelin G-Jan Zelezny, Czechoslovakia S-Seppo Raty, Finland B-Steve Backley, Britain High Jump G-Javier Sotomayor, Cuba S-Patrik Sjoeberg, Sweden B-(tie) Artur Partyka, Poland; Timothy Forsythe, Australia; Hollis Conway, Lafayette, La.
Hammer Throw G-Andrey Abduvaliyev, Unified Team S-Igor Astapkovich, Unified Team B-Igor Nikulin, Unified Team Long Jump G-Carl Lewis, Houston S-Mike Powell, Alta Loma, Calif.
B-Joe Greene, Columbus, Ohio Pole Vault G-Maksim Tarassov, Unified Team S-Igor Trandenkov, Unified Team B-Javier Garcia Chico, Spain Decathlon G-Robert Zmelik, Czechoslovakia S-Antonio Penalver, Spain B-Dave Johnson, Pomona, Calif.
Discus G-Romas Ubartas, Lithuania S-Jurgen Schult, Germany B-Roberto Moya, Cuba 20KM Walk G-Daniel Plaza Montero, Spain S-Guillaume Leblanc, Canada B-Giovanni de Benedictis, Italy 50KM Walk G-Andrei Perlov, Unified Team S-Carlos Mercenario Carbajal, Mexico B-Ronald Weigel, Germany 3,000M Steeplechase G-Mathew Birir, Kenya S-Patrick Sang, Kenya B-William Mutwol, Kenya Marathon G-Hwang Young-Cho, South Korea S-Koitchi Morishita, Japan B-Stephan Freigang, Germany WOMEN 100M G-Gail Devers, Palmdale, Calif.
S-Juliet Cuthbert, Jamaica B-Irina Privalova, Unified Team 200M G-Gwen Torrence, Decatur, Ga.
B-Janeene Vickers, Los Angeles 4x100M Relay G-United States S-Unified Team B-Nigeria 4x400M Relay G-Unified Team S-United States B-Britain Javelin G-Silke Renk, Germany S-Natalia Shikolenko, Unified Team B-Karen Forkel, Germany Long Jump G-Heike Drechsler, Germany S-Inessa Kravets, Unified Team B-Jackie Joyner-Kersee, Canoga Park, Calif.
High Jump G-Heike Henkel, Germany S-Galina Astafei, Romania B-Joanet Quintero, Cuba Shot-Put G-Svetlana Kriveleva, Unified Team S-Huang Zhihong, China B-Kathrin Neimke, Germany Heptathlon G-Jackie Joyner-Kersee, Canoga Park, Calif.
B-Valentin Jordanov, Bulgaria 126 Pounds G-Alejandro Puerto Diaz, Cuba S-Serguei Smal, Unified Team B-Kim Yong Sik, North Korea 137 Pounds G-John Smith, Stillwater, Okla.
S-Asgari Mohammadian, Iran B-Lazaro Reinoso Martinez, Cuba 150 Pounds G-Arsen Fadzaev, Unified Team S-Valentin Dotchev Getzov, Bulgaria B-Kosei Akaishi, Japan 163 Pounds G-Park Jang Soon, South Korea S-Kenny Monday, Stillwater, Okla.
B-Amir Reza Khadem Azghadi, Iran 182 Pounds G-Kevin Jackson, Ames, Iowa S-Elmadi Jabraijlov, Unified Team B-Rasul Khadem Azghadi, Iran 198 Pounds G-Makharbek Khadartsev, Unified Team S-Kenan Simsek, Turkey B-Chris Campbell, Fayetteville, N.Y. 220 Pounds G-Leri Khabelov, Unified Team S-Heiko Balz, Germany B-Ali Kayali, Turkey 286 Pounds G-Bruce Baumgartner, Cambridge Springs, Pa.
S-Jeff Thue, Canada B-David Gobedjichvili, Unified Team Greco-Roman 106 Pounds G-Oleg Koutherenko, Unified Team S-Vincenzo Maenza, Italy B-Wilber Sanchez, Cuba 115 Pounds G-Jon Ronningen, Norway S-Alfred Ter-Mkrttchian, Unified Team B-Min Kyung Kap, South Korea 126 Pounds G-An Han Bong, South Korea S-Rifat Yildiz, Germany B-Sheng Zetian, China 137 Pounds G-M.
Louis Park, Minn.
B-Serguei Demiachkievitch, Unified Team 286 Pounds G-Aleksandr Karelin, Unified Team S-Tomas Johansson, Sweden B-Ioan Grigoras, Romania Yachting  Soling G-Denmark S-United States B-Britain Finn G-Jose Van Der Ploeg, Spain S-Brian Ledbetter, San Diego B-Craig Monk, New Zealand Tornado G-France S-United States B-Australia Europe G-Linda Anderson, Norway S-Natalia Via Dufresne, Spain B-Julia Trotman, Syosset, N.Y.
Flying Dutchman G-Spain S-United States B-Denmark Star G-United States S-New Zealand B-Canada Men's Sailboard G-Franck David, France S-Mike Gebhardt, Fort Walton Beach, Fla.
B-Lars Kleppich, Australia Women's Sailboard G-Barbara Kendall, New Zealand S-Zhang Xiaodong, China B-Dorien De Vries, the Netherlands Men's 470 G-Spain S-United States B-Estonia Women's 470 G-Spain S-New Zealand B-United States
--------------------
WORLD RECORDS World records set or tied at the 1992 Summer Olympics.
RECORDS SET Archery Women Total - Cho Youn-Jeong, South Korea, 1,375, old record: 1,370, Lee Eun-Kyung, South Korea, 1990.
Cycling Men 4,000M pursuit - Chris Boardman, Britain, 4:24.496; old record, Boardman, 4:27.357, 1992. 4,000M team pursuit - Germany, 4:08.791; old record, 4:10.438, Australia, 1992.
Swimming Men 100 backstroke - Jeff Rouse, Fredericksburg, Va., 53.86; old record, 53.93, Rouse, 1991. 200 breast-stroke - Mike Barrowman, Potomac, Md., 2:10.16; old record, 2:10.60, Barrowman, 1991. 400 freestyle - Evgueni Sadovyi, Unified Team, 3:45.00; old record, 3:46.47, Kieren Perkins, Australia, 1992. 800 freestyle relay - Unified Team, 7:11.95; old record, 7:12.51, United States, 1988. 1,500 freestyle - Kieren Perkins, Australia, 14.43.48; old record, 14:48.40, Perkins, 1992.
Women 50 freestyle - Yang Wenyi, China, 24.79; old record, 24.98, Wenyi, China, 1988. 200 individual medley - Lin Li, China, 2:11.65; old record, 2:11.73, Ute Geweniger, East Germany, 1981. 400 freestyle relay - United States, 3:39.46; old record, 3:40.57, East Germany, 1986. 400 medley relay - United States, 4:02.54; old record, 4:03.69, East Germany, 1984.
Track and Field Men 400 hurdles - Kevin Young, Los Angeles, 46.78; old world record, 47.02, Edwin Moses, United States, 1983. 400 relay - United States, 37.40; old record, 37.50, United States, 1991. 1,600 relay - United States, 2:55.74; old record, 2:56.16, United States, 1968 and tied by U.S., 1988.
RECORD TIED Weightlifting 198-pound Clean And Jerk - Kakhi Kakhiachvili, Unified Team, 518 (235.0), record set by Anatoly Khrapaty, Soviet Union, 1988.


Affymax N.V.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kabul Peace Talks Fail, and Shelling Goes On
Thousands of people fled the capital and shelling killed at least 11 today as the Government failed to negotiate a cease-fire between rival guerrilla factions.
A Defense Ministry spokesman quoted by the official Kabul radio said 11 people had been killed and 30 wounded by rocketing of residential areas.
He blamed the Hezb-i-Islami party of the Islamic fundamentalist leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar for the attack.


No Headline
I wanted to scare her so that maybe she would go into a drug treatment program.
I never meant to kill that kid.
That was my only daughter. -- DAISY HUTSON of Jamaica, Queens, who shot and killed her daughter, Renee.  [ B1:2. ]


AlaTeen Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SNC Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Marcey Waters, Adam Gilbert
Marcey Lynn Waters, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Waters of Camarillo, Calif., was married yesterday to Adam Matthew Gilbert, a son of Judith G. Kautto of Chappaqua, N.Y., and the late Ross L. Gilbert.
Cantor Michael Anatole officiated at the Casa Sirena Resort in Oxnard, Calif.
Ms.
Waters, who is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from the University of California at San Diego, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Next month she will start doctoral studies in chemistry at the University of Chicago, where her husband will be a postdoctoral fellow in organometallic chemistry.


DRCA Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


B&amp;H Maritime Carriers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Books of The Times; Exorcising Ghosts of Searing Flames
Young Men and Fire  By Norman Maclean  Illustrated. 301 pages.
University of Chicago Press. $19.95.
Norman Maclean's "Young Men and Fire" is a reconstruction of the catastrophic Mann Gulch forest fire, which blazed over some 4,500 acres in the mountains of western Montana on Aug. 5, 1949.
The first question the story raises is, why did the author choose to write it as a factual report instead of imagining it as fiction?
After all, the best way to describe a forest fire would seem to be from inside it, and the best way to do that would be to imagine it, unless you happened to be right there in the middle of it, which Mr.
Maclean was not.
Moreover, he had proved his ability to make fiction out of fact, if one can judge from his previous book, a collection of three stories based on his rowdy Montana youth that he put together after retiring from his position as a professor of English at the University of Chicago in 1973.
It was called "A River Runs Through It and Other Stories," and the title piece, about fly-fishing and spiritual redemption, has achieved the fame of a minor classic since the book first appeared in 1976.


BFS Bankcorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cruise Lines Shrug Off Mishap
The accident involving the Queen Elizabeth 2 is not likely to hurt the finances of the ship's owner, the Cunard Line, or the health of the cruise industry, analysts and company executives say.
Cunard, a subsidiary of Trafalgar House P.L.C. of London, was insured to cover all lost revenue, except for a $100,000 deductible, while the company's flagship is out of service.
And Joseph Smyth, executive vice president of operations for the cruise line, said yesterday that no one had called the company to cancel their travel plans on the ship, which represents 1,800 of the company's total 5,000 berths on seven ships.


Bisys Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Foes of Slovak Chief Fear He'll Resist Democracy
In a few months, if all goes according to plan, the 74-year-old union of Czechs and Slovaks will end, and Slovakia will emerge as Europe's newest nation with the newly elected Slovak Prime Minister, Vladimir Meciar, as its leader.
That prospect gladdens nationalists here, who say Slovaks have been waiting a thousand years to win control over their destiny.
But the Government elected in June has stirred anxieties among opposition politicians, who see in Mr.
Meciar's first steps harbingers of an authoritarianism to come.


Looking Back After the Job Is Done


Corrections
An article in Business Day on July 24 drawing parallels between Russia under Boris N. Yeltsin and the United States under Franklin D. Roosevelt referred incorrectly to the origin of workers' compensation.
It began early in this century; it was not created by Roosevelt.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Peerless Clothing of Montreal has done so well in shipping its men's suits to the United States that it has emerged as one of the final stumbling blocks in the long negotiations for a North American Free Trade agreement.  [ Page D1. ]  Canadian, Mexican and American negotiators continued to work toward a free trade accord without resolving the final details that still divide them.  [ D3. ]
The Japanese stock market took another serious beating today, with the Nikkei stock average plunging below the 15,000-point level for the first time in more than six years.  [ D1. ] The Economy
An Indonesian company has begun marketing coal from a huge deposit in Borneo that has 80 percent less sulfur than the cleanest U.S. coal.
The new coal can be blended with dirtier coal and burned without smokestack equipment used to control acid rain.  [ D1. ]


Uniforce Temporary Personnel reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about a New Jersey ruling on the classroom television program Channel One included an outdated reference to a Rhode Island ban on it.
The Rhode Island Legislature voted last month to permit the use of the program.


Bush Stirs Fears to Run Against  Trying to Convince Voters That Clinton Would Be a Gamble
As President Bush struggles to revive his campaign, he is returning to an approach that worked for him in 1988: portraying himself as the less scary of the two Presidential candidates.
At campaign appearances in recent days, Mr.
Bush used the same rhetorical techniques he employed against Michael S. Dukakis four years ago, describing threats that he would stand up against and implying, without actually saying so, that his opponent's election would make the threat a reality.


National Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Editorial Notebook; Remembering Herbert Hoover
Today is Herbert Hoover's birthday. And he has not had a good year.
The Democrats have put Hoover, who would have been 118 years old, squarely at the center of their favorite election-year mantra: "
The worst since Herbert Hoover . . .
" At their convention in New York, the 31st President came close to matching Dan Quayle as the party's second most popular target. And this is a man who left the White House in 1933!


2 Women Take Stage And Stir Bar Meeting
With Anita F. Hill sitting four chairs down the dais, Hillary Clinton celebrated the recent advances of women in the legal profession and urged her fellow female lawyers to use their newly attained power and influence to improve the lives of women and their families throughout the United States.
Speaking at the annual meeting of the American Bar Association, whose commission on women she led from 1987 to 1991, Mrs.
Clinton hailed the progress that women had made fighting discrimination, harassment and abuse in the legal workplace.


Pharmaceutical Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Let the Games End. Let Atlanta Begin.
For the contingent of 25 reporters, editors, business people and other observers from The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, the Olympics didn't end yesterday -- they are just beginning.
"We're going to be the hometown newspaper for the Games in '96," the managing editor, JOHN W. WALTER Jr., explained.
"But in '94 and '95, we're going to have to widen the beats. We'll have to develop expertise in water polo, for example."


Raychem Wins a German Phone Contract
The Raychem Corporation has won a $100 million contract to help provide modern telephone service in the former East Germany and in the process test some of the most advanced features incorporating fiber optics.
Raychem is the only American company to participate in one of the world's most ambitious telecommunications projects: the German Government's $30 billion five-year effort to bring a working telephone system to the backward regions of eastern Germany.


Cardinal Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Beating the Traffic by Taking a Ride on the Waves
Tucked behind a tangle of highway ramps and storm fencing, a century-old ferry service here seems to be thriving, even as much of the rest of this city falls into disrepair.
Founded in 1883 by a group of businessmen, including P. T. Barnum, the Bridgeport and Port Jefferson Steamboat Company traverses Long Island Sound with loads of highway-weary travelers interested in cutting their travel time and experiencing a different way to get around.


Coach Remains Mystery, But Cuban Boxers Aren't
About an hour after the Cuban boxing team finished receiving its medals and taking photographs this afternoon, Alcidas Sagarra climbed out of the ring one final time and began to make his way toward his dressing room.
The day had been one of the most satisfying in his 28-year tenure as Cuba's boxing coach: His team had ended up with a total of nine medals, seven of them gold and two silver.
The seven gold medals were the most ever in boxing by any country in a non-boycotted Olympics.


Watered Down, Energy Bill Slogs On
When Iraqi troops invaded Kuwait, Congressional Democrats and Republicans joined in demanding that the United States throw off its chains of dependence on foreign oil.
The National Energy Security Act appeared on the way to swift passage.
But after two years of fits and starts, and considerable watering down, the legislation faces a few more high hurdles in a House-Senate conference committee.


Spain Does Wonders With Dedication and Dollars
It was approaching the morning of another day here on the Ramblas, this Iberian version of Main Street and Fifth Avenue rolled into one.
But the Saturday night revelers were still singing, dancing, clapping.
And why shouldn't they be?
In an impressive 16-day run, the Spanish Olympians had shared the world spotlight with the big boys and girls, with 13 gold medals -- Spain had won just 4 in its previous Summer Games history -- and a total of 22 medals.
Spain had previously amassed just 26 medals since winning its first one in 1900.


A New Opening for Times Square
Times Square, magnet for millions, "crossroads of the world," has come to a crossroads of its own.
The decision to suspend construction of four giant office towers as the core of a private-public redevelopment plan is a sensible bow to reality; the market for new mid-Manhattan skyscrapers is dead.
Planners will now want to rethink their grand design, and doers must move quickly to resuscitate the half-abandoned entertainment block of 42d Street.
A stretch of theaters and small shops stands empty, its tenants evicted to make way for construction of the office towers.
Boarded over with plywood and "Post No Bills" signs, two-thirds of the block between Seventh and Eighth Avenues has the sad look of a deserted Main Street.


QE2 Steaming to Drydock and Inquiries
With a 74-foot gash in its hull, the Queen Elizabeth 2 began slowly steaming toward drydock in Boston early this morning after the last of its 1,800 passengers were evacuated to Newport, R.I.
At the same time, a team of investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board and two experts from Britain's Department of Transport arrived here today to prepare for a public hearing into why the 963-foot Cunard line flagship had hit an underwater obstacle just west of Martha's Vineyard late Friday night.


MEDALS STANDINGS
Nation
G
S
B
Total
Unified Team
45
38
29
112
United States
37
34
37
108
Germany
33
21
28
82
China
16
22
16
54
Cuba
14
6
11
31
Hungary
11
12
7
30
South Korea
12
5
12
29
France
8
5
16
29
Australia
7
9
11
27
Spain
13
7
2
22
Japan
3
8
11
22
Britain
5
3
12
20
Italy
6
5
8
19
Poland
3
6
10
19
Canada
6
5
7
18
Romania
4
6
8
18
Bulgaria
3
7
6
16
Netherlands
2
6
7
15
Sweden
1
7
4
12
New Zealand
1
4
5
10
North Korea
4
0
5
9
Kenya
2
4
2
8
Czechoslovakia
4
2
1
7
Norway
2
4
1
7
Turkey
2
2
2
6
Denmark
1
1
4
6
Indonesia
2
2
1
5
Finland
1
2
2
5
Jamaica
0
3
1
4
Nigeria
0
3
1
4
Brazil
2
1
0
3
Morocco
1
1
1
3
Ethiopia
1
0
2
3
Latvia
0
2
1
3
Belgium
0
1
2
3
Croatia
0
1
2
3
Iran
0
1
2
3
Yugoslavia
0
1
2
3
Greece
2
0
0
2
Ireland
1
1
0
2
Algeria
1
0
1
2
Estonia
1
0
1
2
Lithuania
1
0
1
2
Austria
0
2
0
2
Namibia
0
2
0
2
South Africa
0
2
0
2
Israel
0
1
1
2
Mongolia
0
0
2
2
Slovenia
0
0
2
2
Switzerland
1
0
0
1
Mexico
0
1
0
1
Peru
0
1
0
1
Taiwan
0
1
0
1
Argentina
0
0
1
1
Bahamas
0
0
1
1
Colombia
0
0
1
1
Ghana
0
0
1
1
Malaysia
0
0
1
1
Pakistan
0
0
1
1
Philippines
0
0
1
1
Puerto Rico
0
0
1
1
Qatar
0
0
1
1
Surinam
0
0
1
1
Thailand
0
0
1
1
* Athletes from 12 former Soviet republics
+ Independent Olympic Participants (athletes from Serbia, Montenegro and Macedonia)


Burger King Investors Master L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 'Baby Bells' Reach Agreements With Unions
Southwestern Bell and Bell South, providers of local telephone service for more than 30 million customers, reached agreement with its unions early yesterday morning, as three other large carriers continued to negotiate past the weekend expiration of their labor contracts.
The tentative labor accord at Southwestern Bell, based in St.
Louis, gave 40,000 workers a 12.3 percent wage increase over three years.
About 66 percent of Southwestern Bell's work force is union.
The agreement at Bell South, based in Atlanta, gave 62,000 workers an 11.3 percent wage increase over the same period.
About 64 percent of Bell South's work force is union.
Union members will be voting on whether to approve the accord over the next several weeks.


S2 Golf Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Suburban Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


GWC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Ex-Senator Thomas J. McIntyre, a New Hampshire Democrat, 77
Thomas J. McIntyre, a Democrat who became an influential Senator from New Hampshire, a fabled Republican bastion, died yesterday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 77 years old and lived in Laconia, N.H., and Tequista, Fla.
He died of Alzheimer's disease, pneumonia and heart failure, his family said.


Chronicle
LUKAS FOSS will be celebrating a milestone birthday, his 70th, on Saturday but much to his astonishment, he recently learned that he won't be 70.
Mr.
Foss is on tour in the Far East conducting the Asian Youth Orchestra, which will give him a 70th birthday party.
Never mind that he will be only 69.


Final Details Are Delaying Agreement on Free Trade
Canadian, Mexican and American negotiators continued to work today on a North American Free Trade agreement without resolving the final details that still divide them.
Work has slowed only a little since President Bush left Washington on Friday afternoon for his home in Kennebunkport, Me.
The negotiators, who have been ensconced on the bottom three floors of the Watergate Hotel here since July 29, had hoped to finish the pact before Mr.
Bush left.


Accounts
*
Bank of Boston, Boston, as expected, named Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Boston, to handle its estimated $12 million to $15 million account, previously at Lawner Reingold Britton &amp; Partners, Boston.
The account was awarded without a review after Lawner Reingold merged with Arnold Fortuna Lane &amp; Cabot, Boston, which created a conflict with Arnold Fortuna's Fleet/Norstar bank account. *
C &amp; R Clothiers, Los Angeles, to Asher/Gould Advertising Inc., Los Angeles, for the clothing chain's estimated $5 million account.
Kresser/ Craig, Los Angeles, had handled the account on a project basis since the spring, when C &amp; R ended a longtime relationship with Admarketing Inc., Los Angeles.


Japan Stocks Off Sharply
Japan's battered stock market took another serious beating today, cracking through a barrier that some analysts had warned could lead to even heavier declines in a market that has been in a crisis for more than two years.
Although the 225-issue Nikkei average managed to close slightly above the 15,000-point level today, it was below that mark most of the session after falling sharply at the start of trading.
It was the first time the Nikkei was under 15,000 since March 1986.


Market Place; Gang That Couldn't Pick Straight
Wall Street analysts can earn as much as $1 million a year, and superstars among them can demand -- and get -- their own private session to interrogate a company's top management about business strategy.
So why aren't these powerful analysts better at predicting earnings of the companies they follow?
From the looks of the second-quarter results of the nation's publicly held companies, even the heavy hitters are falling short at anticipating the fates of the companies they cover.
And that can wreak havoc with stock prices and cause more than a little discomfort to investors who make decisions based on those predictions.


Head of U.N. Health Agency Is Embroiled in Battle for Re-election
The World Health Organization is in turmoil: The head of the agency has dismissed his deputy, who is challenging him for the top job.
The leader, Hiroshi Nakajima of Japan, faces a battle for re-election next year when his five-year term as Director General expires.
The United States, which is W.H.O.'s largest financial contributor, is supporting Dr.
Nakajima's deputy, Mohammed Abdelmoumene of Algeria, in the election.


Noble Drilling Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Look That Says Lillehammer Games
When an Olympics comes to your country, what is the "look" you want?
PETTER MOSHUS, a designer and vice president of the organizing committee for the 1994 Winter Games in Lillehammer, Norway, said: "We wanted a modern look, but not based on high-tech computers. We wanted something to symbolize Norway's tradition in 1994."


Sani-Gestion Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Call Him Almost Unbeatable: Braves' Glavine Wins No. 17
Braves 10, Dodgers 3
ATLANTA, Aug. 9 (AP) -- Tom Glavine won his 11th straight decision and pitched the surging Atlanta Braves to their ninth consecutive victory, a 10-3 rout of the Los Angeles Dodgers today.
Glavine (17-3), leading the majors in victories, moved within one victory of matching the longest winning streak in Braves franchise history, set by Boston's Dick Rudolph in 1914.
The last Braves pitcher to win 11 in a row was Milwaukee's Warren Spahn in 1954.


Chinese Scramble to Buy Stock in Shenzhen


And How Will '92 Be Remembered?
Each Olympics takes on its own identity.
The Summer Games in Los Angeles in 1984, for example, are being called the "Games of Profits," according to the Center for Olympic and Sport Studies at a university near Barcelona.
Seoul, in 1988, is described as the "Two Koreas" controversy.


On Stolen Wheels, Newark Youths Defy Authority
The cloak of night had dropped over the city's West District, and that meant it was show time.
A metallic blue Acura lurking in the distance revved its engine to a piercing whine and came hurtling down lamplit Jelliff Avenue.
As the car, a translucent gleam, reached the intersection of 18th Avenue the driver stomped on the brakes, yanked the emergency brake and twisted the steering wheel sharply to the left, causing the squealing car to spin in a tight circle and leave behind the telltale black smudges of a "doughnut."


The Flame Goes Out, But Flamenco Goes On
Barcelona took a gamble in playing host to the Summer Olympics, and its bet has paid off magnificently.
Now, with 16 days of trouble-free Games ending in a spectacular fiesta here tonight, it can at last sit back and enjoy the name and fame it has earned around the globe.
That, of course, was its plan all along -- to provide the "best-ever" Olympics and to sell itself as a 2,000-year-old Mediterranean port that is now part of the modern Europe, a dynamic city as dedicated to business and culture as it seems to be to sports and partying.


Estonia Rattles Its Russian Residents With Its Insistence on 'Estonization'
There is a note of pain in Lyudmila Vedina's voice as she recalls those days, a few years ago, when she and her Russian friends in this ancient university town were ardent supporters of the struggle for Estonian independence.
"We rushed to read every paper," said Mrs.
Vedina, a philologist, who has spent half her life in Tartu and has brought up her children here.
"We signed all the petitions, we took part in everything, we let nothing go by. We were so proud of Estonia."


ALLIES INCH CLOSER TO BOSNIA AID PACT
After consultations among the United States, France and Britain, two senior Administration officials said today that they were nearing agreement on a new Security Council resolution that Brent Scowcroft, Mr.
Bush's national security adviser, said would authorize "all necessary means" to insure delivery of food and medicine to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That could include military force.
Negotiations on Friday and Saturday proved inconclusive.
But Mr.
Scowcroft and Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Deputy Secretary of State, said in separate television appearances that final agreement on a text could come as early as Monday, with the resolution then going before the Security Council early in the week.


Editor's Departure Clouds Gains by Gay Magazine
When The Advocate introduced its striking redesign in June, some media critics saw it as a breakthrough for gay and lesbian publications.
The switch to high-quality paper and the clever repackaging of sexually explicit advertisements into a sealed, pullout section finally succeeded in making the magazine palatable to mainstream advertisers.
But after last month's sudden resignation of the editor in chief who masterminded the redesign, some people wondered whether the well-publicized bickering between him and The Advocate's publisher had tarnished The Advocate's hard-won image as a serious magazine.


The Games Close With Lights, Catalonia, Action!


Dream Team Memories and Forgettables


Walker Dreams of Collegians On the U.S. Basketball Team
Leroy Walker, who will likely be the next president of the United States Olympic Committee, said today that he disagreed with the way the gold-medal winning American basketball team was chosen for the 1992 Summer Olympics.
The Dream Team, 11 National Basketball Association stars and one college player about to enter the N.B.A., was selected by a committee of the national federation, USA Basketball.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Productivity . . . 2d Qtr.
Wednesday  Producer Prices . . .
July  Thursday  Consumer Prices . . .
July Retail Sales . . .
July Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Industrial Production . . .
July Business Inventories . . .
June


Dance in Review
Hubbard Street Dance Company  Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival Becket, Mass.
The Hubbard Street Dance Company has such a loyal and enthusiastic following at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival that the Pillow might be a home away from home.
And the dances of Twyla Tharp have certainly found a second home with this Chicago-based troupe.
That made for an exciting evening when Hubbard Street performed at the festival's Ted Shawn Theater on Saturday night.
"Baker's Dozen" and "The Golden Section" complete the group of works that Ms.
Tharp, who disbanded her own company in 1988, gave Hubbard Street permission to perform.
The company cut its teeth on "The Fugue" and went on to "Sue's Leg." Both dances were performed at the Pillow two years ago.


Scurry-Rainbow Oil Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Crown Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Why Corning Pulled A Switch on Tariffs
To the Editor:
"Corning Has a Change of Heart on Tariffs" (Business Day, July 21) omitted that Corning now has two joint ventures with its Mexican competitor, Vitro S.A.
In a deal that closed last Jan. 2, each company acquired ownership of 51 percent of one joint venture and 49 percent of another.
Each joint venture will market the consumer and household products (glassware, cookware, and so on) of both of the parent companies.


Intertape Polymer Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Navy Resembles a Fraternity in Its Sexism; New York Hearings
To the Editor:
The impact of the Clarence Thomas hearing on public awareness about sexual harassment has indeed been dramatic, as shown in "Suffering in Silence No More: Fighting Sexual Harassment" (front page, July 13).


Miscalculations in Times Square; Project Shows That Renewal Needs More Than Bulldozers
In the end, the culprit was a real estate glut during a deep recession.
But the failure of a 15-year government campaign to redevelop Times Square may rest more squarely on the government's attempt to use bulldoze-and-build urban renewal policies at a time when large-scale development has become a more intricate art.
From its inception in the late 1970's, the project proceeded on the premise that extraordinary financial incentives by city and state agencies could produce towering office buildings to replace the haphazard mix of cut-rate movie houses, street hustlers and sleaze at the south end of Times Square.


Review/Jazz; Tapping the Connection Of Music and Movement
The stage of Alice Tully Hall became a dance floor -- a clicking, snapping, clattering dance floor -- on Friday night, when the Classical Jazz series presented "The Majesty of Tap." To revive jazz's connection to dance and show off some masters of rhythm, the concert engaged a first-rate jazz quartet to back tap-dancers from elder and younger generations.
The quartet played two tunes on its own to reveal Frank Wess's gracious sound on tenor saxophone, Barry Harris's urbane clarity on piano, Christian McBride's deep but nimble lines on bass and Billy Higgins's breezy swing on drums.
Once the dancers began, however, the instruments slipped into the background, playing quietly and doing plenty of stop-time breaks to let the tapping ring out.
Mr.
Higgins, who usually smiles as he plays, was beaming at the rhythms and showmanship, although he never got a chance to trade volleys with the dancers.


Ms. Quatrano, Marc Diamond
Elisabeth Quatrano, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ralph Quatrano of Chapel Hill, N.C., was married yesterday to Marc Ivan Diamond, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ivan Diamond of Berkeley, Calif.
Judge Arnold Greenberg of the California Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board performed the ceremony in Tilden Park in Berkeley.
Ms.
Quatrano, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, is a teacher at the Mount Tamalpais School in Mill Valley, Calif.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is the chairman of the biology department at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.


First Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA
GLORY AND GRIPING
The United States captured 108 medals, second to the Unified Team, but there was plenty for the Americans to complain about, too, and they did.
A SHOW OF FORCE
Dominating the boxing competition, Cuba won nine medals.
Its seven gold medals were the most a single country has ever won in the sport in an Olympics that no one boycotted.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY BEHIND THE DEMISE OF TIMES SQUARE PLAN


How One Golfer Rests on One Laurel
Crooked Stick.
Ninth alternate.
Squeaky.
Wild Thing.
Grip it and rip it.
Kill.
Cinderella story.
The fragments are still fresh in the memory, easily evoking perhaps the most transcendent single week golf has ever known.


Home Port Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BARCELONA: Water Polo; Everyone Into the Polo! But, Alas, Spain Loses
It seemed as if they almost ran out of water.
Spain battled Italy for three overtimes in the water polo final today, a match of pulsating rhythms and foot-stomping fans overseen by a pair of Croatian-born coaches who almost came to blows after their players engaged in a shoving match.


Mets End Road Trip Sagging And Sad
The scope of the overall collapse was great enough that the impact of the final crash was minimal.
The Mets, having lost game after game and with them contact with the top of the National League East, went down, 6-2, tonight against the Cubs.
There was neither wonder nor much worry about the result, for the road trip to irrelevance was already long under way.
That it wound up 0-6 added only a kind of perfection to the failure.


Defying Rabin, Israeli Settlers Press Protests
Jewish settlers moved into homes in the Old City's Muslim quarter today and barricaded themselves in a house they were trying to build in the West Bank, sending a defiant message to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin on the eve of his meeting with President Bush.
Angered by Government curbs on settlement-building in the occupied territories, the settlers have promised to step up protests during Mr.
Rabin's trip to the United States, where he is expected to report on the settlement cuts and plans to speed up talks on Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Applied Innovation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Men Killed in Queens Shooting
Two men were killed and three others injured in their Queens apartment early yesterday morning when an attempt by a former roommate and several others to collect a debt resulted in a spray of gunfire, the police said.
The shooting occurred in a rundown building at 45-35 44th Street in Woodside, Queens, around 1 A.M.
Six men and one woman, all in their 20's and recent emigrants from China, shared the third-floor one-bedroom apartment and neighbors said they knew little about them.


Endosonics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


B&amp;H Ocean Carriers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brown Outruns Defenders and Demons
Nestling a football in his lap like a newborn baby, Jets running back A. B. Brown beamed with joy as he sat in a small interview room outside the Jets' locker room Saturday night after the team's 14-13 victory over the Washington Redskins at Giants Stadium.
It was the same ball that Brown had cradled close to his body on a magnificent 13-yard peek-a-boo touchdown run in the fourth quarter that helped the Jets win the game.


Review/Jazz; Variations on a Theme of Ellington
Duke Ellington's work is so immense, and the topics he tackled in his work so broad, that his 50-or-so-year career lends itself to creative programming.
At Alice Tully Hall on Thursday night, the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra, as part of the Classical Jazz series, took on a slice of Ellingtonia in a concert called "Music Is My Mistress: The Romantic Ellington," which in this case meant pieces that had to do with women.
It's a better idea in print than in practice; even though there is all sorts of variety in the subject, the tempos mostly stayed slow, the improvisations were few, and the material wasn't Ellington's finest.
The second half, which diverged from the subject and featured two major suites that allowed more improvisatory space, was extraordinary.
These pieces -- the "Asphalt Jungle" Suite and the "Peer Gynt" Suite (an arrangement of the Grieg work by Ellington and Billy Strayhorn) captured the Ellington orchestra at its finest and showed what the band can do.
The Lincoln Center orchestra is the finest jazz repertory orchestra at work, and the pieces, with their dense and gorgeous harmonies, lend themselves perfectly to live performance.
The rhythm section, with Herlin Riley on drums, Reginald Veal on bass and Roland Hanna on piano, were utterly idiomatic, capturing the distinct netherworld Ellington's later rhythm sections traveled in, somewhere between be-bop and swing.
And the soloists, from Mr.
Hanna's hard-driving swing to the tenor saxophonist Todd Williams's slippery improvisations, lit up the band.


Washington at Work; The Senator Pursues 'Untold' M.I.A. Story
Senator John F. Kerry remembers well the advice he got a year ago when he was considering whether to lead a new investigation into the fate of prisoners of war and other Americans who never came home from Vietnam.
"Everybody on my staff, everybody I knew thought I was crazy, and said, 'Don't do this,' " he recalls.
"They said it's a no-win tar baby."


Bridge
Overtricks are of negligible importance in social bridge or team play, but they are the lifeblood of match-point games.
If there were an award for the most elegant overtrick of 1991 it would probably go to Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan.
He sat South on the diagramed deal and passed, the usual tactic, when East produced an anemic overcall of one heart.
He then arrived in four no-trump following a slight misunderstanding: His partner passed that bid in the belief that it was natural.
It was intended to be Blackwood, with six clubs as the goal.
That contract succeeds, although it needs careful play after a trump opening lead.
North would have to win in his hand, finesse the heart queen, cash the spade ace and ruff a heart.
Then he could maneuver two spade ruffs, and the heart ace would eventually score after trumps are drawn.


M Stands for Masterful, or a Rookie Named Militello
He stood on the mound as the sky darkened and the air cooled, and he kept setting down Boston batters, his arm trying to outrace the rain.
In the seventh inning, when Sam Militello felt the first few droplets, he was pitching to Tony Pena, the only Red Sox batter with a hit in the game.
He kept pitching, finished the inning, but he already knew.
His dreamlike major league debut was over, having come to a wet and premature end.
For seven innings, the 22-year-old Yankee rookie had frustrated Boston, giving up only one hit and no runs and rarely getting behind in the count.
When he left the field in a downpour after the top of the seventh, he had thrown 98 pitches, close to his limit, and was facing what would be a 33-minute rain delay.
With the Yankees due up upon the game's resumption, he would be down too long, so it was a sure thing he wouldn't return.
An Unspiring Hit at That
Steve Farr was called upon to finish it, as Militello sat in the clubhouse, watching the final two innings on television.
And Farr didn't disappoint.
He retired six straight batters, three on strikeouts, to give the Yankees a one-hit, 6-0 victory over the Red Sox and preserve Militello's first major league victory.


Pulaski Furniture Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 12


USMX Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Century Communications reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


New Milford Bank &amp; Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Is That Any Way To Treat a Medalist?
Sometimes, even the ubiquitous television cameras miss something at the Olympics.
XIONG NI held his head in his hands.
He sat in the press area behind the diving pool an hour after he had won the bronze medal in platform diving.
He didn't move for 10 minutes.
It wasn't defeat but disrespect that distressed him.


Nobel Insurance Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


That's the Spirit! Devers Gets Honor
Only one hurdle remained for GAIL DEVERS in her quest for a second gold medal.
Her earlier victory in the 100 -- and the stories of how she overcame the effects of Graves' disease -- had made her a hero here.
But she tripped on that last hurdle and fell.
Still, her achievements led yesterday to Maxwell House Coffee presenting her with the United States Olympic Committee Olympic Spirit Award.
She had a 3-1 margin in the voting by the news media over the swimmer PABLO MORALES, who won a gold at age 27.


Success of Canadian Exporter Is a Trade Issue
Peerless Clothing Inc., a family-owned suit maker in Montreal, has done so well in shipping its men's wool suits to the United States that it has emerged as one of the final stumbling blocks in the lengthy negotiations for a free-trade agreement between the United States, Mexico and Canada.
In the last three years, Peerless has tripled its sales, to $100 million (Canadian), and now provides 80 percent of all the Canadian men's wool suits shipped to the United States.
Because of its growth and that of some other companies, the American textile industry has persuaded American negotiators to try to keep curbs on imported apparel.
The Canadians have resisted, and the haggling continues as negotiations in Washington remained unresolved today.


BARCELONA: Marathan; South Korean Pulls Away For a Grueling Surprise
The two long-distance runners were alone together, climbing the steep hills of Montjuic, trying to finish up these Olympics on a cloudless Barcelona night.
Neither one was supposed to win this marathon, but now one of them would.
The Japanese runner, Koichi Morishita, was thinking that a silver medal would not be so bad.
It would satisfy expectations back home.


People
*
Peter Greene, 46 years old, was named to the new position of director of account management at Young &amp; Rubicam New York.
Mr.
Greene was most recently president and chief executive at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Canada, Toronto. *
Brian J. Brooks was named to the new position of senior vice president and director of human resources at WPP Group P.L.C., London.
Mr.
Brooks, who will be based in New York, was previously a partner at Towers Perrin, New York.


Police Investigating 6 Rapes in Queens
The police said yesterday that they were investigating a pattern of six rapes believed to have been committed by the same man over the last year in the Laurelton, Queens, area.
In each case, the suspect, whom the police have not identified, entered the victim's apartment through a window in the early morning, covered her face and then raped her, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Edelle James.
The most recent victim, a 41-year-old woman, was raped and sodomized in her apartment at 4:20 A.M. last Friday, Sergeant James said.


Congo's Leader Loses Vote
Gen.
Denis Sassou-Nguesso, whose single-party Marxist Government has ruled this central African country since 1979, has been voted out of office.
Results of the first round of presidential elections, announced over the weekend, showed General Sassou-Nguesso finishing third, leaving Pascal Lissouba and Bernard Kolelas to contest a second round of voting Aug. 16.


Deltona Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


BARCELONA: Basketball; With Gold in Hand, Johnson and Bird Chart Their Futures
Magic Johnson said to give him two or three weeks.
Larry Bird requested a month.
The fate of the planet, or the championship of the National Basketball Association, is not exactly hanging in the balance, but inquiring minds do want to know what comes next for Johnson and Bird.
Now that the Dream Team has reclaimed the basketball Olympic gold medal that America rightfully owns, and Michael Jordan solved the dilemma of how to pledge allegiance to his corporate sponsor on the medal stand, there remains the question of whether the United States' 117-85 victory over Croatia on Saturday night is the last we will see of Johnson, or Bird, or both.


A Family Crack Tragedy; An Addicted Daughter Killed by Her Mother
Daisy Hutson wept quietly as she gripped a picture of her daughter, then 2 years old, sitting cross-legged on a bed with the carefree exuberance of youth.
Dressed in her Sunday best, a dainty yellow cotton dress with ruffles and a big yellow bow in her hair, Renee Hutson couldn't look happier.
The mother remembered the color of her daughter's outfit even though the black-and-white photo was taken 46 years ago.


Sterling Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reinout Kroon, 85, Team Leader In Making American Jet Engine
Reinout P. Kroon, a retired engineer and educator who helped develop the first American-designed turbojet engine, died Tuesday at Chester County Hospital in Media, Pa.
He turned 85 years old that day.
He lived in Kennett Square, Pa.
His family said he died of injuries suffered in an automobile accident.


Banner Aerospace reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CytoTherapeutics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ads for Australia To Stress Exotica
Travel, they say, is broadening.
So the Australian Tourist Commission in Los Angeles, in its first campaign since changing agencies last fall, will introduce advertising aimed at visitors seeking the unfamiliar.
"People with the greatest propensity for going to Australia are looking for, in my terminology, 'broadening experiences,' " Carole Hancock, the commission's regional director for the Americas, said during a visit to New York last week.
While "people could easily recognize what was different about other long-haul destinations like Europe or Asia," she added, previous campaigns for Australia, starring Australian celebrities like the actor Paul Hogan and the golfer Greg Norman, tended to play up its similarities to North America.


No Headline
Grand Ayatollah Abolqassem al-Khoei, one of the greatest scholars of Shiite Islam, died Saturday, the Baghdad radio announced today.
He was 95 years old.
The Ayatollah died of a heart ailment, the radio said.
He had had a pacemaker implanted in July.


Moscow to Get 2 Think Tanks
Hoping to contribute to the growth of independent analysis in the former Soviet Union, two United States policy groups plan to open centers in Moscow this year.
The two groups, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and the Heritage Foundation, say they will be the first such "think tanks" to open full-fledged branches.


BASEBALL: American League; Tigers Rookie Keeps Jays On Ropes
Tigers 9, Blue Jays 2
DETROIT, Aug. 9 (AP) -- David Haas won his first career start and Travis Fryman drove in four runs today as the Detroit Tigers routed Toronto, 9-2, sending the first-place Blue Jays to their fifth loss in seven games.
Haas (1-0), whose previous 12 major league appearances were in relief, allowed two runs and eight hits in six and one-third innings.
He struck out five and walked three as Detroit won its third straight.
John Kiely finished with one-hit relief.


First Golden Bancorp reports earnings for Year to June 30


Wolves Return to Montana, And the Greetings Are Mixed
Over the last two years, Mike Jimenez, a biologist with the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, has regularly visited residents in this picturesque rural valley to offer news about some new neighbors: a pack of wolves.
He usually talks about the pack's movement or the progress of new pups.
But at times, Mr.
Jimenez must become a grief counselor after a wolf attacks livestock or a pet.


Chronicle
Notes from the philanthropic front: LEONA and HARRY B. HELMSLEY have pledged a new gift of $200,000 to the Helmsley Alzheimer's Alert Program, bringing their total contribution to the project that bears their name to $500,000.
They will donate the money through the Harry B. Helmsley Foundation.
The project is a patient registry that uses a fax broadcast mechanism to send descriptions of Alzheimer's patients who are missing to hospital emergency rooms, police precincts, ambulance dispatchers and emergency shelters.
Since its establishment in November 1990, the program has been responsible for finding 217 of the 226 Alzheimer's patients reported lost.


Susan Whitney, Cedric Woindrich
Susan Julia Whitney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas W. Whitney of Fairport, N.Y., was married yesterday to Cedric Woindrich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Woindrich of Vandoeuvre, France.
Anne B. Waasdorp, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Garrett Memorial Chapel in Bluff Point, N.Y.
Mrs.
Woindrich, 25 years old, is an assistant art coordinator for the European and Middle Eastern operations of Disney Consumer Products in Paris.
She graduated from Wellesley College.
Her father is a partner in Whitney &amp; Schild, a Fairport law firm.
Her mother, Jean H. Whitney, is a teacher at the Minerva DeLand School in Fairport.


Jennifer Paul, Jonathan Cohen
Jennifer Ann Paul, a daughter of Warren and Roberta Paul of Armonk, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jonathan Harris Cohen, a son of Bruce and Susan Cohen of Riverside, Conn.
John J. Johnston Jr., the Town Justice of North Salem, N.Y., officiated at the Box Tree in Purdys, N.Y.
Mrs.
Cohen, 28 years old, graduated from Brown University and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
Next month she is to become an associate at the law firm of Epstein &amp; Fogarty in Stamford, Conn.
Her father is the managing director of Paul &amp; Partners Worldwide, a marketing firm in Armonk.
Her mother is a senior public relations specialist with the International Business Machines Corporation in White Plains.


Diversified Communities Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
A Family's Battle With Crack
Crack had ruined Renee Hutson's life, and it drove her mother, Daisy, to end it by shooting her daughter dead on a Queens street.
The mother remembers her child's decline.
Page B1.
A Call to Women Lawyers
A joint appearance by Hillary Clinton and Anita Hill brought unprecedented exhilaration to the normally staid convention of the American Bar Association.
Page A10.


International American Homes reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Discounts By Northwest
Northwest Airlines yesterday joined the leading carriers that are offering steep discounts on fares to Europe this fall and winter.
Discounts range up to 45 percent on some flights, but they average roughly 30 percent on trips to Northwest's five European destinations: Amsterdam, Frankfurt, Glasgow, London and Paris.
For example, a Northwest flight between Chicago and Paris has been reduced to $448, a saving of 40 percent.
Northwest flies nonstop to Europe only from Boston, Detroit and Minneapolis.


BARCELONA: Sports of The Times; Heartfelt Adeu, Adeu: Barcelona Won Gold
THE athletes never had a chance.
No matter how well they jumped and ran and rowed, they could never dominate these Summer Games.
The city won the Games.
The people of Catalonia won the Games.
Always, there were the fantastic spires of Sagrada Familia shimmering in the background, or the fountains of Montjuic, or the towers of Tibidabo in the distance.


Parents Arrested in the Death of 24-Pound, 7-Year-Old Son
The adoptive parents of a 7-year-old boy were arrested yesterday and charged in the killing of the child, who died of chronic malnutrition last May, 20 minutes after they brought him to a hospital on Long Island, the Nassau County police said.
Although the child, Weyland Brown Mitchell, weighed more than 40 pounds in 1990, his weight had dropped to 24 pounds when he arrived at 1 A.M. on May 10 at the Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow, said Detective Jack Sharkey of the Nassau County police.
The child was pronounced dead at 1:20 A.M.


ISRAEL PROPOSES LETTING CITIZENS MEET WITH P.L.O.
Israel's new Government said today that it would propose changing a law that prohibits anyone here from contact with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Details of the change are still being worked out and await approval by Parliament.
The change would legalize meetings with P.L.O. officials as long as they are not considered harmful to Israel's security or interests.


Market Place; Gang That Couldn't Pick Straight
Wall Street analysts can earn as much as $1 million a year, and superstars among them can demand -- and get -- their own private session to interrogate a company's top management about business strategy.
So why aren't these powerful analysts better at predicting earnings of the companies they follow?
From the looks of the second-quarter results of the nation's publicly held companies, even the heavy hitters are falling short at anticipating the fates of the companies they cover.
And that can wreak havoc with stock prices and cause more than a little discomfort to investors who make decisions based on those predictions.


Boat Speeds Across Atlantic
The Destriero, an Italian powerboat, shaved 31 hours off the trans-Atlantic speed record on Saturday night by arriving at Bishop Rock, off the southwest coast of England, 48 hours 34 minutes after it started from Sandy Hook, N.J.
The $50 million custom-built motor vessel left New York Harbor on Thursday afternoon.
It beat a time set in 1990 by Hoverspeed Great Britain, a 243-foot catamaran ferryboat that crossed the Atlantic in 79 hours 55 minutes.


Navy Resembles a Fraternity in Its Sexism; Combat Exclusion
To the Editor:
"Military Chiefs Admit Need to Curb Sexual Harassment" (news article, July 31) states I avoided the issue of women serving in combat by saying, "It's too complex a problem."


Help for Cleaner Air From a Mystery Coal
An Indonesian mining company has begun marketing coal from a huge deposit in Borneo that has 80 percent less sulfur than the cleanest American coal, allowing it to be blended with dirtier coal and burned without smokestake equipment used to control acid rain.
When burned, the Borneo coal produces less carbon dioxide than most coals.
Carbon dioxide is a gas that scientists believe contributes to the "greenhouse effect," which could alter the earth's climate.
If using the new coal eliminated the need for "scrubbers" that clean coal smoke, even less carbon dioxide would be created because the chemical process of removing sulfur from coal smoke also releases carbon dioxide.


Critic's Notebook; A Temple Of Classics Has Room For Rock
A funny thing happened at Tanglewood's Festival of Contemporary Music a couple of weeks ago.
At the end of one concert, the eight punkishly dressed young percussionists who were about to play Christopher Rouse's "Bonham" bounded onto the stage with their arms raised and their fists clenched in a gesture of rock-and-roll triumphalism.
A small but assertive part of the audience shouted, stomped and whistled as if the ensemble were a famous rock band, and when the six-minute piece ended, this claque shouted again and held cigarette lighters aloft.
That this rumpus was clearly premeditated did not matter because, in effect, it was a kind of on- and offstage choreography that grew out of the work's musical substance.
And that substance was even stranger than the posturing, for in composing "Bonham" -- a tribute to Led Zeppelin's drummer, John Bonham, who died in 1980 -- Mr.
Rouse reached unabashedly into rock-and-roll's bag of tricks, came up with some useful ideas, and wove them into a cohesive concert piece.


Giants Get Some Winning Breaks
If you tailgated a little too long tonight, you missed most of the action in the preseason game between the Giants and the Cincinnati Bengals.
After the first 35 seconds, both offenses sputtered, and the Giants won, 13-7, only because their defense played decently against a limp offense.
On this muggy night, neither team sustained many drives.
But the game began like a full-court version of big-play Arena football.


To Cure an Ailing Empire Blue Cross
To the Editor:
Your articles on the financial troubles of New York's Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, most recently July 29, portray a classic case of assessment insurance.


Reebok Ends 'Dan and Dave' Olympic Ads
Faced with yet another unforeseen twist in the saga of "Dan and Dave," Reebok International Ltd. has decided to end its costly and controversial advertising campaign.
"The 'Dan and Dave' campaign, as we know it, has been settled in Barcelona," a Reebok spokeswoman, Bernadette Mansur, said yesterday.


Actress's Challenge in Change of Pace and Diction
Marisa Tomei was, as she would say, steamed.
Her fists were clenched and she was pacing one of the stages at the Joseph Papp Public Theater on a recent afternoon as she quoted, verbatim, a gossip-column item about her starring role in "The Comedy of Errors." The item said she'd been cast "in the Joe Papp tradition of hiring Hollywood stars for Shakespeare -- whether they're ready or not."
Ms.
Tomei is, of course, the sizzling ingenue who came close to stealing the hit film "My Cousin Vinny" from Joe Pesci, a veteran actor who knows a thing or two about scene-stealing.


In Radio, Costly Stars Are Often Worth the Price
Despite the advertising recession, many of the largest radio stations remain profitable and, as a result, have no qualms about paying $1 million or more to some stars of their morning programs.
Indeed, such highly paid radio stars may be more of a necessity than a luxury if they can pull in big audiences -- and advertisers -- in highly competitive markets.


Clinton Takes Aggressive Stances On Role of U.S. in Bosnia Conflict
In his latest effort to place himself at the center of foreign policy discussions, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas yesterday took a somewhat more aggressive tack than President Bush on resolving the violent impasse in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr.
Clinton said he thought the United States should consider using military force to open Serbian detention camps and should consider lifting the arms embargo on the former Yugoslav republics of and Bosnia and Croatia.


Police Shooting Focuses Black Anger in Texas City
For as long as any one can remember, the railroad tracks that run through Tyler have separated blacks from whites, and the town fathers handled problems between the races quietly, if they were handled at all.
But this summer, black anger over several cases of perceived injustice by the police and the courts has broken the quiet.
Protests have been loudest over the fatal shooting of an 84-year-old black woman by a white police officer in a botched drug raid.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Forsman Wins Playoff  Dan Forsman parred the second playoff hole to win the Buick Open in Grand Blanc, Mich., yesterday, defeating defending champion Brad Faxon and Steve Elkington.
It was Forsman's fourth PGA Tour victory, his first since 1990.
The playoff began on No. 10, a 401-yard par-4 where Faxon was eliminated with a par, and continued on the adjoining 18th, also a par 4.
Elkington's approach landed in deep grass at the left side of the green.
His third shot moved the ball only a few feet and he was still buried in the grass.
He finished with double-bogey 6.
Forsman's approach landed in front of the green.
He used his putter to get the ball within five feet of the pin, then sank the putt for par and the victory.
It was the second consecutive year a playoff was needed at Warwick Hills Golf and Country Club.
Last year, Faxon defeated Chip Beck on the first extra hole.
Forsman earned $180,000 of the $1 million purse.
He also won one of the sponsor's cars.
The paycheck lifted his earnings to $600,350, by far his best year ever.
Elkington started the day tied for the lead with Mike Sullivan at 10-under.
He made two birdies, at the 4th and 10th, and parred his way in for a final-round 70.
(AP) Mochrie Loses to Newcomer: Florence Descampe, a rookie from Belgium, outdueled the season's leading money-winner, Dottie Mochrie, and earned her first L.P.G.A. victory, a rain-soaked two-shot triumph in the Stratton Mountain Classic in Vermont.
Descampe, 23 years old, who started the day two shots behind Mochrie and Cindy Rarick, birdied the 13th hole to take the lead and finished with a four-under par 67 for a total of four-under 278.
Mochrie, playing one hole behind, parred the 13th and futilely chased Descampe through the final five holes.
Mochrie barely missed a 30-foot putt on No. 18 and then bogeyed the hole for a 71 and 280. (AP) Hill Prevails in Sudden Death: Mike Hill sank a 15-foot birdie putt on the second playoff hole yesterday to beat Walt Zembriski in the rain-shortened Digital Seniors Classic in Concord, Mass.
The victory was Hill's third of the year and 13th since he joined the PGA Senior Tour in January 1989.
The final round was canceled just before 1 P.M., just over an hour after play was halted when rain and lightning continued to drench the Nashawtuc Country Club.
Only 24 of 78 players had teed off and were on the course.
Under Senior Tour rules, players tied for the lead when the final round is canceled play a sudden-death playoff when the course is deemed playable. (AP) Muehr Wins Amateur Title: Michael Muehr of Roxiticus Country Club in Mendham, N.J., defeated Jeff Thomas of Plainfield West, 1 up, in the rain-delayed 36-hole final of the Metropolitan Golf Association Amateur championship at the Wee Burn Country Club in Darien, Conn.
The 20-year-old Muehr, a junior at Duke, had captured the Ike Tournament earlier in the year, making him the first player to win both championships since Jimmy Fisher accomplished the feat in 1966.
Thomas, 32 years old, who won the M.G.A.
Public Links title this year, has now finished runner-up in the amateur four times.
TENNIS  Krajicek Is Victor  Second-seeded Richard Krajicek of the Netherlands came back in the third set to beat unseeded Mark Woodforde of Australia, 6-4, 2-6, 6-4, yesterday to win the Volvo Tennis-Los Angeles tournament.
Krajicek, who overcame a 3-0 deficit in the third set, became the first Dutchman to win a tour event in the United States since Tom Okker in 1977.
Krajicek, 20 years old, moved up to 14th in the world rankings, ahead of Aaron Krickstein, the tournament's top-seeded player, who was forced to retire in Saturday night's semifinal match against Woodforde with a broken foot that will require surgery.
Krajicek's only other tour victory came last year in Hong Kong.
Woodforde, ranked 91st in the world in singles entering the tournament but the partner with Todd Woodbridge on the No. 1-ranked doubles team, was seeking his first singles victory in more than two years. (AP) AUTO RACING  Fittipaldi Sets Record  Emerson Fittipaldi drove the fastest non-oval race in Indy-car history yesterday, beating Michael Andretti by 16 seconds and winning his third Budweiser Cleveland Grand Prix with an average speed of 133.292 miles an hour.
That smashed the previous Cleveland record of 128.421 m.p.h., set by Fittipaldi in 1987.
He also won the Cleveland race in 1989, and he finished second to Andretti here last year.
Bobby Rahal finished fourth but maintained first place in the Indy-car ranking with 148 points.
Fittipaldi picked up 22 points -- one for being the pole-sitter, one for leading the most laps, and 20 for winning -- to move into fourth place with 104 points.
Al Unser Jr. is second with 117 points and Andretti is third with 116.
Five races remain.
Andretti took the lead from Fittipaldi, the pole-sitter, on the first lap, holding it until Fittipaldi took advantage of slower traffic and slipped past him at the end of lap 14 of the 85-lap race. (AP) Kyle Petty Wins: Kyle Petty won the rain-shortened Bud at the Glen Nascar stock-car race at Watkins Glen, N.Y., which went only 51 of a scheduled 90 laps before being red-flagged.
Though it was short, the race was competitive, with Petty and defending champion Ernie Irvan battling at the front most of the way, each leading 19 laps.
The big move of the race came on lap 36 when Petty slipped past Irvan in the new inner loop, a chicane near the end of the long back straightaway.
Petty led the final seven laps on the 2.45-mile, 11-turn Watkins Glen International circuit to earn his first road-racing victory and the fifth triumph of his Winston Cup career. (AP)


Shaw Industries Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Pop; Wily Rock With Polka Just Below The Surface
Until this year, They Might Be Giants performed as a duo (John Flansburgh and John Linnell, singing and playing guitar, accordion and reed instruments) with backing tapes that could sound like a carousel one moment, a stampede the next.
The duo even wrote a song proclaiming that its minimal lineup was not a "rhythm section want ad." But things change, and at the Beacon Theater on Wednesday night, They Might Be Giants introduced a flesh-and-blood band, with bass, drums and keyboards.
The new lineup traded some quick-change studio cleverness for clout, but could still hop styles and twist tunes with ease.
Camouflaged as a rock band, though one with a polka combo just below the surface, They Might Be Giants were as tricky as ever.
Mr.
Linnell and Mr.
Flansburgh love pop's catchiness but distrust its seeming simplicity.
Their songs complicate matters and treat incongruity as a fact of life, knocking together pop genres from country to mid-1960's Beatles to polkas to heavy metal to funk.
The lyrics detour into word play or non sequiturs; the music might skip a beat, switch directions or lend its catchiness to such unlikely thoughts as, "She's actual size, but she seems much bigger to me."


Books of The Times; Why Did She Kill? It Just Sort of Happened
Crossed Over  A Murder, a Memoir  By Beverly Lowry  245 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
On June 13, 1983, two grisly murders were committed in northwest Houston.
In the early hours of that morning, 23-year-old Karla Faye Tucker and her boyfriend, 37-year-old Daniel Ryan Garrett, drove over to the apartment of an acquaintance named Jerry Lynn Dean.
Several hours later, the couple loaded up Dean's El Camino truck with some motorcycle parts and drove away, leaving behind a scene of horror.
Dean had been bludgeoned to death: his head had been unhinged from his neck; his chest and back, punctured repeatedly by blows from a pickax.
His companion, a woman named Deborah Ruth Thornton, whom he'd met the previous evening, was dead, too; the pickax had been left embedded in her chest.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; BUSH PULLS COMMERCIALS WITH PRESIDENTIAL SEAL
President Bush's first campaign television commercials almost broke the law and had to be pulled, Advertising Age reported today.
The Bush campaign had to withdraw the advertisements, slated to run until the Republican Convention opens Aug. 17 in Houston, because they opened with the Presidential seal, the trade journal said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton's Staff Sees Campaign As a Real War
James Carville is a whippet of a man, lean and balding and as tightly coiled as the innards of a baseball.
In his calmest moment, the chief strategist for the Presidential campaign of Bill Clinton can scarcely sit still, and he does not so much speak as issue intermittent verbal explosions.
On a recent morning, yelling into his telephone receiver as if outraged to find it in his hand, he was almost hopping up and down in his anger.
"Look! Don't give me that! I don't want to hear that! We're not messing around with these people, you hear me?! We haven't won this thing in 12 years. We're in a war here, you understand that?!" To be fair to Mr.
Carville, this quotation in its original form was laced with expletives, running about two per sentence.


Kronstadt Journal; Russia's Great Navy Base: Picture It as Hong Kong
Fifteen miles and 23 minutes by hydrofoil from St.
Petersburg, Kronstadt and its naval base can seem a world away: clean, orderly and disciplined in the way many Russians like to think life ought to be.
There are no hawkers of cheap Turkish clothing; no prostitutes hanging around hard-currency hotels; no gypsies begging in the streets.


Paul Gapp, 64, Journalist, Dies; Architecture Critic Won Pulitzer
Paul Gapp, the Pulitzer Prizewinning architecture critic for The Chicago Tribune, died on July 30 at Northwest Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 64 years old and lived in Chicago.
He died of lung cancer complicated by emphysema, his office said.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Quarterback Count
Bob Gagliano knows the San Diego Chargers may look for another quarterback besides himself to replace injured John Friesz.
He also thinks he can show his coaches that such a move is unnecessary.
"I've come off the bench in Detroit and won," said Gagliano, who was Friesz's backup last season after joining the Chargers as a Plan B free agent.
"I know I can do it. I've done it before. I'm comfortable with the system right now to where I feel I can go out and be productive. It's hard to say what their thoughts are right now, but I can't concern myself with that because it's out of my control. I can just go out and try to play well."


Sandwich Chef Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Infinity Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Munching Uranium
Scientists have found a bacterium that draws uranium into its body from its surroundings, then converts the uranium into a salt that can be safely stored as a crystalline solid in the bacterium's outer membrane.
The bacteria are so efficient at eating uranium that they can devour up to nine times their body weight without any apparent ill effects.


By Design; Gentle Whiffs of Summer
Women who adore strong scent are somewhat up against it in the summer.
Perfumes that leave heavy trails behind their wearers are too strong for summer country settings.
The powerful perfumes are not only off-putting to human beings, they also tend to attract biting bugs.
Still, a lot of women want to smell of something other than sun-tanned skin, moisturizer or swimming-pool chlorine.
One not-very-well-kept secret is to switch to a man's cologne.
Guerlain's Vetiver is very popular, and is light enough to splash on with abandon.
Annick Goutal's Vetiver is pleasant yet astringent, and the company's Eau de Lavande smells as sharp and bittersweet as a field of lavender in Provence.
Not necessarily for men, but in that genre of light fragrance, is Sisley's Eau de Campagne, which, as its name suggests, is like a fresh country breeze -- lemony and perfumy, but not too much so.


San Franciscans Brace for Move by Giants
The scenes were all familiar for a summer's afternoon at the ball park.
Kids waited around the players' parking lot for autographs.
Workers readied the field for batting practice.
Technicians moved quietly but hurriedly in preparation for another television broadcast.
And the seats were all empty.


GE CAPITAL FLEET TAKES OVER AVIS'S EUROPEAN UNIT
GE Capital Fleet Services, a unit of the General Electric Company, said yesterday that it had acquired Avis Europe's vehicle leasing and fleet management business from Avis Inc.
GE Capital, based in Minneapolis, said the acquisition would make it the largest corporate fleet management company in the world, with more than 620,000 vehicles.
It would not disclose the purchase price, but it confirmed that Avis Europe, based in Brussels, had assets of $950 million.
The Avis unit has 120,000 vehicles in 14 countries.


Paul F. Reilly, 81, Lawyer, Dies; Prosecutor for Dewey and Hogan
Paul F. Reilly, a New York lawyer who was a prosecutor under District Attorneys Thomas E. Dewey and Frank S. Hogan, died on Friday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y.
He was was 81 years old and lived in Upper Nyack, N.Y.
He died of cancer, the Hannemann Funeral Home in Nyack reported.


Reserves of Flour in Sarajevo Dwindle to a 2-Week Supply
Officials said today that less than two weeks' reserve of flour was left at Sarajevo's only functioning bakery, posing the threat of hunger just as the United States and other Western powers debate military options to insure the delivery of food and medicine to the city.
Adding urgency to the steps contemplated by President Bush and other leaders, the officials said it would be necessary to augment the 200 tons a day of supplies that are being flown into Sarajevo airport -- only limited amounts of it flour -- with overland convoys from points outside Bosnia and Herzegovina, principally the Adriatic port of Split in Croatia.


A-Plant to Be Shut Because of Its Cost
In a sign of nuclear power's decline, the directors of a utility in Oregon voted yesterday to retire a plant in 1996, halfway through its planned life of 40 years, because operating it is no longer considered worth the cost.
The Trojan nuclear power plant in Ranier, Ore., is not the first reactor to be retired long before the projected end of its life, but at 1.1 million watts it is the largest.
About 20 nuclear power plants around the country may face the same fate as their steam generators age, while other utilities have already decided to replace plants.
Article, page A14.


Battling Contagions of Superstition and Ignorance; A Ukrainian-Born Physician Coaxes Nervous Immigrants to Accept Western Medicine
Three-year-old Leonid Rozental had seen the vaccination needle and was screaming as Dr.
Anatoly Belilovsky approached.
"This will be like the bite of a big mosquito," said the doctor in Russian to the boy.
Then, he gave Leonid the shot and a lollipop in quick succession.
"He should have had this when he was 2 months old," the doctor said, referring to a standard vaccination intended to prevent a type of meningitis.


Bolsa Chica Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Car Buyers Turn Back to Detroit
Suzanne Welsh, a clerical worker from Buena Park, Calif., had no intention of trading in her 1989 Toyota Camry, but her brother-in-law's new Saturn started her thinking.
"I've had three Japanese cars in a row, and I started to feel real guilty," she said.


File Shows Earlier Abuse of Starved Child
Three years before he died of malnutrition in his adoptive parents' Long Island home, 7-year-old Weyland Brown Mitchell appeared to have a wide range of behavior problems that are often linked to child abuse or neglect, a doctor who reviewed his case file said yesterday.
Evidence gathered by specialists at the Rose F. Kennedy Center in the Bronx in 1989 and 1990 showed that the boy had been neglected or abused before he was placed with Robert E. and Carmencita Mitchell, said Dr.
Herbert Cohen, director of children's evaluation and rehabilitation at the center for developmental problems.
The records do not show whether abuse continued after he was placed in the Mitchells' care.


Avnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


After Crashes, Helping Rescuers Walk Away
The only heavy trucks and buses that have hurtled down Route 515 recently into this small mountain community were in the nightmares of local emergency workers.
Police patrols have kept vehicles weighing more than four tons off Route 515 since a gasoline tanker truck and a chartered bus, in separate accidents occurring within 10 days in July, went out of control on the steep mountain road and crashed with awful results on the outskirts of Vernon, near the New York State border.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the grounding of the Queen Elizabeth 2, and an article and a map yesterday, misstated her Canadian itinerary.
She had been to Saint John, New Brunswick, and then to Halifax, Nova Scotia, before returning to American waters.
Contrary to a Cu nard spokesman's initial account, she had not gone on to Newfoundland.


Cholesterol's New Image: High Is Bad; So Is Low
SLOWLY and hesitantly, leading heart disease researchers are concluding that there seems to be a dark side to having especially low cholesterol levels.
Although there is no dispute that low concentrations of cholesterol in the blood protect people from heart disease, there also seems to be a newly found, but sometimes grudging, agreement that very low cholesterol levels make death from other causes more likely.
Several studies pointing to a risk from low cholesterol levels have appeared this year, with more awaiting publication.
These studies, based on data from hundreds of thousands of people, show that people who have extra-low levels of cholesterol in their blood are more likely to die in later years from a variety of causes, including suicide, homicide, strokes, certain cancers, liver disease and lung disease.
In fact, the deaths from these other causes mount so quickly that the mortality rate for those with low cholesterol levels equals the rate for people with very high cholesterol levels, who are likely to die from heart disease.


Voit Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


NewTel Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Strategy: Avoiding a Quagmire
Because of the risks of extended internal strife in Bosnia, the Pentagon sees it as the wrong place and time for military intervention.
News Analysis, page A6.


S.A.T. Score Improperly Nullified, Judge Rules
A New York State judge ruled yesterday that the organization that gives the Scholastic Aptitude Test had improperly nullified the score of a Queens youth it suspected of having had someone else take the test for him.
The organization, the Educational Testing Service, said it would appeal the ruling.
It noted that it had ultimately won every court case involving allegations of cheating on the various exams it administers, although lower courts had twice before found in favor of students.


Eugene Kinkead, 86, Staff Writer And an Editor at The New Yorker
Eugene Kinkead, a staff writer and editor at The New Yorker magazine for 58 years, died on Saturday at the Phelps Memorial Hospital in Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 86 years old and lived in Nyack, N.Y.
Mr. Kinkead died of cancer, said a daughter, Gwen.


Procter &amp; Gamble Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Step Forward, Step Back, Smarten Up
The bad game that followed the good game didn't change Coach Bruce Coslet's opinion of Browning Nagle or Browning Nagle's opinion of Browning Nagle.
These are the growing pains of a young quarterback, Coslet and Nagle both said today when the Jets returned to their headquarters after their 14-13 exhibition-game victory over the Washington Redskins on Saturday night.


Prosecutors Criticized By Lawyer for Clifford
The lawyer for Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman, defendants in a multibillion-dollar fraud involving the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, has accused the Manhattan District Attorney's Office of trying to destroy the two men by freezing most of their personal assets, including checking and savings accounts.
"Doctors' bills and attorney fees cannot be paid," the lawyer, Robert S. Bennett, said in a statement issued yesterday that constituted an unusual public attack on a prosecutor.
"They can't even pay their routine living expenses." By Mr.
Bennett's account, the freeze order was issued without warning, and one of the two defendants bounced a check to the man who cuts his grass.


Edusoft Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Buffton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY DINKINS NAMES SEARCH COMMITTEE
Mayor Dinkins named a five-member committee headed by one of his most trusted allies to handle the politically sensitive search for a new Police Commissioner.
The committee is composed of people who are intensely loyal to the Mayor, who have served on similar search committees for him and who generally share his opinions on issues like the need for civilian complaint review and community policing.
B3.
SERIAL RAPIST IN QUEENS
The police intensified a search for a serial rapist in southeastern Queens, stepping up night patrols and warning residents to lock windows and take other precautions against a man who six times in the last year has climbed in windows and raped women in their bedrooms.
One woman has been a victim of the rapist twice.
B3.
A DIFFICULT CHILDHOOD
Three years before he died of malnutrition in his adoptive parents' Long Island home, 7-year-old Weyland Brown Mitchell appeared to have a wide range of behavior problems that are often linked to child abuse or neglect, a doctor who reviewed his case file said.
The boy's adoptive parents have pleaded not guilty to charges of manslaughter.
B3.
REGION HOW A CAR THIEF GETS HIS THRILLS
"You can steal any car in the world if you know what to do," said Monk, a ninth grader who said he makes it his business to know exactly what to do, especially when it comes to his favorites: 5.0 Ford Mustangs and top-shelf Japanese imports, like Acura Legends.
Throughout poor neighborhoods in Newark, the car theft capital of the country, young people like Monk steal money, sometimes for money, but often for the sheer thrill of it.
"I drive, crash a couple of them, dump them and go get some more," he said.
A1.
SECOND THOUGHTS ON GUN BILL
A New Jersey Assemblyman who now says he was wrong when he voted to repeal Governor Florio's ban on assault firearms said that members of the National Rifle Association had warned that he could face a primary battle next year if he votes against overriding the Governor's veto of the repeal measure.
But Assemblyman Robert J. Martin said that he hoped his own reversal would "at the very least force some others to consider their position on this." B5.
TO THE RESCUE, IN REAL LIFE
Popular "reality-based" television shows about emergency workers do not have unhappy endings; the victims are rescued and the rescuers never cry.
But in Vernon, N.J., where both a gasoline tanker truck and a chartered bus crashed last month, the reality was that a lot of people were hurt, some died and rescuers were left both proud and heartbroken.
B6.
REMEMBERING DOGS WHO SERVED
A Westchester County pet cemetery wants to be the national memorial to the 30,000 dogs that have served the United States armed forces.
A War Dog Memorial already exists at the Hartsdale Canine Cemetery, a statue built by money given by children after World War I. But a Florida man has proposed building a memorial in Washington.
B6.
Our Towns by Diana Jean Schemo B6
Chronicle B5


Israel Blamed in Death Of Arab in Detention
Palestinian human rights groups blamed Israel today for the death of a Palestinian being interrogated at a West Bank jail after an American pathologist said the prisoner had succumbed to an asthma attack "brought about by conditions in detention."
The Israeli police are investigating the death of the 23-year-old Arab, Mustafa Abdul Hadi Barakat, who died on Aug. 4, a day after he was detained.
An army statement said Mr.
Barakat had suffered "an apparent asthma attack," a finding later confirmed by an autopsy.


Peer Review Analysis reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


16 Days Tied to a TV, or How I Spent a Summer Vocation
The sound of Charlie Jones's voice jolted me awake Saturday night, rousing me from my nonstop pursuit of flaws (and grudgingly, praiseworthy moments) in NBC's coverage of rhythmic gymnastics in the Summer Olympics.
My bleary eyes refocused on the screen.
What's wrong with the picture now?
Gotta jot!
Gotta critique!
Don't want to miss a camera angle, a replay, a close-up, a gnarled phrase!
I wrote, "Charlie Jones forgets to mention girl was raised by seals who taught her to balance beach balls."


Putting the (Olympic) Torch To the Games' Commercials
THE name of one of the plethora of products incessantly promoted during NBC's coverage of the 1992 Summer Games epitomized the effect of the overcommercialized hyperbole: Olympic Stain.
To this weary viewer, the 16 days of mercenary merchandising irrevocably damaged what few Olympic ideals remained after February's oversponsored snow festival that CBS insisted on calling the Winter Olympics.
After enduring both, viewers should demand their own Triplecast: The Big Three networks ought to broadcast their entire 1992-93 prime-time schedules without commercials.


Forest Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Central Reserve Life reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yield on 30-Year U.S. Bond At Lowest Level in 5 1/2 Years
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond fell yesterday to its lowest level in five and a half years, and now investors and dealers are waiting to see if this week's three big Treasury auctions will knock this rally in bond prices off the track.
But if that does not happen, long-term interest rates are moving into a new zone, a level not seen for decades.
Some analysts predict that rates could fall to 7 percent by the end of the year, the lowest they have been since the early 1970's.


Topics of The Times; The Faces of AIDS
It's a pretty face: long dark hair, big dark eyes, a wide smile.
In the photograph that ran with her obituary, Alison Gertz looks like a good-luck girl.
That luck ran out, however, when she was only 16.
She had sex, just once, with a young man.
Ten years later, last Saturday, Alison Gertz died of AIDS.
Alison's is one face of AIDS.
That of the young man who infected her, dead years ago, is another.
Ryan White is a third, Michael Bennett a fourth.
There are countless other faces -- some famous, some known only to their families, and a few known to no one at all.


Tether-Propelled Space Shuttle? Forget It
To the Editor:
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration's experiment with a satellite on a tether, had it been successful, might have yielded interesting results ("Astronauts Abandon Test of Tethered Satellite," front page, Aug. 6).
However, the suggestion by some that such a tether might be used in the future to generate the electric power needed to operate the space shuttle is farfetched.
Electric power can indeed be generated by moving a conducting wire through the earth's magnetic field, but one needs to apply a force to the wire.
A generator simply converts mechanical energy to electrical energy.


International Totalizator Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Sears Turns To Outsider For Key Post
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, reaching outside of the organization to find an executive to head its troubled merchandising group, said yesterday that Arthur C. Martinez, a top executive at Saks Fifth Avenue, had been named to lead the operation.
Investors, who have been frustrated by the slow pace of changes at Sears, seemed cheered by the appointment of an outsider.
Sears's stock, which was trading down before the announcement, closed up 37.5 cents at $40.625


Surgery Sidelines Knick Backup
Knicks backup center Tim McCormick will miss most of next season, maybe even the entire season, as he recovers from reconstructive knee surgery.
McCormick had surgery last week in Vail, Colo., undergoing the same procedure that enabled Philadelphia 76ers center Jeff Ruland to return to the National Basketball Association.
Dr.
Richard Steadman, who performed the surgery, also operated on Ruland.


Patterns
New Paths for Bruno Magli
Zebra-striped booties, gold mules and polka-dot ankle-strap sandals are not the kinds of styles Bruno Magli is known for.
They represent a new direction for the Italian shoe manufacturer, a direction that includes suede jodhpurs and jeans, fringed leather jackets, a barnyard animal print on scarfs and luggage.
A bold new advertising campaign for the shoes features quotes from famous people (example: "It's the good girls who keep the diaries; the bad girls never have the time," by Tallulah Bankhead).
That's not what anyone expects from a house like Bruno Magli, which has always specialized in classic pumps and sling backs.
The classics will remain, but they are no longer the whole story for the company, whose annual sales worldwide total $100 million.
Credit for the update goes to Rolf Grueterich, a former retailer who recently took over design and distribution of the women's lines for North America.
He has been responsible for Bruno Magli men's shoes for 14 years.


OREGON REACTOR TO BE SHUT DOWN
In a telling sign of the decline of nuclear power, the directors of a utility in Oregon voted yesterday to retire a problem-plagued nuclear plant in 1996, halfway through its planned life of 40 years, because operating it was no longer considered worth the cost.
Directors of Portland General Electric, which operates the Trojan nuclear plant in Rainier, Ore., said they took the action because replacing the complex's faulty steam generators would cost about $200 million, and the money would be better spent on conservation projects and alternative sources.


Tesoro Petroleum Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY NEWS
AMOCO PRODUCTION CO., Chicago, an oil and natural gas concern, opened New Mexico's first retail compressed natural gas refueling station and Amoco's first refueling station wholly dedicated to natural gas.
HARRIS CORP., Melbourne, Fla., announced that its electronic systems division and Ericsson GE Mobile Communications Inc. would jointly market land mobile telecommunications systems to governments.


Review/Rock; Lollapalooza, a Day Full of Sound and Fury
Lollapalooza '92 had a hard act to follow.
The first Lollapalooza tour, in 1991, sold out arenas with a bill of seven raucous bands and a circus tent full of political and social-action groups.
Its success proved that people in their teens and 20's would turn out in force for a 10-hour show that promised sonic jolts, a break from concert routine and a hint of idealism.
The tour was an early warning of both the rage of the 1992 electorate and the ascendancy of post-punk alternative rock.
The sequel, which sold out the 11,000-seat Jones Beach Theater here today and returns on Tuesday, is a sure thing rather than a wild idea.
It's bigger and more mercantile than its model, more diverse in its auxiliary attractions and less so in its headliners.
As with the first Lollapalooza tour, the 1992 version carries a grab bag of messages and attitudes, from the party-hearty spirit of the Red Hot Chili Peppers and, surprisingly, Ice Cube, to the vengeful wrath of Ministry and Soundgarden to the smoldering despair of Pearl Jam, the flippant nihilism of the Jesus and Mary Chain and the introspection of Lush.


Accounts
*
Galeries Lafayette U.S.A., New York, to Berenter Greenhouse &amp; Webster, New York, as agency of record for the department store's American account, previously handled by Eldorado, Paris.
A review on the account, with billings estimated at $2 million, also included Lotas Minard Patton McIver, New York, and Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, New York. *
Marriott Conference Centers, Washington, to Dana Communications, Hopewell, N.J., as its initial agency to develop marketing and communications programs for the lodging chain's conference centers.
The account, with billings estimated at $1 million to $2 million, was awarded after a review that also included Fitzgerald &amp; Company, Atlanta, and Middleberg Associates Inc., New York.


Southeastern Michigan Gas Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Knape &amp; Vogt Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Consumers Water Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A sports article on Monday about Cuba's Olympic boxing coach misidentified the Cuban Minister of Sport.
He is Conrado Martinez.


Nytest Environmental Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Polygram to Buy 51% Stake in Interscope's Film Division
Polygram N.V. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy a 51 percent stake in the film division of Interscope Communications Inc. for $35 million.
Interscope, which is owned by Ted Field, a scion of the Chicago department-store family, has produced 25 films, including "Cocktail," "The Hand That Rocked the Cradle" and "Three Men and a Baby."


IGI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A Washington at Work article yesterday about Senator John F. Kerry misidentified his law school in some editions.
As an adjoining biographical chart said, it was Boston College Law School.


Frontier Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A picture caption on Friday about the Learn to Swim program at New York City pools misidentified the sponsor.
It is the Philip Morris Companies, through the City Parks Foundation.
And the children shown, while at a participating pool, were not themselves taking part in the program.


On Poverty's Edge: a Welfare Mother In California Fears a Life With Less
When Sonja Blutgarten spent $20 for cake mix and party favors to celebrate her sons' birthdays, it meant she could not afford to do eight loads of wash.
The fat sacks of dirty clothes crowded the corridor of her shabby apartment for months while she squirreled away a dollar here and a dollar there to finance a trip to the coin laundry.
For Ms.
Blutgarten, a 29-year-old unemployed mother of two, such trade offs are a fact of life, part of the day-to-day calculus of supporting herself, 6-year-old TeAndre and 4-year-old Kehnan on a $663 monthly welfare check, plus $168 worth of food stamps.


Bob Evans Farms Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 24


Max W. Salvadori, 84, Professor Who Fought the Fascists in Italy
Max W. Salvadori, an anti-Fascist resistance fighter in Italy who became a professor of modern European history at Smith College, died Thursday at his home in Northampton, Mass.
He was 84 years old.
He died of cancer, the college said yesterday.


Health-Mor reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Justice Dept. Rebuffs Democrats On Special Prosecutor on Iraq Aid
The Bush Administration rebuffed House Democrats today and refused to seek the appointment of an independent prosecutor to investigate whether officials violated the law by trying to aid Iraq before the Persian Gulf war.
The decision may spare President Bush some political embarrassment in this year's campaign, but the Attorney General insisted that politics did not influence the decision.
Democrats immediately attacked the decision as part of a politically motivated cover-up.


Horn &amp; Hardart Co.  reports earnings for 13wks to June 27


DEMAND FORCES GREYHOUND TO RESTRICT $5 BUS TICKET
Unable to keep up with demand spurred by a fare war on its New York-Washington route, Greyhound Lines yesterday started restricting the $5 ticket sale to six departure times a day.
Through Sunday, travelers may travel from New York to Washington for $5 on buses that leave at 8 A.M., 10 A.M. and 11 A.M.; from Washington, the special fare applies to buses leaving at 4 P.M. and 7:45 P.M.
The 4 P.M. slot includes a local and express bus.
The Dallas-based bus line's competitor on the route, Peter Pan Trailways Bus Lines of Springfield, Mass., had restricted the special $5 fare to the first 20 seats on its six daily departures in each direction.
All other fares for the trip are $25.


IKOS Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  ALLIES AGREE ON MILITARY FORCE  Western allies reached agreement on a draft Security Council resolution authorizing force to get relief into Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Approval of the resolution, which does not specify the nature or source of the military action, is expected.
A1  SUSTENANCE ON BOSNIA'S TABLES  While diplomats gathered to work out an approach to aid Bosnia, Sarajevans grappled with a more basic need: flour for bread that helps keep the city's 400,000 people alive.
A1


Chess
Wilhelm Steinitz, who dominated chess from 1866 to 1894, was as famous for his eccentricities as for his brilliance and profundity.
The most outlandish of his maxims was, "The king is a fighting piece."
If he had added, "in the endgame," no one would disagree with him, but he meant in the middle game and the opening.
The infamous Steinitz Gambit goes 1 e4 e5 2 f4 ef 3 d4 Qh4 4 Ke2 and Steinitz, with an excess of tenacity, took many a defeat with it.


LOAN DEAL STRUCK BY BUSH AND RABIN
After a day of Israeli-American talks, United States officials said today that President Bush and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin had agreed in principle on $10 billion in American loan guarantees and had ordered their aides to resolve final details so they could announce the accord on Tuesday.
In talks at Mr.
Bush's seaside family compound that were intended to demonstrate a revived warmth in relations, Mr.
Bush asked Mr.
Rabin for a personal explanation of his policy on settlements in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip and was largely satisfied with it, officials said.
A Major Issue Defused
Among the remaining issues, they said, was what settlements would be permitted and how the United States would offset the costs of any additional construction from the loan guarantees.


Mercury General Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Semiconductor Packaging Materials reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Datum Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


'The Art of Winning' By a Lunch-Pail Staff
Often, when the term blue collar is attached to a person, a unit, a team, it is to eliminate any confusion about the product produced by that entity ever resembling a work of art.
But sometimes things aren't so simple.


Rouse Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Breeders' Cup Will Stay Put
Weeks of confusion over the Breeders' Cup racing championships seemed to be resolved today when a circuit judge in Tallahassee ruled that Florida had enough legal authority to run the races even though the state's main betting laws expired last month.
The ruling apparently meant that Gulfstream Park would stage the races as scheduled Oct. 31 and not be forced to surrender them to another track, most likely Belmont Park in New York.
And officials of the Breeders' Cup, who have been insisting on assurances from Florida, said they were satisfied by the judge's ruling.


LifeCell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; GORE SUPPORTS STRONG MILITARY
Senator Al Gore, the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee, toured Connecticut today to stress the ticket's commitment to a strong military.


Review/Opera; Britten's Interpretation of 'The Rape of Lucretia'
With Tanglewood here in town, the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival nearby in Becket, Aston Magna's early-music series in Great Barrington, and various other performing troupes, festivals and museums in the vincinity, this verdant corner of western Massachussets is hardly starved for culture.
But in 1985, Rex A. Hearn, a transplanted Englishman, saw a gap that needed filling and started the Berkshire Opera Company.
The company's specialty is opera in English, sung by promising young singers.
Last month the company presented Donizetti's "Elixir of Love," and tonight it opened a striking new production of Benjamin Britten's 1946 chamber opera "The Rape of Lucretia." The performances are at the Cranwell Opera House, a 450-seat concrete former chapel on the grounds of the Cranwell Hotel, through Aug. 19.


Report to Congress Opposes Synthetic Hormone in Cows
Congressional investigators said today that the Government should delay commercial approval of a genetically engineered hormone that increases milk production in cows until questions are resolved concerning its effects on people's health.
The General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, said it agreed with most scientific opinion that synthetic bovine growth hormone wais not harmful because humans did not absorb or use the animal protein.


Finding a New Messenger for the Brain's Signals to the Body
TEN years ago, scientists were surprised to learn that a constituent of meat and potatoes, the common amino acid glutamate, was a potent carrier of brain signals.
Three years ago, they were startled to learn that a poisonous substance, nitric oxide, also transmitted information between nerve cells.
But the latest finding about such carriers of brain signals, the neurotransmitters, that allow people to think dream and wiggle their toes, is raising eyebrows to the laboratory roof.
A chemical called ATP, or adenosine triphosphate, found inside every living cell in almost every living creature, a molecule that is to the cell what gasoline is to the internal combustion engine, a substance that provides the energy that makes life possible, has a completely unexpected role in the brain.


Topics of The Times; Brisk, Bracing and Brrr!
The ocean waters around New York City have been, like the air, cooler than normal.
This has affected bluefish, Common and Roseate Terns and ocean bathers -- who in summer also tend to be common and roseate.
The terns have been the victims of one of nature's Rube Goldberg procedures.
It starts with the bluefish, which come north and raid schools of small fish called silversides, which flee for safety to the surface where terns catch them to feed their young.
But bluefish haven't liked the cooler waters, leaving the silversides in peace and the terns without food for their young.


Xerox Notes Offer A Yield of 7.188%
The Xerox Corporation was among a number of large corporations selling debt in the marketplace yesterday, taking advantage of low interest rates.
Underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation priced $200 million of 7.15 percent notes due on Aug. 1, 2004, at a price of 99.693 to yield 7.188 percent, or about 70 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


More Accords Reached In Phone Negotiations
The Ameritech Corporation, which provides local telephone service to more than 16.7 million customers in the Midwest, said yesterday that most of its subsidiaries had reached tentative agreements with its principal union.
Ameritech is the third regional Baby Bell company to reach a tentative agreement in as many days, following agreements for the Bell South Corporation and the Southwestern Bell Corporation.


Columbia Gas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


PEPSI IS OFFERING A DIET VERSION OF CLEAR COLA
After taking the color out of cola, Pepsi has taken the calories out as well.
On Saturday, Pepsi introduced Diet Crystal Pepsi, a no-calorie version of its clear cola.
Crystal Pepsi was introduced in test markets in Colorado, Dallas and Rhode Island in April.
Tom Pirko, president of Bevmark Inc., a consulting firm in Los Angeles, said the clear cola was doing extremely well in test markets.
"The results are way beyond anyone's expectations," he said.
He added that the introduction of the diet Crystal Pepsi was part of Pepsi's plan to develop it into a full-fledged cola line.
"What they are preparing is an assault on Coke with a full-line cola," he said.


Gene May Help Birds Tune Out Sour Notes And Tune In Rivals
MALE songbirds, those tireless flutists of the forest, must be as adept at appreciating music as they are at making it.
A male must sing to seduce a mate and to define the boundaries of his territory; but he must also know the songs of all the birds surrounding him, to distinguish between the harmless tunes of his neighbors and the threatening songs of strangers that may have designs on his little branch of the tree.
Now researchers have discovered the first molecular clue to how male songbirds recognize the melodies of other males.
Studying canaries and zebra finches, Dr.
Claudio V. Mello and his colleagues at Rockefeller University in Manhattan have identified a gene that is one of the first to respond in the brains of birds when they hear the songs of other members of their species.
The nerve cells that react are in part of the brain thought to be the avian equivalent of the mammalian auditory cortex, where incoming sound signals are integrated and interpreted.


Pirates Don't Mind Getting Late Lift
The numbers were posted on the scoreboard before the Mets-Pirates game began: Montreal 11, Chicago 0.
All it took was a quick glance up from the Pittsburgh dugout to remind the Pirates that they are still in a pennant race.
Along about the 16th inning, after the Pirates had stranded 10 base runners in extra innings and were reduced to pinch-hitting today's scheduled starting pitcher, Doug Drabek, it must have been a hideous sight: 11-0.
What an easy afternoon the Expos had in Chicago.


Observer; Those Wonderful Folks
A tribute to Olympic athletes:
This is being composed on a Compaq Personal Computer using DOS version 3.31.
The software is WordPerfect 5.1.
Transmission from the point of composition to the publication site is accomplished through a Hayes Smartmodem 1200 using Smart Communications software to operate through the A.T.&amp;T. long-distance telephone system.


Procter &amp; Gamble Earnings Rose 12% in Latest Quarter
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company reported yesterday that fiscal fourth-quarter net income increased 12 percent, saying that a gain from the sale of its Italian coffee business was offset by heavy spending for new products in Europe.
For the quarter ended June 30, the consumer-products company earned $339 million, or 46 cents a share, compared with $304 million, or 41 cents a share, in the year-earlier period.
Sales advanced 6.6 percent, to $7.17 billion from $6.72 billion.


We Should Do This Again, Says a Happy Samaranch
Outside the main Olympic press center today, the city of Barcelona wore the smug look of a successful party host on the morning after a great bash.
Subdued, satisfied residents returned to their workplaces in the nicest weather in weeks, knowing they had staged a Summer Games worth their obvious cost and effort.
Inside the center at his wrap-up news conference, Juan Antonio Samaranch, president of the International Olympic Committee, had only a little tidying up to do.
There was a fifth positive drug test, for the Lithuanian long jumper Nijole Medvedeva, who had finished fourth in that event.
Medvedeva used Mesocarb, a stimulant on the banned substance list.
Apparently, even newly recognized federations had their problems.


16 Innings, 5 Hours, Too Much For Mets
In the end, the Mets were too numb to be emotional, and for that they could almost be grateful.
The Mets, in a game that would have been a classic in another, imagined world of meaningful August baseball, were defeated by the Pirates, 4-2, in a game that lasted 16 innings.
It was a game that was rich with endless mini-dramas and enough major frustrations to, in defiance of reason, tear at the hearts of the long ago broken Mets.


Bright Ideas for Dull Schools
Why do so many New York City students fall into an academic wasteland?
Two big reasons are the overwhelming size of some high schools and the fact that inexperienced teachers are often concentrated in troubled schools.
Chancellor Joseph Fernandez now advances two reasonable suggestions.
Most students attend neighborhood high schools with comprehensive programs.
A few offer enriched or magnet programs in specialized areas.
There are also alternative schools for dropouts.
Often the schools that cater to large, diverse populations lose students to anonymity and apathy.


African-Americans Can't Win Justice in the Two-Party System
To the Editor:
In "Black Demagogues and Pseudo-Scholars" (Op-Ed, July 20), Henry Louis Gates Jr., a professor of English and chairman of the Afro-American studies department at Harvard University, describes "anti-Semitism as a weapon in the raging battle of who will speak for black America." He is right: there is a power struggle going on over who will lead the black community.
And anti-Semitism is being exploited by both sides: the nationalists who court the black community by showing how much they dislike Jews, and the assimilationists who like to show off their special relationship to Jews.
What Mr.
Gates doesn't make clear is the vantage point from which he writes about this fight for leadership of the African-American community.
He is very much in this struggle.


Many Details Stand in Way Of Trade Pact
In these post-Olympic days, bureaucrats here seem to be shooting for their own kind of world record: they have been hours away from finishing a North American Free Trade Agreement for a week.
Trade officials from Canada, Mexico and the United States have been in the Watergate Hotel here since July 29.
They have been busily agreeing to eliminate trade barriers, but the final compromises never seem to happen.


Handy &amp; Harman reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


General Parcel reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
TODAY: 10 P.M., NBC, "NBC Dateline," interview. (Channel 4 in New York)


Text of the U.N.'s Draft Resolution on the Balkan Crisis
Following is a draft of the Security Council resolution being considered to authorize the use of force to insure that aid is delivered to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
THE SECURITY COUNCIL,
UNDERLINING once again the imperative need for an urgent negotiated political solution to the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina,
RECOGNIZING that the provision of humanitarian assistance in Bosnia-Herzegovina is an important element in the Council's effort to restore international peace and security in the area,


F.N.B. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bone Clues Suggest Warmblooded Dinosaur
BY comparing proportions of two types of oxygen in the bones of present-day animals with those of various long-extinct species, scientists have found striking new evidence that at least some dinosaurs were warmblooded.
The discovery was made by Dr.
William J. Showers, a North Carolina State University geochemist, and Dr.
Reese Barrick and Dr.
Alfred G. Fischer, both of the University of Southern California.
Measurements made by the team demonstrated that Tyrannosaurus rex was almost certainly warmblooded, while a giant vegetarian called Camarasaurus may have been warmblooded as a juvenile but coldblooded as an adult.


A Rose May Be a Rose, But 'Rosy' Is 'Blushing,' 'Blooming' or 'Bright'
It's not easy to be at a loss for words when it comes to writing about the new fifth edition of Roget's International Thesaurus.
It's big -- um, quick, page 187, category 257, paragraph 17 -- and voluminous, capacious, generous, ample, copious, broad, wide, extensive, expansive, comprehensive.
And if more is needed, there's category 158, paragraph 10 ("spacious") and its followers.
What's more, the thesaurus has taken a new look at the language and found thousands of new terms that are clearly crying for apposite words in the pursuit of lively exposition.
That's what a thesaurus is all about, a dictionary of synonyms for the person who needs a broad palette to color expressions.
Roget's Fifth, for those who prefer unqualified statistics, weighs 4 1/2 pounds, has 1,141 pages and contains more than 325,000 words sorted into 1,073 categories describing just about every aspect of the human condition.
It was put together with the inestimable help of computers, which then supplied the data to the ultimate computer, the human brain, in this case the one belonging to Dr.
Robert L. Chapman, editor, scholar in medieval English studies and lexicographer of modern slang.


Ebersol Has Job Keeping Cost Down
Too bad Dick Ebersol has to come home from Barcelona, Spain.
The president of NBC Sports has so relished being the co-executive producer of the Summer Olympics and playing a 1990's version of the role pioneered by his mentor, ABC's Roone Arledge, that it seems a pity to return to -- ugh! -- exhibition football.
"We got the celebration of sport and youth that we wanted," he said, boasting of raves from ABC's Arledge and Jim McKay.
"The whole world came. There were no incidents. We did a great job of storytelling."


Star-Gulpers May Power the Brightest Galaxies
THE brightest things in the cosmos have long been puzzles to astronomers.
For decades it has been known that some galaxies have tiny cores, now believed to be as small as a star, that shine with the brilliance of a trillion suns.
The mystery of what powers them has deepened in recent years as a zoo of bright galaxies with odd shapes has been discovered.
Their violent cores broadcast radio waves, X-rays, gamma rays and energetic particles, often in jets of extraordinary power not present elsewhere in the universe.
Astronomers around the globe, attempting to make sense of these strange objects, now believe they have solved a major part of the mystery.
Diverse inhabitants of the galactic zoo are suspected of being different aspects of the same animal.


Giants' Offense Not in Highlight Films
For the Giants, Sunday night's 13-7 victory over the Cincinnati Bengals in their first preseason game was like the glass of water: Was it half full or half empty?
Yes, the Giants won, but no, the offense, notably the quarterbacks, was not consistent.
Today, after Coach Ray Handley had watched game tapes, he said he did not like the shortcomings on offense, but he understood the reasons.
And he was encouraged that one of the reasons, missing offensive linemen, would change with the imminent return of Jumbo Elliott and William Roberts, two key starters.
Elliott had been hospitalized because of an ailing back and Roberts has been in and out of the hospital because of an irregular heartbeat.


Legislator Cites Pressure in Gun Ban About-Face
A five-term Republican Assemblyman who conceded last week that he was wrong when he voted to repeal Gov.
Jim Florio's ban on assault firearms said today that members of the National Rifle Association had warned that he could face a primary battle next year if he votes against overriding the Governor's veto of the repeal measure.
Asked why he had voted twice before to repeal the ban, the Assemblyman, Robert J. Martin of Morris Plains, a former prosecutor and infantry weapons trainer in the Army, said simply, "I was wrong."


Clinton Says G.O.P. Conflict on Economy Promises Higher Deficit
Gov.
Bill Clinton asserted today that President Bush had abdicated responsibility for the nation's economic troubles and that conflict between the President and his fellow Republicans promised larger Federal budget deficits.
"President Bush says the buck stops somewhere else, and you ought to be afraid of my opponents that might even be worse than me," the Democratic Presidential nominee said at an afternoon rally outside Independence Hall here.


Briggs &amp; Stratton reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BRIEFS
Debt  *
CIT Group Holdings Inc., 60 percent owned by Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank and 40 percent owned by Chemical Banking Corp., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $1.25 billion in debt securities.


Laos at Center of Search for Vietnam P.O.W.'s
Documents being released by the Pentagon show that Laos has been a persistent focus of attention and frustration through nearly two decades of investigation of Americans still missing from the Vietnam War.
The documents also disclose that a lengthening list of officials in Richard M. Nixon's Administration believed that as many as several hundred people were missing when the war-time prisoner exchange ended in 1973.


CREDIT MARKETS;
A $106 million bond issue by Farmington, N.M., was tentatively priced for a maximum yield of 6.181 percent for an issue due in 2013 through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities are priced to yield from 3 percent in 1993 to 4.7 percent in 1997 to 5.5 percent in 2002 and 5.9 percent in 2002.


Life Preservers for Windows Users
BY the end of this year, according to the Microsoft Corporation, more than half of all new personal computers will come with DOS-Windows already installed as the primary operating system.
Microsoft officials say Windows is selling at a rate of more than a million copies a month.
That's a lot of Windows.
And if my experiences are any indication, a lot of people are probably glassy-eyed from trying to figure out how to install and configure and customize Windows to meet their needs.


Koss Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


STV Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Doings Continue At Euro RSCG
As the French agency Euro RSCG moves toward reorganizing its American operations, there were further developments involving current and former top executives.
This week's Adweek reported that Peter Stranger, president at the Los Angeles office of Della Femina, McNamee Inc., would be given his own stand-alone agency within the Euro RSCG network after the expected merger of Della Femina, McNamee with Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer in New York.


Market Place; Building Stocks Wither in Tokyo
WITH just about everything else failing, the Japanese Government is now pinning its hopes on the construction industry to winch the ailing economy and stock market out of their deepening ruts.
The idea is to pour tens of billions of dollars into public works, like roads, sewage plants and bridges, on the theory that the employment and orders from construction companies will give the economy a sorely needed lift.
For a while, that had made various construction-related shares the darlings of the stock market.
But in a sign of the depth of the market's malaise, even that sector is now looking worn out.
Investors seem to find every piece of news just another excuse to run for the exits.


West Shouldn't Risk A Failure in Bosnia
To the Editor:
Many in these days are urging the West to become involved militarily in Bosnia, despite the real risks for a quagmire.
They say that it is better to be immersed in a quagmire than to risk the dangers of inaction, since dictators everywhere will then be encouraged to exploit ethnic animosities.
But the only deterrence is a credible deterrence.
A failed intervention, like the one in Lebanon, would show the combatants they have nothing to fear from the West, since it cannot successfully intervene in their conflict.
They suspect this now, but they are not certain, and this doubt hangs over their heads like the sword of Damocles.
A failed intervention will turn their suspicions into certainty.


Britain Bans North Ireland's Largest Protestant Paramilitary Group
The British Government outlawed Northern Ireland's largest Protestant paramilitary organization today, describing it as an illegal enterprise committed to "criminal terrorist acts."
The ban on the Ulster Defense Association, which takes effect as of midnight tonight, makes it a crime to belong to the group or to raise money or speak on its behalf.


Memory Confirms Reality of Child Sex Abuse
To the Editor:
As a survivor of childhood sexual abuse, I don't know what I found more disturbing about "Childhood Trauma: Memory or Invention?" (Science Time, July 21), the news that some therapists are misusing the techniques of hypnosis when trying to help their clients retrieve memories of childhood abuse, or the many important omissions in the article.
The unwary reader with no previous knowledge of the prevalence of child abuse would not learn that more than a million cases of child abuse are substantiated by the authorities each year (last year alone the total was 1.2 million), and that surveys of adults in the United States have found that one in four women and one in seven men have conscious memories of having been sexually abused as children.
Had your report been framed with these statistics, the reader would not have the mistaken impression that because of the sloppy techniques of some therapists, the memories of many adult survivors of child abuse cannot be believed.


72 of Steelmakers' Trade Cases Allowed to Proceed
An independent Federal agency ruled today that American steelmakers could proceed with 72 legal complaints charging that their foreign rivals receive government subsidies and sell steel at unfairly low prices.
The panel blocked 12 other complaints, which involved mostly small foreign producers.
The decisions this afternoon by the International Trade Commission were a partial victory for American steel producers.
The American producers worried when they filed their cases on June 30 that the commission's increasingly narrow interpretation of American trade law might result in more rulings against them.


Officers Plead Not Guilty in Second King Case
Four Los Angeles police officers today pleaded not guilty to Federal civil rights charges in the videotaped beating of Rodney G. King, three months after the riots that followed their acquittal on state charges in the same case.
As the second phase of legal proceedings began, each officer stepped to a lectern to tell the judge: "Not guilty."


Bush Blows It on Health Care
President Bush has made it his mission to encourage states to experiment with health care reform.
But last week, the Administration put its courage in the closet when it rejected Oregon's proposal to expand health care to more than 400,000 Oregonians, 120,000 of whom are poor.
Claiming that the plan was biased against people with disabilities, the Government refused to grant the state a waiver from Medicaid laws.
This assessment is misguided.
And without Federal approval, we cannot alter Medicaid and offer thousands of Oregonians health care.


Executive Changes
CHRYSLER CAPITAL CORP., Stamford, Conn., named William S. Bishop president.
GRAND METROPOLITAN FOOD SERVICES U.S.A., Minneapolis, appointed S. Paul Oliver president.


Dinkins Names Panel to Fill Police Post
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday named a five-member committee to be headed by one of his most trusted allies to handle the search for a new Police Commissioner.
Lee P. Brown, the current Commissioner, announced last week that he was stepping down to spend time with his wife, Yvonne, who is ill.
The Mayor has said he wants to be sure Mr.
Brown's departure will not sidetrack his plan to return the nation's largest police force to a more traditional cop-on-the-beat style of policing.


Transmedia Network Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quarex Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Airlines Raise A Ticket Fee
Delta Air Lines, Northwest and America West said they planned to double, to $50, their fees for rewriting nonrefundable tickets.
The higher fee, which the carriers said was necessary to cover costs, is scheduled to take effect Sept. 1.
On that date, Delta and Northwest plan to raise all fares 5 percent.


Review/Theater; The Sad, Short Life Of a Subway Picasso Or an Urban Vandal
Wesley Brown's drama "Life During Wartime" dives into the heart of one of the most explosive issues a contemporary play could hope to confront -- police brutality and race -- and handles it with an impressive subtlety and evenhandedness.
The play, at the Nuyorican Poets Cafe, is loosely based on the notorious Michael Stewart case, in which a young New York graffiti writer lapsed into a coma and died following his arrest in 1983.
After a furious public outcry, six police officers were tried on criminal charges and acquitted.
A quasi docudrama that interweaves the testimony of family members, a police officer, witnesses, a television newswoman and a lawyer, with scenes of domestic conflict, "Life During Wartime" examines the fictional case of a graffiti writer named Daryl Cummings who dies in circumstances similar to Stewart's.
Although the play expresses little doubt that Daryl was beaten to death, it isn't as concerned with proclaiming criminal guilt as with exploring the social and familial tensions that turn Daryl into a larger-than-life symbol.
By the end of the play, as one character puts it, he has become everything from a subway Picasso to a common criminal, depending on the observer.


TJX Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


Harlem Legend's Last Appearance at the Apollo


Cambior reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dr. Aaron Yalow; Professor, 72
Dr.
Aaron Yalow, a retired professor of physics at the Cooper Union School of Engineering and a medical physicist at the Hospital for Joint Diseases, died on Saturday at Montefiore Medical Center.
He was 72 years old and lived in the Bronx.
His family said he died of cardiac arrest.


Care Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Practical Tips on Singing for One's Supper
Even though the United States has developed a lively regional opera scene in recent decades, Europe is still full of American opera singers busily building their careers.
The best pass their apprenticeships abroad and then move on to recordings and international stardom.
They are at the glittering summit of the operatic world.
But they all began their ascent at humbler base camps near the bottom, along with hundreds of other hopefuls who never made it past the tree line, so to speak.
Some of those who fail to attain international success still manage honorable mid-level careers in mid-sized ensembles and cities.
Others fade back into private life.


Sports of The Times; Footnote From Barcelona
YOU can run, Joe Louis used to say, but you can't hide.
Not from that relentless beast called history.
It chases you decade after decade and pursues you with accumulated truths and consequences that are joined together like so many links of a chain.
For the last 14 days, a certain history revisited Spain as the athletic segment of the African Diaspora made a poignant return to Barcelona in celebration of the Olympic Games.
Spain, for a large number of black athletes, represents the cradle of an oppressive part of their history.


Arnold Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Franklin Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


America Online Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Watts Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Margaret Thatcher as Churchill
How many more echoes of horror do Western societies need to hear?
Sealed train cars . . . ethnic cleansing . . . concentration camps.
Genocidal aggression and callous indifference did not end with the Nazis.
The plague has risen with Serbia's devastation of defenseless Bosnia.
Unless the world acts forcefully, and fast, many more will die -- and the contagion will spread.
As Margaret Thatcher rightly reminds Americans, first on the Op-Ed page and now in interviews, inaction is immoral.
When many risk sounding like Neville Chamberlain in 1938, Lady Thatcher's words sound positively Churchillian.


United Fire &amp; Casualty Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Riot Erupts at Concert Starring Guns 'n' Roses
A sold-out heavy-metal concert in Montreal starring Guns 'n' Roses and Metallica turned into a riot on Saturday after W. Axl Rose, the lead singer of Guns 'n' Roses, called his band off the stage 55 minutes into the show, complaining of voice problems.
Earlier in the concert, which was at Olympic Stadium, Metallica cut short its performance after James Hetfield, its lead singer, suffered second-degree burns to his face, arms and hands when a stage prop exploded.
He was taken to Montreal General Hospital and released that night, a hospital spokesman said.


INSIDE
Adding to Welfare's Despair
As a mother on welfare in California, Sonja Blutgarten makes difficult trade-offs every day.
And with the state in a budget crisis, her benefits will probably be cut soon.
Page A12.
Low-Cholesterol Risks
Researchers who have long warned of the dangers of high cholesterol levels are slowly concluding that very low levels may also pose a health threat.
Science Times, page C1.
New Help for Small Business
Changing the way it aids small companies, New York City will try to encourage business loans by reducing the risks faced by the banks.
Page B1.


One Final Curtain Call For Apollo's Star-Maker
Through the haze of an oppressively humid day, thousands of people, some dressed in their Sunday finery, filed into the lobby of the Apollo Theater yesterday to say goodbye to a Harlem legend.
Elegantly dressed in a gray suit, red tie and matching pocket handkerchief, Ralph W. Cooper, the soul of the theater for 50 years, lay in state in an open coffin surrounded by flowers.


Jays Get Homers And Bigger Lead
Blue Jays 8, Orioles 4
TORONTO, Aug. 10 (AP) -- Dave Winfield, Candy Maldonado and Joe Carter each hit two-run home runs tonight, powering the Toronto Blue Jays past the Baltimore Orioles, 8-4, in the opener of their four-game American League East showdown.
The Blue Jays, returning home from a 2-5 road trip, ended a three-game losing streak and increased their lead over the Orioles to three games.
Toronto has won five of seven against Baltimore this season.
Maldonado and Carter each homered in staking Todd Stottlemyre (7-7) to a 5-2 lead after three innings.
Stottlemyre gave up two runs on five hits in seven innings.


For Idle Young in Newark, Pride in a Theft Done Right
For a demonstration, a 15-year-old boy, his frame as compact as a sparrow's, slid beneath the dashboard of a stranger's car.
"This," he said in a boyish voice, "is how you get a car." The youth, known on the street as Monk, tugged back a plastic collar and displayed a tangle of wires, switches and pins that he had manipulated on so many other cars to start their engines and unlock their steering wheels.
If this had been another car -- a car that Monk wanted -- it would now be his, he said.
But he was merely showing a visitor the ropes.
And in doing so Monk offered a glimpse into the world of young car thieves.
Nothing stops them: neither shrieking alarms nor locked bars on steering wheels nor even their consciences.
Black, Jobless and Poor
"You can steal any car in the world if you know what to do," said Monk, a ninth grader who said he made it his business to know exactly what to do, especially when it came to his favorites: 5.0 Ford Mustangs and top-shelf Japanese imports, like Acura Legends and Vigors.


The Work Is Warm, but the Reward Is Sweet
It's that time of the year when the urge to succumb to the freshest of foods, sweet corn picked directly from the field and sold at a roadside stand, weakens even the stringent counselors who advise against pouring on butter and salt to any serving of food.
But first the harvest must be gathered.
Chris Olson, 14 years old, did the job yesterday on his grandfather's farm in Dutchess County near Salt Point, N.Y. (Susan Harris for The New York Times)


Night Patrols Intensified in Queens as Police Search for Serial Rapist
The police intensified a search for a serial rapist in southeastern Queens yesterday, stepping up night patrols and warning residents to lock windows and take other precautions against a man who six times in the last year has climbed in windows and raped women in their bedrooms.
Investigators said the rapist, whose pattern has been to strike at homes in Laurelton and Rosedale between 1:30 A.M. and 5 A.M. and to cover his victims' faces with a sheet or pillow to prevent them from seeing his face, assaulted one woman twice, the first time nearly a year ago and again last Friday.


Woolworth Corp.  reports earnings for 13wks to July 25


Bridge
The world's most cosmopolitan bridge game is played every Thursday in New York City at 45th Street and First Avenue.
It is, predictably, at the United Nations Bridge Club, directed by Gabriel Milev.
A dinner-and-bridge evening there last month honored Lala-Rookh Shelley, a retired member recovering from surgery, and Sviatoslav Dyomin, who was about to leave for Guinea as a United Nations official.
The two guests of honor played together, and outdistanced the field with a 72 percent score aided by the diagramed deal.
Three diamonds would have been made easily, so Shelley's decision to continue to three hearts with the North hand was accurate.
Dyomin worked hard, and made one trick more than the rest of the field.


War and Censorship
To the Editor:
John R. MacArthur's "Other Defeat in the Gulf" (Op-Ed, July 27) reminds us of how little we will be told the next time the United States Government pumps up its military muscle and the news media stand by as cheerleaders.
If there are any grumbles about censorship, it will have to do with the gore they are unable to deliver to their eager viewers, not the ethics of our Government's actions.
BARBARA COMMINS San Francisco, July 28, 1992


Discus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


A Pet Cemetery Proposal To Honor the Dogs of War
If ever therewas a year for man's best friend to find new friends in Congress, this is it: the 50th anniversary of America's dogs of war, the K-9 Corps.
Although they have served honorably in four wars (and unofficially in World War I), rescuing the wounded and warning of explosives and the enemy, there is no nationally recognized memorial to the 30,000 dogs that have served the United States military.


U.S. AND 2 ALLIES BACK A U.N. THREAT ON AID FOR BOSNIA
Overcoming earlier differences, the United States, Britain and France agreed today to press for a Security Council resolution threatening the use of force to insure the supply of food and medicine to beleaguered parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina but not specifying what military steps would be taken.
The proposed resolution, which United Nations diplomats said would probably win approval later this week, left unclear which countries would participate in any military action.
It also confined the use of force to the delivery of relief supplies, ruling out force to stop the fighting in the area or rescue people from detention camps in the former Yugoslav republic.


Foiled Home Run


CHRONICLE
JOAN BACCHUS MAYNARD, who has devoted more than two decades to the preservation of a fragile sliver of black history in Brooklyn -- four farmhouses that were owned by freed slaves before the Civil War -- has been named the recipient of the highest award of the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
Ms.
Maynard, the executive director of the Society for the Preservation of Weeksville and Bedford-Stuyvesant History, will receive the Louise du Pont Crowninshield Award at a National Trust conference in Miami on Oct. 8.


Restor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brian F. Hayes, 24; Wrote of Experience As a Cancer Patient
Brian F. Hayes, a Dartmouth student who wrote an article for The New York Times Magazine in 1991 about his experiences as a cancer patient, died Sunday in his parents' home in Melrose, Mass.
He was 24 years old.
The cause of death was testicular cancer, said his father, G. Frederick Hayes.


No Headline
What's in me is a human life that's kicking me and sitting on my bladder. --MARY POTTER SUMMA, the pregnant chairwoman of the Republican platform subcommittee dealing with abortion.  [ A16:3. ]


Ex-C.I.A. Expert on Iran Ties Agent to Arms Sale
The Central Intelligence Agency's longtime authority on Iran testified today at the trial of Clair E. George, tying the former chief of covert operations more closely to the effort to sell arms to Iran during the Reagan Administration.
George Cave, who began his career with the C.I.A. in 1956, provided what appeared to be significantly damaging testimony about Mr.
George, who is on trial in Federal District Court here on charges of lying to Congress and investigators about the agency's knowledge of the Iran-contra affair.
Mr.
Cave described meetings at the agency's headquarters in Langley, Va., in which officials discussed details of the sale of arms to Iran, noting that Mr.
George attended at least one of them.


Ingles Markets reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


May Department Stores Co.  reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 1


To Predict Divorce, Ask 125 Questions
WITH one in two marriages now ending in divorce, the toss of a coin would predict with 50 percent accuracy which marriages will survive.
Can science improve the odds of an accurate prediction, even to nearly 100 percent?
Yes, say psychologists at the University of Washington in Seattle.
They have devised an uncomplicated method that they contend will predict 94 times out of 100 which couples will still be married four years later.
Even among newlyweds, the psychologists say, the hallmarks of trouble can be readily determined years before a marriage dissolves.
The researchers, who have published their findings in the inaugural issue of The Journal of Family Psychology, said they were surprised to find that the husband's disappointment with the marriage was the single most potent predictor of divorce.
Marital lore has long held that the wife is the best barometer of the health of a marriage.


Sold: Olympic Winners and Losers
Here's how the advertisements shown during NBC's coverage of the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona might rank if entered in a competition.
Gold By Wieden &amp; Kennedy for Nike By Fallon McElligott for Lee jeans By Young &amp; Rubicam for Eastman Kodak Tin By McCann-Erickson for Coca-Cola By Leo Burnett for Miller Lite By DDB Needham for Bud Light Lead By WNBC-TV for WNBC-TV By Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer for MCI By Leo Burnett for Kellogg Advertising, page D15


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Drug companies would pay the Government application fees for drug approvals under an agreement being worked out in Congress.
The F.D.A. would use the fees to hire 600 new examiners so it could cut approval times by half.  [ Page A1. ]
The lawyer for Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman, defendants in a multibillion dollar fraud involving B.C.C.I., accused the office of Manhattan District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of trying to destroy the two men by freezing personal assets.  [ D2. ]


Limits of U.S. Role  White House Is Seeking to Minimize Any Use of Military in Balkan Conflict
As the Bush Administration considers possible military intervention in the Balkan war, it seems determined to minimize the American role, convinced that the conflict represents neither the time nor the place to use military power in a world no longer dominated by the cold war.
By defining American and Western aims as guaranteeing the delivery of relief aid, the Administration appears to be ruling out the use of American force to quell the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina and force the warring parties to negotiate a cease-fire.
Officials have remained largely silent on whether outside forces should be used to insure access to Serbian detention camps in Bosnia, taking a cautious stance that is generally echoed by Washington's European allies.


Q&amp;A
Flying Ants
Q.
In July, a swarm of something that looked like flying ants congregated on the air-conditioner in my high-rise apartment window.
What were they, termites after the piano?
A.
"In all likelihood, they were not termites, but a reproductive ant of some type," said Dr.
Louis M. Vasvary, an extension specialist in entomology at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.


Todd Shipyards reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Braves Are Beaten As Streak Ends at 9
Dodgers 5, Braves 3
ATLANTA, Aug. 10 (AP) -- Atlanta's nine-game winning streak ended tonight when Ramon Martinez outpitched Steve Avery and led the Los Angeles Dodgers past the Braves, 5-3.
A crowd of 43,368, giving the Braves a franchise attendance record of 2,156,715, saw the Dodgers end a four-game losing streak and avoid a four-game sweep.
"We were getting the breaks tonight and finally played good enough for the most part," said Eric Karros, who drove in a run with a two-out double in the seventh.


Will Chargers Seek Simms?
Before training camp began three weeks ago, Coach Ray Handley of the Giants said if he were with another team and in need of a quarterback, he would call the well-stocked Giants.
On Saturday night, San Diego starter John Friesz tore a knee ligament and was lost for the season, prompting speculation that the Chargers might seek 36-year-old Phil Simms of the Giants.
Handley said today he still thought the Giants were the first place to look for a quarterback, but he also said chances of a trade were remote.
Bobby Beathard, the Chargers' general manager, said only that "nothing is in the works today."


First National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Clinic Coaches Children to Dribble and Shoot


Progress Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


People
*
Andrea Trotenberg was named to the new post of executive creative director at Rapp Collins Marcoa, Chicago.
She had been a senior vice president and group director at Bayer Bess Vanderwarker of Chicago.


Dinkins Offers Loan Plan For Businesses
New York City yesterday announced a plan to help small and medium-sized businesses by reducing the risks faced by banks that make loans to them.
The program represents a sharp change in the way the city has supported small business, which is considered vital to producing jobs.


TSR Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Why Stop at a Flatter Tax?
Seven leading Republican conservatives, led by Housing Secretary Jack Kemp, are pushing President Bush to adopt a bold plan to slash taxes.
In a memo they warn: "We can't keep promising the American people that patience will lead to prosperity. We must show them that we have a set of principles and a plan to dramatically expand economic growth, job creation and entrepreneurial capitalism."
To that end, the group proposes a "flatter, lower, simpler" tax code.
Exciting rhetoric.
But shopworn specifics.
The seven would have been better off going all the way to Jerry Brown's flat tax proposal.
The California Democrat's plan, though flawed, was at least bold.


Ivaco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Memory Confirms Reality of Child Sex Abuse; What Freud Discovered
To the Editor:
Re "Childhood Trauma: Memory or Invention?" (Science Times, July 21): You and cognitive psychology have rediscovered Freud.
At least some of today's focus on child sexual abuse seems to have been catalyzed by publicity for Jeffrey Masson's "Assault on Truth: Freud's Suppression of the Seduction Theory."
Dr.
Masson argues that Freud uncovered the truth about the alarming frequency of childhood sexual abuse while treating neurotic patients early in his psychoanalytic career, but rather than accept and report what he heard (and few patients explicitly reported abuse), he attributed their complaints to fantasy.


Coors Sues Anheuser Over Ads
Anheuser-Busch Inc. and the Adolph Coors Company declined to comment yesterday on a lawsuit that Coors filed over an Anheuser advertising campaign that casts doubts on the brewing process used to make Coors Light.
Both brewers said that a court order prohibits discussion of the suit, which Coors filed on Friday in Federal District Court in New York.
A Coors spokeswoman in Golden, Colo., said the court would hear arguments on Friday on Coors's motion for a preliminary injunction to bar the television and radio commercials from running.
She added that Anheuser had agreed to suspend the spots temporarily pending the outcome of the hearing.


Major Assailed on All Sides, 4 Months After Vote
Four months after winning the British general election, Prime Minister John Major is under fire from his predecessor, parts of his Conservative Party and the Labor Party for what they call his passivity in the face of growing economic, political and diplomatic problems.
Mr.
Major, who was hand-picked by the Prime Minister at the time, Margaret Thatcher, as her successor two years ago, has been completely upstaged by her in the last week over the issue of what to do about the violence in the Balkans.
While he counsels diplomacy, Lady Thatcher has been in the newspapers and on the air advocating ultimatums and bombing campaigns against the Serbian nationalists attacking large areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Goodby Reported In Deal With Esprit
Esprit de Corp. and Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, both in San Francisco, declined comment yesterday on a report in this week's Delaney Report that the clothing retailer would name Goodby, Berlin to handle its $10 million account, previously handled in house.
The change would follow the departure from Esprit in March of one of the best-known figures in fashion retail advertising, Neil Kraft, who left to join Calvin Klein Inc. in New York as senior vice president and director of advertising and creative services.


Playing at War, Once Removed
AS personal computers grow ever more powerful, the programs written for them become bigger and more versatile.
This is especially true of games, which in many ways are on the leading edge of technological advances and remain the biggest-selling category of software.
Robosport, from Maxis of Orinda, Calif., has been around for nearly a year and a half in a version for the Macintosh.
Now it is available for computers running Windows 3.0 or 3.1, as well as for the Amiga.
I tried the Windows version.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.20
5.66
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.13
5.31
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.17
5.39
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.97
6.04
7.77
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.36
7.39
8.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.25
9.14
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.21
6.18
7.05
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Disease Control Agency Has Lost Control
To the Editor:
In his Doctor's World column (Science Times, July 28), Lawrence K. Altman, M.D., states that "in recent months, the C.D.C.'s image has been tarnished by its handling of major AIDS issues." Acquired immune deficiency syndrome is one of many epidemics in which officials of the Centers for Disease Control have failed to follow the principles of public health.
The syphilis rate is the highest in 40 years.
There were 50,000 new cases in 1990, higher than in 1949, the last year before antibiotics were widely used.
Tuberculosis exceeds a million cases.
Last year measles infected 500 people in Philadelphia alone, killing 6 children, the first measles deaths in 20 years.
Malaria, introduced by migrant workers, is increasing rapidly.


QE2 Limps to Her Berth in Boston Harbor


COMPANY NEWS: Banishing the Scarlet Letters; 5 States Count Blessings: They're Free of the R.T.C.
Reuters
Americans have come to pride themselves on being drug free, smoke free and nuclear free.
Now there is a new category as a consequence of the savings and loan crisis: R.T.C. free.
The R.T.C., or the Resolution Trust Corporation, is the Federal agency charged with managing the cleanup of the savings industry's collapse by selling off the assets of failed savings and loans.


CNA Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Placed Craig Grebeck, shortstop, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Shawn Jeter, infielder, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Activated Lance Blankenship, second baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.
Designated Gene Nelson, pitcher, for assignment.


Sallie Mae Prices $631 Million Debt
The Student Loan Marketing Association, which purchases student loans, priced $631 million in debt securities yesterday in two deals.
The agency, known as Sallie Mae, first priced $500 million of short-term floating-rate notes due Feb. 11, 1993, to yield 5 basis points more than the three-month Treasury bill with the interest adjusted the day after each weekly Treasury bill auction.


Business Scene; Weapons Makers Thinking Small
THE HUGHES AIRCRAFT COMPANY is acquiring General Dynamics' missile division, not to expand but to eliminate a competitor at a time when the Pentagon is buying fewer missiles.
General Dynamics, in turn, justifies the sale with the view that it is much more likely to profit from making submarines or warplanes than missiles.
Thus are two of America's leading military contractors trying to adjust to the Federal Government's shrinking outlays for defense, now that the cold war is over.
Rather than leave the business -- by converting weapons factories to the production of consumer goods -- the industry is trying to divide a smaller pie.
And in the process, giant operations that have turned out elaborate weaponry for four decades are going through radical change.


Cubic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pen-Computer Maker in Talks With Suitor
Momenta International, a Silicon Valley company that last year introduced a pen-based computer, said yesterday that it is negotiating with an "offshore" company over a possible purchase agreement.
A Momenta official said that a purchase could be announced as early as today and that if the discussions failed, the Mountain View, Calif., company was likely to file under the bankruptcy laws.
Momenta was founded in 1989 to design a portable computer that could be operated with both a keyboard and a pen.


Plan to Speed Approval of Drugs: Makers Would Pay Fees to U.S
The Government and the drug industry are near an agreement to require the companies to pay fees that would be used by the Food and Drug Administration to hire 600 new examiners and speed approval of drugs, officials on both sides said today.
The agreement, being worked out by Congressional staff members, is intended to resolve what both the Government and industry have said for the last few years is a catastrophe waiting to happen: the number of drug applications is rapidly increasing, especially because of the boom in biotechnology products, some of which might save lives if they were available.
But the F.D.A. has not had enough staff members to keep up with its examinations of the scientific research submitted by the drug companies.


Hollywood Park reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
THERESA RIVERA, the mother of Capt.
Manuel Rivera Jr., the first New York City resident and the first Hispanic person known to have died in the Persian Gulf war, wants to make sure his name endures.
At a ceremony today with Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS, Borough President FERNANDO FERRER of the Bronx and a Marine color guard, a group of subsidized middle-income houses at Brook Avenue and 145th Street in the Bronx will be named for Captain Rivera.
And four scholarships bearing his name will be awarded to graduates of Bronx high schools.


Diagnostic/Retrieval reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Optrotech Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Barnes &amp; Noble Plans $100 Million Stock Sale
Barnes &amp; Noble, the nation's second-largest bookseller, disclosed plans yesterday to sell more than $100 million in common stock to help finance an aggressive expansion of both its "super stores" and its mall outlets.
Barnes &amp; Noble Inc., a private company, plans to sell 6.87 million shares, or about 36 percent of its stock, at about $15 a share, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
It will also issue $170 million in new debt.


Ailey Camp: Not Just For Dance
A symphony of chimes rings softly out into the hot summer afternoon in a small blue classroom.
A floor below, children are learning to keep their backs flat and their heads erect in a gymnasium dance class.
A few doors down, other children are learning what "stream of consciousness" means and the difference between "conscious" and "conscience." In another classroom, the lesson is about newspaper headlines and deadlines.
Ailey Camp is in session at the Children's Aid Society in Greenwich Village.
And the 61 girls and boys who attend the six-week program, which ends on Friday, will go out into the world with a better idea of what it means to dance, to write, to compose and perform music, and to take responsibility for their own young lives lived, in many cases, in chaotic urban poverty.


Atlanta Journal; Striving to Outshine Barcelona's Aura
The Olympic flag is on its way to Atlanta, but it has dawned on a lot of people here that as an act to follow, Barcelona isn't Biloxi or Chattanooga.
Instead of 2,000 years of culture and history, Atlanta offers a city that was founded in 1842 and was then nearly burned to the ground by General Sherman 22 years later.
Instead of 13th-century cathedrals, Atlanta's monuments tend to be things like "the Dump," the boarded-up building where Margaret Mitchell wrote "Gone With the Wind," and the Varsity, the drive-in where Atlantans go for their quotient of greasy burgers.
Instead of the Mediterranean Sea, there's the Chattahoochee River.


Wahlco Environmental Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AMRE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Amdura Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


McGrath Rentcorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Grants Seek to Expand Audiences for Concerts
Chamber Music America and Concert Artists Guild, both of New York, have been awarded a total of more than $2.9 million in grants from the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund for programs to reach new audiences with classical and modern music.
Chamber Music America, formed in 1978, will receive $2.5 million over the next five years to sponsor concerts and workshops in community centers, schools, government offices, places of worship and other nontraditional performance sites.
Almost half of the grant will be used to create an endowment fund for the program.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; To Republicans' Relief, Bush Hones Campaign
His speeches are getting sharper, more partisan, more laden with red-meat lines and tough-guy attitude.
His surrogates are taking on Gov.
Bill Clinton, the Democratic nominee, with more gusto and fewer stumbles.
President Bush finally seems to be entering what he calls the campaign mode.
For his fellow Republicans, it is not a moment too soon.
Mr.
Bush's campaign has been a series of missed opportunities to make the case for a second term, but he cannot afford to fumble the next two weeks.
The Republican National Convention begins Monday, and the most recent spate of polls shows Mr.
Clinton still holding on to a formidable lead of about 20 points.
By contrast, four years ago the Bush campaign had cut Michael S. Dukakis's lead from 17 percentage points to 7 in the three weeks between the conventions.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republican Platform; G.O.P. Drafting Stand for Total Ban on Abortion
Republicans began writing a party platform today that advocates a constitutional amendment outlawing abortion and embraces a variety of other conservative doctrines, including a repeal of the tax increases President Bush signed two years ago.
In contrast to the Democrats, who sought in the platform they adopted last month to round the edges on their sharpest liberal stances of the past, the Republicans seem determined to stress conservative principle over pragmatic drift toward the center.


Chemists Dissect The Colors Of Flowers
WHAT makes geraniums red, hyacinths purple and day flowers blue has been debated among chemists for 70 years.
While they agree that a few chemicals in flowers cause myriad hues in the petals, scientists have differed on how these colors develop.
Now researchers say they have determined the structure of anthocyanins, one type of floral pigment.
Dr.
Kumi Yoshida, an assistant professor of organic chemistry at Sugiyama Jogakuen University in Japan, who was an author of the report, in the current issue of the journal Nature, said anthocyanin was responsible for the day flower's blue color.


Yankees Tumble Closer To Cellar
Shawn Hillegas knew the situation.
He saw Sam Militello pitch a gorgeous game Sunday and he knows September is coming.
If Hillegas wanted the Yankees to include him in their future, he needed to pitch effectively tonight.
Hillegas was not effective at all, more like defective.
The 28-year-old might wonder what the future holds for his tattered pitching career after the Tigers bounced him in the fourth inning tonight and cruised to a 10-5 victory over the Yankees at Tiger Stadium.


John Gutman, Ex-Aide At the Met, Dies at 90
John Gutman, a former assistant manager of the Metropolitan Opera, died last Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City.
He was 90 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of an abdominal disorder, said a nephew, Steven Allister.


Review/Fashion; Rich Choices In Swimwear
Plain or fancy -- which way do you prefer your swim clothes? The choice is yours.
When new swimsuits for the cruise and resort season made their debut in fashion shows last week, the design sweep was wider than usual.
At one end was the extreme minimalism of Calvin Klein in his second major swimsuit presentation in his Seventh Avenue showroom.
Supporting the other end of the arc were the realistic roses that keyed the gently romantic look of styles by Gottex.


Anchor Bancorp (Wis.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
GREGORY HINES had just acknowledged his standing ovation at the Sunday matinee of "Jelly's Last Jam" at the Virginia Theater on West 52d Street when an object flew out of the mezzanine, striking two people in the audience below.
The two -- SHERRY THOMAS and her 13-year-old daughter, RASHEEDA, of Columbia, S.C. -- were hit by what turned out to be a stool that STEVEN McDONALD, a spotlight operator, had accidentally kicked.


Searching Through the Haze for Klan Trophies
QUIETLY, with none of the fanfare that accompanied their arrival, the last vestiges of the Ku Klux Klan slipped from display at the volunteer fire departments of Huntington.
Nobody will say exactly when it happened.
Even getting to see the trophies the Klan awarded in the 1920's -- which until recently had sat in showcases undisturbed -- has become impossible for an outsider.
"You've got to talk to the Chief," a dispatcher at the station house told a visitor.


McDonnell Realigning Operations
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation, struggling to trim costs in the face of declining earnings, announced plans yesterday for combining its six military businesses into two groups and handing its largest pending project over to different managers.
The nation's largest military contractor, McDonnell Douglas has been humbled by cutbacks in weapons spending and by cost overruns.
Its commercial aircraft business has not been able to take up the slack in the military operations.


Walshire Assurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Home Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Valspar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 24


Bentsen Supports More Enterprise Zones
Hoping to avoid a Presidential veto of his $31 billion tax bill, Senator Lloyd Bentsen today proposed to sharply expand the number of enterprise zones eligible for tax breaks for businesses that invest in impoverished communities.
Only a few hours before he made his concession, Mr.
Bentsen, the Democratic chairman of the Finance Committee, said in a speech that it was important to limit the number of enterprise zones to prevent spreading benefits so thinly that they would accomplish little.
But the Texas Democrat said he was forced to modify his position because the Administration had backed away from its tentative support for his bill under pressure from Republican conservatives.


Cholesterol: Still a Villain
To read the ever-changing reports about diet and health is to fear that you're damned if you do, damned if you don't.
The newest example is cholesterol.
For years now, people who don't know the difference between cholesterol and collateral have just
known
that a high cholesterol count -- 240 units or more -- is bad news. It still is.
True, several studies described in yesterday's Science Times reveal a curiously sinister side to especially low levels of this fatty alcohol substance in the blood -- 160 units and under.
People with such readings are far less likely to die of heart disease, but it turns out they are far
more
likely to commit suicide or homicide, and die from strokes, certain cancers, liver and lung disease.


Back on Track
Good for President Bush and Israel's new Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin.
Their cordial meeting in Kennebunkport opens the way to quick approval of $10 billion in U.S. loan guarantees for Israel and to real bargaining at regional peace talks, to resume on Aug. 24 in Washington.
Every bit as important, civility has supplanted sour contention in an old, valued alliance.
The new mood was as evident as the smile on George Bush's face, and in his hospitable embrace of the plain-spoken hero of Israel's great victory in the 1967 war.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congress; SENATE APPROVES FAMILY LEAVE BILL
The Senate voted today to require employers to grant workers unpaid family and medical leave, a rare Congressional effort to underscore the themes of Bill Clinton's Presidential campaign.
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, made the political case bluntly, saying: "This legislation will strengthen families. Those who believe in family values should be supporting this legislation."


California's Budget Impasse Leaving Suppliers in Lurch
State prisons in California owe more than $600,000 to Vincent A. Valenzie, owner of the Produce Man in East Los Angeles, for lettuce, tomatoes and oranges.
And California is into Pacific Bid Supply of San Francisco for $47,000 worth of pickles, 20,000 jars of them.
So it goes across California on the 42d day in which the state has gone without a budget.
Because the state has run out of money to pay its bills, the thousands of vendors who supply state mental hospitals, schools, prisons and other institutions with nearly everything from syringes to eggnog are beginning to hurt.
Like Mr.
Valenzie, many suppliers have had to lay off workers and beg creditors for extensions.


Infrasonics Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Excerpts From an Interview With President Bush
Following are excerpts from a taped interview with President Bush yesterday by Stone Phillips of NBC News, as provided by NBC News.
MR.
PHILLIPS: Mr.
President, Dan Quayle -- he's your man.
You're sticking with him.
But is it true, as we have heard, that he has come to you and offered to step aside if you thought that could help?


WLR Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Griffith Still in Hospital
EMILE GRIFFITH, the Hall of Fame boxer, remained hospitalized yesterday with serious kidney damage, his former manager said.


Don't Gene-Splice Choice
To The Living Section:
Whatever the preference for each of us, pro or con, in genetically engineered foods  [ "Gene-Spliced Foods: Is It Safe Soup Yet?" June 17 ] , one thing remains abundantly clear: nonlabeling deprives the consumer of the right of choice, which should be one's option in a free society.


No Headline
I'd put my arm around her and say, if she were trying to make that decision, encourage her to not do that, but of course I'd stand by my child.
I'd love her and help her, lift her up, wipe the tears away, and we'd get back in the game. -- PRESIDENT BUSH, on what he would do if his granddaughter sought an abortion.  [ A15:2. ]


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING Lewis Stops Dixon  Lennox Lewis of England tuned up for his Oct. 31 heavyweight world-title elimination bout with Razor Ruddock by stopping Mike Dixon of Atlanta last night at 1:02 of the fourth round at Harrah's Casino Hotel in Atlantic City.
The fight was halted after Dixon was wobbling following a standing 8-count.
Lewis (21-0) will fight Ruddock in London.
That winner is to fight next spring against the winner of the Nov. 13 title bout between champion Evander Holyfield and Riddick Bowe. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Lewis and Bubka Win  Carl Lewis returned to the individual sprints yesterday, winning the 100 meters in the Monte Carlo Grand Prix track meet.
Sergei Bubka of Ukraine, who was a flop in the Olympics, won the pole vault at 19 feet 4 1/4 inches, but failed in three attempts at a world-record height of 20-1.
Maxim Tarasov, the Olympic champion, tied for seventh at 18-4 1/2.
Lewis raced away in the last 40 meters to win in 10.15 seconds.
Vitaly Savin of the Commonwealth of Independent States was second in 10.21 and Dennis Mitchell, the Olympic bronze medalist behind Linford Christie of Britain, was third in 10.28.
Christie bypassed this meet.
Nourredine Morceli of Algeria, the world 1,500-meters champion, rebounded from his poor performance in the Olympics to turn in the fastest time of the year in the metric mile, 3 minutes 32.75 seconds.
Kevin Young, who broke Edwin Moses's 400-hurdles world mark last week with an effort of 46.78 seconds at Barcelona, won in 47.60 last night. (AP)


Knowledgeware Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


To Check Octane, Refiner Sees the Light
A motorist who buys a tank of gasoline with too low an octane rating will find out when the foot is on the accelerator: the engine will knock.
That measurement system seems crude, but most refineries measure octane in almost the same way, using a "knock engine" that can be adjusted until it makes the telltale sound.
Not only can that system be cumbersome and slow, it does not solve an emerging problem for refiners who supply urban areas: determining the exact composition of the product they offer for sale, to meet clean air requirements.


New Regime for Knox With Rams
The last time Chuck Knox coached the Los Angeles Rams, Warren Beatty hadn't yet won them a Super Bowl in "Heaven Can Wait."
The last time Knox coached here, the Raiders were not even a twinkle in the Los Angeles Coliseum's eye.
The Rams still leased the place, filled most of the 100,000 splintered bench seats, had Jim Nabors sing the anthem, acappella, and invited half of Hollywood to the sideline.


Lam Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S., Britain and France Warn Baghdad on Shiites
The United States, Britain and France warned President Saddam Hussein today that they might come to the aid of the Shiite Muslims of Iraq's vast southern marshlands if he continued to oppress them, just as they aided Kurdish refugees fleeing his armies in the north last year.
The warnings came at a special Security Council meeting called to hear a report on human rights violations in Iraq by the former Dutch Foreign Minister, Max van der Stoel, who is investigating Iraq's human rights record on behalf of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva.


China Report Sees Prison as One Big, Happy Jail
The Government sought today to rebut Western criticisms by issuing a major report on conditions in Chinese prisons.
But it painted such a glowing portrait of prison life that skeptics are unlikely to be convinced.
The white paper, "Criminal Reform in China," is part of a broad effort by the authorities to counter allegations of torture, hunger and slave labor in what critics call China's "gulag." The report includes numerous statistics, but its tone is so far removed from what former prisoners have said that it is unclear how reliable the figures are.


7 Black Hospitals Struggle to Find A Modern Role
Not long after the turn of the century, the nation had about 200 hospitals built primarily to serve blacks.
For black health-care professionals, they were meccas.
For black patients, they were welcome alternatives to being treated in neglected corners of segregated hospitals.
Today, long after the tight fist of lawful segregation loosened its grip, only seven historically black hospitals remain, and health-care experts say some of them have only a faint pulse.
While historically black colleges, newspapers and other businesses found their niches in the post-segregation era, black hospitals seem to have had trouble redefining their role.


Bosnian Calls Bush's Plan a Welcome 'First Step'
The Bosnian President said today that the reported willingness of the United States and other Western powers to use military force to protect the delivery of food and medicine to Sarajevo and other beleaguered Government-held cities was a welcome "first step." He added that he hoped it would lead to a wider commitment to use force directly against Serbian nationalist troops.
Some senior officials here had been critical of President Bush's move to have the United Nations Security Council adopt a resolution approving force in support of augmented relief efforts, calling it a half-measure that would leave Serbian troops free to continue offensives that have captured wide areas of Bosnia.


A Black in Blue: Taunts From Township's Youth
Lieut.
Col.
Shaka Simon Tshabalala, a barrel-shaped black man wearing the blue uniform of the South African police, stood in the dusty arena of Sinaba soccer stadium.
From the concrete grandstand 500 rallygoers, mostly schoolchildren, chanted taunts at him in Zulu.
"They are shouting now, 'You ugly thing, Tshabalala, we are going to kill you tonight!' " the colonel translated with a good-natured grimace.
" 'Tshabalala, we are going to cut off your private parts!' "


Personal Health; Genital herpes thrives on ignorance and secrecy.
THE woman wrote that although she is young, attractive and in love, her life has been destroyed by genital herpes, an incurable venereal infection that she is too ashamed to reveal to anyone, especially the man who loves and wants to marry her.
She explained that she had contracted herpes during her one previous relationship with a man.
She said the infected man had known that he had herpes but had neither told her nor done anything to protect her from the viral disease.
A decade ago, herpes sent a wave of panic through participants in the so-called sexual revolution.
Now, in the wake of publicity about the AIDS epidemic, genital herpes is nearly forgotten but hardly gone.
About 30 million Americans -- 16 percent of people between the ages of 15 and 74 -- are believed to harbor this contagious virus, which takes up lifelong residence in the body and emerges from time to time to produce painful blistering sores on and around the genitals.


Continental Medical Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Pop Life
The 50's Elvis
"Elvis, the King of Rock 'n' Roll: The Complete 50's Masters" (RCA), a five-CD boxed set, was released in late June, in ample time for this weekend's observation of the 15th anniversary of the singer's death.
A candlelight vigil at Graceland in Memphis is planned, and there will be heavy television coverage (a review of one program, "Crazy About Elvis," on "48 Hours" tonight, is on page C18).
RCA has already shipped 175,000 copies of the CD set, and 36,000 have been sold, though Joe Galante, RCA's president, says those numbers aren't accurate because the company has also been selling the set through the Home Shopping Network.
Those figures do not get picked up by the Soundscan counting system.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY WELFARE ROLLS KEEP CLIMBING
In the most telling sign of the tremendous human damage the city's economic woes have caused, the number of New Yorkers on welfare broke the one million mark last month for the first time since the city's fiscal crisis in the 1970's.
Most of the newcomers are unskilled workers who have had trouble competing for jobs in the recession, many economists and state officials said.
A1.
FLAWS FOUND IN BRIDGE INSPECTIONS


Food Notes
Crepes and Cannelloni
The French Culinary Institute, 462 Broadway (at Grand Street), is expanding its scope.
In the fall, it will inaugurate an international division (for non-French cuisines) with a series of courses in Italian cooking.
Most of the classes will be aimed at amateur cooks, and will be held on evenings and weekends.


The Talk of Detroit; Iacocca's Ford-Size Dreams Run Into 90's Reality
Lee A. Iacocca has been many things in his storied automotive career.
But one important goal has eluded him.
For what he wants most is to be like Henry Ford 2d, who ruled the Ford Motor Company as if it were a fief whether he was in the executive suite or in retirement.
When Mr.
Ford was preparing to retire in the late 1970's, Mr.
Iacocca wanted to succeed him.
He knew the company, the industry and what needed to be done.
"In terms of everything that really counted," Mr.
Iacocca wrote in his autobiography, "I was more important than Henry."


Rioting Over Stock Issues Poses Challenge for Chinese
Rioting in the southern city of Shenzhen by people eager to buy new stock offerings appeared to have ended today, but the clashes on Monday presented a challenge to officials who are trying to push for more rapid economic change in China.
The police were reported to have fired tear gas and shots into the air to disperse crowds of rioters Monday night, in the worst civil unrest reported in China since the Tiananmen Square protests in Beijing in 1989.
The rioters set cars on fire and attacked police cars, according to reports from Chinese officials and local newspapers in Beijing and in Hong Kong, which is adjacent to Shenzhen.


Toon Gets Go-Ahead To Resume Practicing
Wide receiver Al Toon has been cleared to resume practice on Wednesday although he will probably not play in Sunday's exhibition game against the Green Bay Packers.
That was the good news out of the Jets' training complex, where players had the day off but coaches were busily preparing for the team's third preseason game.
Toon underwent tests today under the direction of Dr.
Nick DePasquale, the chief of cardiovascular services at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan, to check on the heart palpitations that kept him out of Saturday night's game against Washington.
His status will be closely monitored.
Still Awaiting O'Brien Accord
Meanwhile, the talks between the team and quarterback Ken O'Brien seem to be producing no progress.


Fighting Between Angola Forces And Rebels Grows as Vote Nears
The authorities said today that fierce fighting had broken out between Government forces and Angolan rebels.
Skirmishes in the northern province of Malange were said to be the most violent incidents since the two sides signed a cease-fire accord last year that ended 16 years of fighting.


9 Firefighters Are Injured in South Bronx Blaze
Nine firefighters were injured, none seriously, as they battled a fierce fire that engulfed a fifth-floor apartment in the South Bronx yesterday, officials said.
The Fire Commissioner, Carlos M. Rivera, said the fire had been particularly difficult to extinguish, with strong winds fueling the blaze from outside and live electrical wires creating a minefield for firefighters inside.
Some of the injured firefighters received electric shocks as well as minor burns, the Commissioner said.


A Playwright Applies His Craft To Czar Nicholas II's Last Days
"The report was so terrible, so chilling, so horrible, that at first I didn't want to publish it," said Edvard Radzinsky, the Russian author of "The Last Tsar: The Life and Death of Nicholas II," which last week was No. 9 on the New York Times best-seller list for nonfiction.
His book has been acclaimed as an astonishingly detailed and copiously documented account of events leading to the execution of Czar Nicholas II, his family and their retinue in the early hours of July 17, 1918, amid the chaos that engulfed Russia after the Revolution.
Mr.
Radzinsky was talking about his discovery of a report written by the commander of the firing squad that killed the last members of the Romanov dynasty, the family that had ruled Russia for three centuries.


With Rabin Beside Him, Bush Praises the Israelis
After several years of cool relations between the Bush Administration and Israel, President Bush hailed Israel today as a "strategic partner" of the United States, as he and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin announced their agreement on a much-delayed package of $10 billion in loan guarantees.
With Mr.
Rabin beside him outside the Bush home in Kennebunkport, Me., the President said they had agreed on the basic principles of the loan program, which would run five years.


Bank Rates Decline, but More Slowly
Yields of bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit lost more ground in the week that ended today, according to data gathered by The Bank Rate Monitor, a bank interest rate publication.
But while the decline was nearly the same as that of the previous week, it was not as fast as it has been over the last several weeks.


Unwelcome New Business in Corona
Like countless other streets throughout New York City, the two blocks of 43d Avenue that stretch from 102d Street to 104th in Corona, Queens, have been the site of a quiet battle between old and new over the last few years.
That battle has been over crime.
Olga Ramirez, who has lived on the block for 40 of her 46 years, still talks about how peaceful this area can be.
"I've come from the city at 12, 1 o'clock at night, and I don't worry for a moment," she said.


Profits Rose in Quarter for Wal-Mart and Penney
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the rapidly expanding discount retailer, reported a 21.5 percent increase today in second-quarter profits.
Although it was the smallest percentage gain since the first quarter of 1991 for the nation's biggest retailer, it was far above average for the industry and higher than many analysts had expected.


Limited Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Applied Materials reports earnings for Qtr to July 26


Southwest Securities Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


How Violence Began in Northern Ireland
To the Editor:
In reporting on efforts to negotiate a settlement of the strife in Northern Ireland, you write that "violence in the province . . . began with Catholic protests over discrimination in jobs and housing." You then note that "this gave rise to a guerrilla campaign by the Irish Republican Army to end British control of the province" (news article, July 29).


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
3.32
5.56
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.13
5.30
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.19
5.40
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.94
5.97
7.73
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.31
7.36
8.16
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.34
8.35
9.12
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.16
6.21
7.04
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


GPA Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dismay as Driver in Bus Crash on I-87 Is Cleared
The families of some of the 25 East Meadow schoolchildren injured when their charter bus careered down a 70-foot ravine in upstate New York last spring reacted with shock and disappointment to the news that the driver of the bus would not face criminal charges.
An Essex County grand jury decided on Monday not to indict the driver, 45-year-old Dennis Ellis of Brooklyn, on two counts of criminally negligent homicide in the accident, which killed two students from the Woodland Middle School in East Meadow.
Mr.
Ellis and his employer, the Gray Line Bus Company, still face civil suits brought by parents.


Saatchi Reports Return to Profits
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. said yesterday that it made a profit of $:3.9 million ($7 million), or 0.7 pence (1.25 cents) a share, in the first half of this year, in contrast to a loss of $:38 million a year earlier.
Revenues of $:354.7 million ($634.6 million) were up from $:352.8 million a year earlier.


Southern Indiana Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; The Oasis In Racing's Desert
RALPH WILSON has a message for all you people who see big bucks in sports.
He is the owner of the Buffalo Bills, who got creamed in the Super Bowl last January, and he is the breeder of the international mystery horse Arazi, who ran eighth in the Kentucky Derby last May.
And he knows all about big bucks and lost dreams.
"If you want to get into professional sports these days," Wilson says, "you really ought to buy a bowling alley."


Bush Angrily Denies a Report of an Affair
President Bush today angrily denied a published report, based on a purported interview with a man who is now dead, that he had an affair with an aide in 1984.
"I'm not going to take any sleazy questions like that from CNN," Mr.
Bush said when a reporter for Cable News Network asked him about the report during a news conference in Kennebunkport, Me., with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel.


Metropolitan Diary
SCENE: The elevator of a mid-Manhattan office building.
Dramatis personnae: A businessman (double-breasted suit, wingtips); shoeshine man, pulling his cart, and Todd Manas, who hears their conversation as the elevator makes its descent.
Businessman: Do you ever get to 18?
Shoeshine man: No.
Businessman: If you ever get a chance, please look me up in suite 1821.
Shoeshine man: Have you got a pen?
Businessman, reaching to his breast pocket and pulling out a Montblanc: Why, yes.
Shoeshine man: Call me when you want a shine. Here's my beeper number . . .
Dear Diary:
Just when you think you've heard it all on the automated telephone circuit, your calculator needs repair, so you dial (800) 762-1241 and a pleasant female voice responds: "Thank you for calling the Casio Referral Hot Line. If you are calling from a touch-tone telephone, press "1" now. If you are calling from a rotary-dial telephone, please call back on a touch-tone telephone."
Grrrrrrrr . . . -- WALTER GRAY  OUTDOOR CONCERT  For me. it's a cliffhanger:  My Timmie plays timpani in the Youth Symphony  Today's concert is at Reflection Lake.
Timmie has nothing to do  until his one big cue  for 15 cymbal bangs  in the allegro ma non troppo  finale of Shostakovich's Fifth  celebrating victory at Leningrad.
I'm holding my breath.
Timmie's not watching the score.
His eyes are on hummingbirds  high in the sycamore, and on the golden-  haired harpist he adores.
Will he come in on the dot  or not?
What if a mosquito gets him?
Glory be, he's back!
CRASH!
Timmie's made it.
Now I breathe easy.
Let the tuba's mother worry. -- ALMA DENNY Dear Diary:
I loved the taupe Italian-cut suit the moment I saw it.
When my wife warned it might be "too sexy for work," I joyfully bought it.
I also invested in the perfect tie.
Some weeks later, when a high-level meeting and lunch with the Italian Trade Commission came up, I was ready.
My confidence was quickly affirmed when the chief executive of one of our industry's top companies entered, wearing an identical suit.
We joked about this being the New York "power suit" of the year.
Later, as our group walked into Harry's Grill for lunch, the maitre d'hotel greeted us wearing the now all-too-familiar taupe Italian-cut suit.
We were well into the pasta course when the stylish gent swept by again and our hostess from Milan said, "Do you know who that is?" I held my breath.
"That's the young Cipriani, the Venice Cipriani," she said, "and when he married the heiress to the European Ferruzzi sugar empire, his father gave him this restaurant as a wedding present."
Lord, how I love that suit. -- GARY M. FOOTE Dear Diary:
Maybe it was the heat.
I got onto a crosstown bus on 57th Street, grateful to be off the broiling sidewalk.
As I sank wearily into my seat, I remembered that I had not asked for a transfer.
Feeling certain the driver would remember me from only seconds before, I approached him with my request.
"Forget it, lady," he barked. "Too late."
Not one to be easily cowed, I reminded him that I'd only just boarded and demanded my transfer.
After a few more refusals and my own steadfast stubborness, he looked at me angrily, and with a great show of indignation, reached over, ripped off a transfer, and handed it to me, saying ominously, "Cuomo's gonna get rid of people like you."
I still have no idea what he meant, but every now and then I find myself looking over my shoulder. -- RITA GARDNER Dear Diary:
The other morning I was on the Deer Park platform waiting for the 7:46 Long Island Rail Road train to Penn Station.
I noticed a particularly well-dressed fellow, carrying a well-worn attache case, standing back a bit.
Another suit-and-tie-type walked over to him, looking surprised.
"Hey, Bill!" the second man said. "I thought you'd retired."
"I did," Bill said.
"Yesterday was my last day. I've been taking this train for 32 years. A few years ago I began planning for my retirement and promised myself that the day after I retired I was going to get dressed, drive to the station, wait for the train, watch the rest of you get on, watch it pull out and go home."
A few minutes later, the train pulled in.
We got on, Bill stayed back.
"All aboard!" the conductor cried.
The doors closed and the train pulled out of the station.
From the window, I could see Bill standing there.
Then he picked up his attache case and walked back to the parking lot. -- MICHAEL L. ROSEN  Metropolitan Diary welcomes contributions of short anecdotes, observations and light verse about life in the New York region.
Unused material cannot be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, self-addressed envelope.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DE BEERS CONSOLIDATED MINES LTD.  said first-half earnings for the giant diamond group fell 26 percent because the recession had hurt demand and smuggling of diamonds from Angola swelled supplies.
TANDEM COMPUTERS INC.  said the board authorized it to buy back up to 1 million, or nine-tenths of 1 percent, of its shares.


Serbs Back a U.N. Relief Force, But Warn Against Foreign Army
The leader of Bosnia's Serbs said today that his forces would accept deployment of a neutral international force to secure relief convoys to wartorn regions.
But he spoke of "unpredictable consequences" if the deployment turned out to be a prelude to full-scale anti-Serbian intervention.
"Military intervention can take place if it is under a United Nations flag and limited to humanitarian issues," President Radovan Karadzic, the president of the self-declared Serbian republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, said in an interview here today.
"We could even support this. Our people trust the United Nations forces."


TPI Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fixed-Price Lessons, At $19.92 a Customer
SAN DOMENICO, an elegant Italian restaurant on Central Park South with leather chairs and ocher walls, is often sparsely populated at lunch time.
But this month, San Domenico is packed.
So, too, is the Gotham Bar and Grill, Le Perigord, the Sign of the Dove and other restaurants with reputations for good food but images of being too expensive or too forbidding for most New Yorkers.
It took a bargain to bring restaurant madness back to New York.


Commerical Federal reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Showalter Seething As Yanks See Cellar
Losing is bad enough in baseball, but losing ugly is worse.
During a frustrating stretch that has seen them lose 13 of 16 games and move into a last-place tie with the Cleveland Indians, the Yankees have been losing ugly.
Real ugly.
The constant losing and lackadaisical manner caused Manager Buck Showalter to confront his players before tonight's game and chastise them.
It did not have any immediate effect as the Tigers slugged two homers off Melido Perez and defeated the Yankees again, 5-1, at Tiger Stadium.
The Yanks slithered 11 games below .500 and fell into last for the first time this season as Frank Tanana, who had been struggling in recent outings, squelched them on five hits into the eighth.


Ares Serono reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


LGF Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Penney (J.C.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


U.S. Accused of Easing Pursuit of S.&amp; L. Cases
Government lawyers told a Senate panel today that Federal attempts to sue and recover money from former officials of defunct savings and loan associations had been mismanaged and relaxed in recent months.
They suggested that political influence played a role in weakened Government efforts.
A lawyer with the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency responsible for cleaning up collapsed savings and loan institutions, said the agency dropped plans to sue officials of an institution around the time one of them visited with President Bush.
The lawyer, Jacqueline P. Taylor, criticized the decision to resolve the matter out of court rather than to file a lawsuit as "an inappropriate settlement because of political reasons."


TALKING HISTORY WITH: David McCullough; Immersed in Facts, The Better to Imagine Harry Truman's Life
WHEN David McCullough was writing "The Great Bridge," his chronicle of how the Brooklyn Bridge was built, he grew a beard, the better to look and feel like one of the book's heroes, the engineer Washington Roebling.
While working for the last decade on his current best seller, "Truman," he would begin each day with a brisk early-morning walk, just as Harry S. Truman did.
To learn the rhythms of speech and of life in Truman's hometown, Independence, Mo., Mr.
McCullough lived there for a while.
In Washington, he raced through the Capitol, retracing the path Truman ran when he was summoned to the White House on April 12, 1945, to be told that Franklin D. Roosevelt had died and that he was now President of the United States.


Muslims Fleeing Serbs in Bosnia Plead With U.N. for Safe Passage
In a sign that Serbian forces are expanding their campaign of "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia and Herzegovina, United Nations officials reported today that as many as 20,000 Muslims have asked for safe passage out of Serbian-controlled areas near the Croatian border.
Local leaders in northwestern Bosnia, saying they were speaking for predominantly Muslim communities of between 1,000 and 2,000 people, have written letters to United Nations officials appealing for help in escaping the Serbian drive.


A Management Shuffle At Subaru of America
A month after the resignation of Thomas R. Gibson, the president and chief operating officer of Subaru of America Inc., the auto maker announced a new top management team yesterday.
The new structure, which eliminates the management layers of president and senior vice president, calls for Takeshi Higurashi to remain chairman and chief executive.


Foam in the Cellar
To The Living Section:
"Root Beer: A Flood of Memories, a Sip of Foam," by Eben Shapiro  [ July 22 ] , discussed the various brands of root beer available today, but neglected to tell us about the history of the drink.
Getting a cold drink out of a can is fine for today's generation, but the romance, the nostalgia and, incidentally, the "kick" are missing.


Kurds Creating a Country On the Hostile Soil of Iraq
For the third time this century, a fledgling Kurdish state has risen out of the havoc of war.
Largely as a result of the American-led intervention on their behalf at the end of the Persian Gulf war, the four million Kurds in northern Iraq have been able to form their own government, as their forebears did briefly in 1920 and 1946.


Review/Theater; Williamstown Pairing on Terrorism
WILLIAMSTOWN, Mass., Aug. 7 -- The conflict between political expediency and moral responsibility is investigated with chilling intensity in Romulus Linney's "2" at the Williamstown Theater Festival.
In this play about Hermann Goering and the Nuremberg war crimes trials, Mr.
Linney is unblinking in his confrontation of Nazism, which he regards not as a faceless horror but as the result of individual men swept away by their power and by their craze for greater power.
While "2" is running on the Williamstown main stage, Jane Anderson's "Hotel Oubliette," a study of hostages under siege, is at the company's Other Stage.
As a pair, the plays offer summer theatergoers a double dose of theatricalized terrorism.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Babies Do the Soft-Selling In New Charmin Campaign
PROCTER &amp; GAMBLE is using a bunch of babies to do a pitchman's job.
The consumer-products giant is introducing animated television commercials for Charmin, the country's best-selling bathroom tissue, that use cloyingly adorable cartoon infants in an effort to recapture the success the brand enjoyed with Mr.
Whipple, its annoying, though effective, advertising character.


Wiser Oil reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Insituform of North America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:
President Bush
SUNDAY: 11:30 A.M., ABC, "This Week," interview with David Brinkley.
(Channel 7 in New York)


Player Is Sentenced
DONALD SHELBY TOOMER, a Utah State cornerback, has been ordered to serve two days in jail and pay a $700 fine after pleading guilty to charges stemming from a 1991 altercation at his girlfriend's home.


Peace and Provocation in New York City
The opponents of Mayor David Dinkins are concocting ever more fantastic tales about the events surrounding the Washington Heights disturbances that followed the death of Jose Garcia last month.
Initially, police union officials said the Mayor turned Mr.
Garcia into a "martyr." Then Guy Molinari, the Staten Island Borough President, said Mr.
Dinkins had not supported the police.
Finally, Rudolph W. Giuliani, writing on this page on Friday, criticized the Mayor's efforts to restore calm in the community.
As the grand jury investigation of the shooting moves ahead, these charges not only distort the facts but threaten to disrupt the peace.
Simply put, Mayor Dinkins sought to restore calm in a neighborhood that had erupted.
The charge that he took sides against the police disparages the efforts of countless New Yorkers who walked the streets and worked with him to end the violence.


Rocky Mountain Helicopters reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Sigma-Aldrich reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Donohue Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rockefeller's Bid for Senate Imperiled; Board of Elections Disqualifies Signatures on Nominating Petitions
Larry Rockefeller, an environmental lawyer seeking to challenge Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato in the Republican primary on Sept. 15, appeared to have lost his place on the ballot today when too many of the signatures he had collected were declared invalid by the State Board of Elections, his lawyer said.
To run a primary against Senator D'Amato, Mr.
Rockefeller, a 47-year-old nephew of former Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller, was required to present the Board of Elections with a total of 10,000 valid signatures.
Although his lawyer, Lawrence Mandelker, submitted petitions bearing 10,774 signatures, the board had disqualified 2,597 of them by late this evening, Mr.
Mandelker said.


After a Year of Lows, Kite Enters P.G.A. Championship at Top
A year ago, Tom Kite came to the P.G.A.
Championship in the throes of the most frustrating period of his career.
The week brought one more indignity, as he missed the cut at Crooked Stick to fail in his final opportunity to make the United States Ryder Cup team.
At this week's 74th edition at the Bellerive Country Club, Kite comes in holding the United States Open title and riding the pinnacle of a 21-year career that has this season seen him stretch out his lead as the biggest money winner in the history of golf.


Corrections
An article last Wednesday about the return of the house call in medicine rendered one physician's name incorrectly.
He is Dr.
Karl Eilender.


Corrections
The Advertising column in Business Day on Friday, about the market for television time, misstated NBC's prime-time rating.
The network finished last season in second place, not third.


60,000 Needed for Bosnia, A U.S. General Estimates
A representative of the Joint Chiefs of Staff told Congress today that 60,000 to 120,000 troops would be needed to insure the uninterrupted flow by land and air of food and medical supplies to Sarajevo, the besieged capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But the official, Lieut.
Gen.
Barry R. McCaffrey, acknowledged under questioning that there was no plan agreed to by the United States and European countries to deploy a sizable ground force.
He suggested that as a result the United Nations may need to enlist the cooperation of the warring parties in the Balkans to get the supplies through.


NFL TRAINING CAMPS
Detroit Lions
Wide receiver Willie Green watched Saturday's Oilers game on television.
Detroit officials saw the 17-7 loss up close and personal.
Their perspectives were different but their conclusions were the same: Green belonged in camp.
Yesterday, after weeks of fruitless negotiations the two sides finally saw eye to eye and Green signed a two-year contract.


The Gold Isn't Worth It for Olympic Gymnasts; Inhumane to Horses
To the Editor:
As an avid rider, owner and exhibitor of horses, I was very excited about watching the equestrian exhibition of the 1992 Olympic Games.
However, I was greatly disappointed with the cross-country event.
It was not a display of talent, but a display in disrespect for one of the most beautiful of athletes, the horse.


Bridge Inspection Inquiry Finds Flaws in Fieldwork
New York City bridge inspectors have grossly overstated the amount of time they spend checking the city's smaller bridges to determine whether they are safe, an 18-month investigation by the City Council and the City Comptroller shows.
The investigators blamed the Dinkins administration for failing to adequately supervise the city's bridge inspectors in determining whether they do their jobs.
But they would not say who specifically was at fault or whether the bridges were unsafe as a result.


Next Comes the Political Review of the Free Trade Agreement
A trade agreement by Canada, Mexico and the United States cannot go into effect until it is approved by Congress.
And before Congress votes next year, an important event will intervene: the election in November.
If Bill Clinton is elected President, he will certainly want to put his own stamp on the deal.
That might mean reopening negotiations with the Canadians and Mexicans.
Or it might mean recasting the legislation put forward by the Bush Administration to set the pact into effect.


The Gold Isn't Worth It for Olympic Gymnasts; Dream Team Bashing
To the Editor:
"America's Nightmare Team" (editorial, Aug. 1) criticizes the United States Olympic basketball team because it celebrated its enormous superiority over Croatia and failed to stay in the housing provided for the athletes.
You also criticize the refusal of some players to wear the Reebok emblem at the medal ceremonies.


Storm Causes Power Failures and Flooding
A cold front blowing in from the northwest generated whipping winds, lightning and drenching rains throughout the New York metropolitan region yesterday, flooding roads, knocking down trees and utility poles and leaving thousands without electricity well into the evening.
Powerful thunderstorms, bringing winds gusting as high as 60 miles per hour, struck northern New Jersey shortly after 12:30 P.M. and cut a swath across New York City, southern Connecticut and Long Island before blowing into the Atlantic Ocean around 7 P.M.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP INC., New York, an insurance organization, appointed James S. Davis executive vice president and chief operating officer of its New Hampshire Insurance Company unit.
GTE MOBILNET, Atlanta, a unit of GTE Corp., named Ronald R. Grawert president.


Clinton's Birthplace Looks to Make a Buck


Senators Study Business Practices
The curious practices of the boxing business were the focus of the Senate's Permanent Subcomittee on Investigations today.
Testimony ranged from charges of abuse suffered by fighters to accusations of chicanery by the sport's governing bodies and promoters to the possibility of involvement by organized crime.
The subcommittee, which is part of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, can recommend legislation.
Its chairman is Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia.


Waging War From Behind the Wheel; In Battered Undercover Patrols, Officers Stalk Newark's Young Thieves
On a torpid afternoon, the two rumpled police officers watched an overhead jet dwindle into a speck and climbed into their unmarked Lincoln Town Car.
"Be careful out there, boys," the captain told them.
They knew.
They had only to glance at their car.
The right front fender was badly crumpled a couple of weeks ago when a criminal slammed into it.
The wounded car was a taunting reminder of the perils of their trade: catching car thieves.


MICC Investments reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Are Killed In a Shootout In Queens
Two men, one of them a hostage, were killed and a third man was critically injured last night in a wild shootout between police officers and gunmen who had attempted to rob a Queens social club, the police said.
The shootout rocked the neighborhood, and in the tense aftermath, scores of police officers worked late into the night combing streets and backyards in search of three other armed men involved in the botched robbery.


Wal-Mart Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Review/Music; What's a King to Do When the Princes Love Their Dad's Fiancee?
Few concertgoers are likely to be waiting with bated breath for a certified auditor's report, but Lincoln Center's 19-month effort to present all of Mozart's 835 extant works is winding to a close.
The final stretch in its Mozart Bicentennial project is the Festival of Mozart Operas in Concert, which opened on Monday evening with a performance of "Mitridate, Re di Ponto" at Alice Tully Hall, and is to run through Aug. 22.
Included are 9 operas (and a fragment of a 10th) that had to be performed for the sake of completeness, but which were deemed too marginal to warrant staged productions.
They can all be sampled on recordings, but according to the annals of Opera America, which keeps tabs on such information, the performances of "Il Sogno di Scipione" and "Ascanio in Alba" are to be United States premieres, and tonight's performance of "La Finta Semplice" is to be the work's New York premiere.
"Der Schauspieldirektor" is to have a new English text by Albert Innaurato, and will incorporate the surviving music from the incomplete "L'Oca del Cairo."


Fire in Boston Skyscraper Injures at Least 76 People


Waban Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


Mets Unleash a Secret Weapon: a 6-10 Rookie
The Mets took the field at Shea Stadium last night and were booed.
Loudly.
Understandably.
On the mound, Eric Hillman stood amid it all, anxious, awkward, certain of perhaps one thing: Shea Stadium wasn't booing him.
A 51-60 record?
Hillman had no hand in that.
A 1-9 record against the Pirates in 1992?
Sorry, Hillman couldn't assume blame for that even if he wanted to.
A deficit of 12 1/2 games in the National League East?
Not his doing.


Bush Reportedly Favors F-15 Sale to Saudis
President Bush told leading Republicans in the Senate and House today that he is seriously considering approving a $5 billion sale of F-15 fighter planes to Saudi Arabia, one of the Senators said.
The lawmaker, Senator Christopher S. Bond of Missouri, said the participants in the meeting, which was held at the White House, were asked by Mr.
Bush to assess whether they would be able to block efforts in Congress to disapprove the sale.


Central Banks' Intervention Helps to Prop Up the Dollar
The Federal Reserve Bank coordinated a dollar-buying spree yesterday with a dozen European central banks to keep the dollar from drifting any closer to its all-time low against the German mark.
But the action lifted the dollar only slightly.
The Fed's intervention, its third in three weeks, was apparently aimed at keeping the dollar from going down so far that it bred panic in currency and stock markets.
The buying was also intended, traders said, to prevent the dollar from hitting a record low that could be politically embarassing to President Bush during an election year.
The dollar closed at 1.4669 German marks, up from Monday's close at 1.4630 marks, and a cut above the all-time low of 1.4475, set on Feb. 11, 1991.
The Fed began buying when the dollar fell to 1.4620, traders said, and waded into the market repeatedly during the day.


Ann Taylor Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Loral Bid for LTV Divisions Is Increased to $475 Million
The bidding war for the missiles and aircraft unit of the LTV Corporation intensified again late today.
The group headed by the Loral Corporation pledged $475 million, an increase from a $445 million bid disclosed last week.
The new Loral offer tops a $440million bid announced two weeks ago by the Martin Marietta Corporation.
That deal carried the approval of LTV and several of its senior creditor groups in the form of a definitive agreement.


Dollar General reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


A Volunteer Firefighter Faces Charges of Setting Fatal Fires
A probationary firefighter in the volunteer Fire Department in Sayville, L.I., was charged today with setting a series of fires that devastated the village's Victorian-era business district and killed two elderly men who lived in apartments above a row of wooden frame shops.
In an indictment unsealed today, Louis Gelsomino, an 18-year-old student at Sayville High School, was charged with two counts of murder and five counts of arson in connection with at least some of the fires that terrified shopkeepers and homeowners in this village on the south shore of Long Island last winter.


Lively on the Palate and Easy On the Wallet: Fresh Produce
FRESH herbs, vegetables and fruit are featured in this refreshing summer menu.
These products are more plentiful, flavorful and economical now than at any other time of the year, so they appear often on my table.
I am fortunate to have an herb garden in my backyard, so I can just gather the mint and other herbs used in the first course, bulgur and mint salad.
If you don't have an herb garden, take advantage of the good buys on herbs at farmers' markets and supermarkets.


Southland Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
AL -- Suspended Todd Stottlemyre, Toronto Blue Jays pitcher, for five games for making contact with umpire Jim Joyce and shouting obscenities during an Aug. 5 game.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Recalled and activated Eric King, pitcher, from injury rehabilitation at Toledo of the International League.
Optioned Buddy Groom, pitcher, to Toledo.
National League
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Traded Steve Scarsone, infielder, to the Baltimore Orioles for Juan Bell, shortstop.
Activated Andy Ashby, pitcher, from the disabled list.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Signed Alex Blackwell, forward. United States Basketball League
NEW JERSEY JAMMERS -- Named Ron Kotz general manager. FOOTBALL National Football League
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Signed James Washington, safety.
DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Willie Green, wide receiver, to a two-year contract.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Waived Kip Lewis, wide receiver.
HOUSTON OILERS -- Agreed to terms with Bo Orlando, safety.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Signed Ray Berry, linebacker.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Otis Smith, defensive back, and Britt Hager, linebacker.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Waived Micah Haley, nose tackle. HOCKEY National Hockey League
MINNESOTA NORTH STARS -- Named Rick Wilson assistant coach.
OTTAWA SENATORS -- Signed Peter Sidorkiewicz, goalie, Mike Peluso, left wing, Jim Thomson, right wing and Dominic Lavoie, defenseman.
International Hockey League  SAN DIEGO GULLS -- Signed Warren Rychel, left wing.
Re-signed Alan Hepple, defenseman.
SOCCER  U.S.
SOCCER FEDERATION -- Named Ray Liggett comptroller.


Krabbe's Track Club Dismisses Her Trainer
The trainer for KATRIN KRABBE, the double world-sprint champion from Germany, was dismissed yesterday for giving her the banned stimulant Clenbuterol.
"THOMAS SPRINGSTEIN irresponsibly betrayed his duty as trainer of caring for the athletes under his charge," the Neubrandenburg Sports Club said.
Springstein admitted last week to buying Clenbuterol on the black market for Krabbe and her teammates, GRIT BREUER and MANUELA DERR.
The drug, used for asthma treatment, is banned by the International Olympic Committee.


REVLON'S PRESIDENT, LEVIN, ADDS CHIEF EXECUTIVE POST
Revlon Inc., a unit of MacAndrews and Forbes Inc., said yesterday that its president, Jerry W. Levin, had assumed the additional title of chief executive.
Since becoming president of Revlon in April 1991, Mr.
Levin had shared the title of co-chief executive with the chairman, Ronald O. Perelman.
In a statement, Mr.
Perelman said Revlon would reconsider its initial public offering when market conditions improved.
On July 30, Revlon withdrew a planned public stock offering, citing the weak market for initial public offerings.


New Yorkers Now Risk the Loss of a Popular Oasis in Midtown
To the Editor:
New York City's open-space advocates are appalled by Sony's proposal to fill in 8,727 square feet of public open space at the former A.T.&amp; T. building, Madison Avenue and 55th Street, and remove it from the public realm.
This plaza space was originally given to the public in exchange for increased bulk and height to the "Chippendale-topped" tower.


Missed Class? Hit Rewind
For those who cannot afford to study with the stars at $1,000 per couple per day, a cheaper alternative is increasingly available.
Half a dozen companies now offer videotaped lectures of dynamic college professors doing what they do best.
"How do you find those rare professors who are legendary for the brilliance of their lectures?" asks The Teaching Company of Arlington, Va., in a brochure for its SuperStar Teachers college lecture series on both audio and videotape.


The Gold Isn't Worth It for Olympic Gymnasts; Teen-Age Courage
To the Editor:
As a 12-year-old gymnast, I would like to respond to Dave Anderson's column criticizing women's gymnastics (Sports pages, July 31).
A sport is a great alternative to sitting around playing video games or watching television, since that robs just as much of your childhood as striving for excellence does.


Cutback in Military Spending: No Help for Ailing Economy
Not since the 1950's has the United States recovered from recession while military spending was falling sharply.
But now that the cold war is over, America is struggling to do just that, and finding it difficult.
The precipitous drop in military spending in the last 18 months has eroded an important pillar of the economy, and many economists say that is a big reason that the United States is now having such trouble pulling out of recession.


Topics of The Times; Wailing About Wails
A car is stolen every three and a half minutes in New York City.
Yet car alarms are hardly the answer.
They do far more to annoy whole neighborhoods than to deter thieves.
They also encourage vigilante behavior among otherwise peaceable citizens.
The other night on a quiet stretch of East 74th Street in Manhattan, a station wagon erupted in rhythmic wails.
The law says that alarms must shut off after three minutes.
This one went on for an hour.
Soon three neighbors converged on the car, each carrying a note filled with unprintable invective.
They placed the messages under the windshield wiper, then retreated.
This was polite revenge.
Other citizens, jarred from slumber, have been known to slash tires and deface windows.


Carlyle Douglas, 45, Editor and Reporter
Carlyle C. Douglas, an editor and reporter, died on Monday at Harper Hospital in Detroit.
He was 45 years old and lived in Manhattan until three months ago.
Mr.
Douglas died of pneumonia, a complication of lung and brain cancer, his brother, David, said.


Bridge
There are some bridge hands that have the feel of a roller-coaster: Down to the depths, up to the heights, but down unexpectedly to the depths at the finish.
The sufferer on the diagramed deal was Sharon Osberg of San Francisco, who became a world champion last October in the Venice Cup in Yokohama, Japan.
She was playing in June in the Berkeley Cavendish, a West Coast version of a celebrated invitational pairs event played each May in Manhattan.


CHRONICLE
FRED W. FRIENDLY, the television producer, commentator, author and former president of CBS News, was honored with the American Bar Association's Lifetime Achievement Gavel Award yesterday at the association's annual meeting in San Francisco.
Mr.
Friendly, an eight-time winner of the Silver Gavel, given by the bar association for contributions to the public's understanding of the American legal system, is only the second person to receive the lifetime award in the 35-year history of the awards.
The other was Henry Fonda, who received it in 1981.
Mr.
Friendly is the creator of the Public Broadcasting Service's series on legal and social issues, including "The Constitution: That Delicate Balance" and "The Presidency and the Constitution."
In accepting the award, Mr.
Friendly used a quote found for him by his wife, RUTH FRIENDLY, about 11 years ago: "Our job is not to make up anybody's mind, but to open minds and to make the agony of decision making so intense you can escape only by thinking."
"I taught school for many years, and I once saw that quote on a blackboard," Mrs.
Friendly said by telephone yesterday, as the couple prepared for the luncheon at the San Francisco Hilton.
"I have looked everywhere to learn where it came from, but he has said it so often that I now consider it Fred Friendly's quote."


Fraud by U.S. Is Charged In Nazi-Camp Hearing
As John Demjanjuk sat in an Israeli jail, a death sentence hanging over his head, lawyers for the 72-year-old retired Cleveland auto worker argued today that Government prosecutors had fraudulently withheld evidence showing that he was not Ivan the Terrible, the sadistic guard at the Treblinka death camp.
Mr.
Demjanjuk's lawyers asserted that all proceedings in his tortuous legal journey, particularly the order stripping him of his American citizenship and complying with Israel's demand for extradition, had been tainted by a "long trail of fraudulent conduct."


Brave, and a Brown: Bavaro Is Back, for Now
Mark Bavaro walked into the Giants' training headquarters here today and said quite flatly in Bavaro style: "I'm here today. But I could be gone tomorrow."
With Bavaro, the intensity in his eyes is still not masked by the softness of his voice.


Melvin A. Cole, 77, Ice Cream Executive
Melvin A. Cole, a former executive with the Haagen-Dazs ice cream company, died on Monday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 75 years old and was a lifelong resident of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mr. Cole died of lung cancer, said his daughter, Johanna.


Markel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


An Extra Dirty Pot Can Be Worth the Trouble
THIS menu violates a principle of the column: no more than three pots should be necessary.
Four are needed here, including a stove-top grill, but the results are special enough to serve to company.
Even with four pots it can be prepared in less than 30 minutes, and the dishwashing takes less than 10 minutes. (I timed it.)


COMPANY NEWS: A Sound Idea; Dolby Theater Format Adapted to Home Uses
Dolby Laboratories Inc., which took the hiss out of cassette tapes and brought stereo sound to motion pictures, now plans to bring its latest digital stereo sound format for movies into the home.
The public was introduced to the new format, Dolby Stereo Digital, in 10 specially equipped theaters that showed "Batman Returns" and "Honey, I Blew Up the Kid."


PEROT CRITICIZES U.S. HANOI POLICY
Ross Perot, who helped to foster the belief that American prisoners remained captive in Indochina after the Vietnam War, told a Senate committee today that a policy of isolating and "humiliating" Hanoi had been misguided and counterproductive.
He was also sharply critical of a long American covert war in Laos run by the Central Intelligence Agency, which he said contributed to the problems the United States had subsequently faced in Indochina.


Potential Investor Pulls Out On Giants
The effort to keep the Giants in San Francisco suffered a significant setback today when H. Irving Grousbeck, considered a potential major investor in an attempt to purchase the team, said he was no longer interested.
Unless a committed group of investors steps forward quickly, the only step that remains is for National and American league owners to approve the sale of the club to a group in Florida.


Accel International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Eating Well
IS something wrong with a survey that finds fewer than 200 processed food products healthful enough for children to eat?
Or is the system that produces the food supply at fault for the paltry number of choices?
The Center for Science in the Public Interest, the consumer advocacy group in Washington, has just released a report on the state of processed foods for children, and it doesn't like what it found.
Only seven cereals and one cheese, for example, were included in the top category of foods, those that met all the nutritional and food safety criteria; not one frozen dinner or fast-food meal was included in that category. (The report grouped foods into three categories: Best, second best, and best of a bad lot.)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Vice President; Quayle Attacks Bar Association for Honoring Hill
A year after declaring war on the country's civil justice system, Vice President Dan Quayle renewed his assault on the American Bar Association today by criticizing the group for honoring Anita F. Hill, the Oklahoma law professor who accused Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment.
Mr.
Quayle also used two public appearances here to assert that the Democrats remained beholden to special interests, specifically contending that Gov.
Bill Clinton was "in the pocket" of the country's trial lawyers.
As exhibit A in his case, Mr.
Quayle, who is himself a lawyer, pointed to Hillary Clinton's speech on Sunday at the American Bar Association convention in nearby San Francisco, where Professor Hill was given an award.


DEFENSE IS BEGUN IN TRIAL OF EX-SPY
The defense in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George began its counterattack today, but its opening salvo seemed to misfire.
Mr.
George, once the third highest official of the Central Intelligence Agency and its head of covert operations, is charged with lying to Congress and investigators about the agency's knowledge of the sale of arms to Iran and the diversion of profits to the Nicaraguan rebels during the Reagan Administration.


Bell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republican Platform; Drafters Soften Stand on Taxes To Placate Bush
To avoid embarrassing President Bush, the drafters of the Republican Party's platform today moderated sections they had approved on Monday that called the 1990 budget agreement the President signed a "mistake" and that promised to try to repeal the tax increases that were part of that agreement.
Instead, the platform will call the tax increases that were part of the budget agreement with Congress "recessionary," blame Congressional Democrats for them and call only for their "ultimate" reversal.


New Company Awakens a Ballet From Old Russia
Outside, there is a sunny haze of green Berkshire hills, with white hydrangeas blowing against the open door to the dance studio.
A few awed tourists peer inside as sleek young men and women whirl to the end of a bouncy big-band score.
"Spasibo," some say in Russian.
"Thank you," the others say.
Morning rehearsal has come to an end for the new Ballet de Ville, which makes its debut this week at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival.
The chamber ballet troupe is the brainchild of Samuel Miller, the director of the festival, and Peter Anastos, a choreographer known for his humor and knowledge of ballet and modern dance styles.
Mr.
Anastos is also the director of the Pillow's Ballet Repertory Project, which trains advanced-level students in performance skills.
All 14 students, including 8 young Russian and Ukrainian ballet dancers, will perform with the 8 principals and soloists of Ballet de Ville.


United Retail Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Overseas Shipholding Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mets Intend for Cone to Stay Put
Al Harazin, the general manager of the Mets, yesterday said the organization had no plan to trade David Cone and that its strategic thinking would not be affected by the club's status in the National League East.
"I have absolutely no intention of trading David Cone," Harazin said.
"My plan is to sign him and I'll do nothing to compromise my position."


Lions Executives Testify
Linebacker NIKO NOGA was worth nowhere near what his agent was asking during salary negotiations, a Detroit Lions executive, CHUCK SCHMIDT, testified yesterday in the National Football League antitrust trial in Minneapolis.
Schmidt, a Lions vice president, took issue with the testimony of an agent, MARK BARTLESTEIN, that had Noga been a starting linebacker for an N.F.L. team during 1990 and 1991, he would have been paid $1 million.
Schmidt called that estimate "ridiculous."


Break Up the Unifieds? It's Now History
The athletes of what is almost certainly the last Unified Team have returned after a triumphal Olympics, with their future no more certain than that of their varied homelands.
The supremacy of the Unified Team in Barcelona had a bittersweet feeling to many, as the last hollow victory of an intensive sports system and the totalitarian empire that spawned and funded such excellence.
The huge governmental investment in socialist sport stemmed not from any love of athletic competition, but from the Cold War, and now it is gone.


Wine Talk
TWO years ago, when we last took a look at California's battle with the phylloxera bug, the experts were predicting that replanting diseased vines in the Napa Valley alone could eventually cost $250 million.
Now they've doubled that figure for the Napa region and are talking about replacing 150,000 acres of vines in Napa and Sonoma counties at a total cost of $1 billion
Should the infestation spread elsewhere, the cost could go higher.
Already, traces of phylloxera are in Washington State's vineyards.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush, Asked in Personal Context, Takes a Softer Stand on Abortion
As the Republican Party drafts a platform that demands a constitutional ban on abortion, President Bush today struck a less absolute tone on the issue when he was asked how he would deal with an abortion in his own family.
During an interview in the Oval Office taped during the afternoon and broadcast this evening in an edited form on the NBC News program "Dateline," Mr.
Bush said that if one of his granddaughters came to him as an adult and said she wanted an abortion, he would argue against it but ultimately support her.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 7
July 31
Aug. 9
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
7.0
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.1
2.9
Gasoline stocks
214.5
219.1
207.4
Distillate stocks
118.1
114.6
123.6
Crude imports, daily
5.8
6.8
6.9
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.8
1.4
Crude stocks
329.3
330.2
348.1
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
90.7
90.2
88.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  PACT ON FREE-TRADE ZONE
The United States, Canada and Mexico agreed to create a free-trade area covering all of North America, eliminating customs duties and other trade restrictions.
Most economists say this will bring greater prosperity to all three countries, as each specializes in those industries in which it is relatively efficient.
A1  KURDS' POWER COALESCES  Rising from the rubble of the Persian Gulf war is an independent Kurdistan, complete with a many-tiered bureaucracy but lacking international recognition.
A1  A WARNING FROM THE WEST  Western allies warned President Saddam Hussein that they could defend the Shiite Muslims of Iraq's southern marshlands just as they helped the Kurds who rebelled against his rule.
A6  'ETHNIC CLEANSING' REPORTS GROW  Reports of possible further large-scale expulsions of Muslims compounded a growing international outcry over earlier "ethnic cleansing" operations in Serbian-controlled areas of Bosnia.
A1  'UNPREDICTABLE CONSEQUENCES'  The leader of Bosnia's Serbs accepted the idea of a neutral international force, but predicted uncontrollable consequences if military intervention extended beyond getting food and medicine to Bosnians.
A8  RELIEF FORCE IS 'A FIRST STEP'  Bosnia's President called a draft United Nations resolution authorizing force to push through aid to his country a "first step" toward the military assistance he seeks.
A8  CONGRESS HEARS TROOP ESTIMATES  From 60,000 to 120,000 troops would be needed to insure the uninterrupted flow of food and medicine to Sarajevo, Congress was told.
A8  LOOKING AHEAD WITH UNCERTAINTY  Col.
Shaka Simon Tshabalala labored through the painful decades of apartheid as a black police officer in a white system.
He fears what the future may bring.
A3  PEROT ADDRESSES COMMITTEE  Ross Perot said a long covert war run by the C.I.A. in Laos contributed to the problems the United States has faced in getting information about prisoners in Indochina.
A9  CHINA DEFENDS PRISON PRACTICES  Beijing, under pressure over enforced labor in its prisons, released a report putting a positive face on the secretive system.
A7  U.S.
AND ISRAEL: PARTNERS AGAIN  Side by side in Kennebunkport, Me., President Bush and Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir announced their agreement on $10 billion in loan guarantees for Israel.
A9  Fighting is reported between Angolan Government and rebels.
A9  Madrid edges Catalonia for Olympic international relations medal.A5  Berlin Journal: An artist and rebel molded by the system.
A4  National A12-20  BUSH ON ABORTION  Moderating his language on abortion, President Bush said that if one of his granddaughters chose to have an abortion he would stand by her even though he would personally oppose her decision.
A1  Republicans edited their platform to avoid slapping the President.
A14  Vice President Quayle attacked the American Bar Association.
A14  The bar association voted to fight restrictions on abortion rights.
A14  THE HEALTH-CARE DEBATE  Both Presidential candidates say they want to curb health-care costs and make insurance coverage more available, but they favor very different methods and neither spells out how to pay the bills.
A1  BOOST FOR FAMILY LEAVE  The Senate approved a bill mandating that employers give their workers unpaid family and medical leave.
The measure, supported by Gov.
Bill Clinton, is one of the few in the current short session with a clear tie to the Presidential campaign.
A14  THE COST OF MILITARY CUTS  The big drop in military spending lately has eroded an important pillar of the economy, and many economists say that is a main reason the United States is having such trouble pulling out of recession.
A1  GETTING BY IN CALIFORNIA  While California state employees get by on i.o.u.'s during the government's budget impasse, vendors to the state are getting no payments at all.
Still, mindful of future business opportunities and buoyed by ingenuity and bank loans, most continue to make their deliveries.
A12  DEMJANJUK APPEAL IS BEGUN  Lawyers for the man accused of being the death camp guard Ivan the Terrible argued that Federal prosecutors withheld crucial evidence in the deportation hearing of their client, John Demjanjuk.
A12  MINING FOR TOURIST GOLD  Every now and then an opportunity knocks that simply cannot be ignored, and for residents of Hope, Ark., that time is now, as the town scurries to profit on its new fame as Bill Clinton's birthplace.
A12  QUESTIONS ON THE QE2  As the Queen Elizabeth 2 moved to drydock in Boston after its accident on Friday night, the question of nautical charts of the accident area was getting greater scrutiny.
A12  OFFICIALS LINKED TO A THEFT  A Congressional investigation concluded that senior Justice Department officials stole a computer company's software and let it to be sold overseas for the financial gain of the officials' private associates.
A20  Texas executes a killer.
A20  The defense begins in the Iran-contra trial of Clair George.
A20  Education Page B6  Alumni jaunts for intellectual fun.
Lincoln Center Institute inspires new ways to use the arts in teaching.
Metro Digest B1  WELFARE ROLL SWELLS
In the most telling sign of the tremendous human damage the city's economic woes have caused, the number of New Yorkers on welfare broke the one million mark last month for the first time since the city's fiscal crisis in the 1970's.
A1  Business Digest D1  Living Section C1-10  When the heat is high, it's no sweat for wise cooks.
C1  Talking history with David McCullough, the author of "Truman." C1  Fixed-price lessons, at $19.92 a head.
C1  Eating Well C3  The Purposeful Cook C4  The taste, aroma and elegance of Cavaillon melons.
C6  Food Notes C7  Wine Talk C8  Health Page C12  Struggling black hospitals seek to redefine their role.
Personal Health: The hidden epidemic of genital herpes.
Arts/Entertainment C13-18  A playwright on a czar.
C13  New company and old ballet.
C13  Theater: "2," by Linney.
C14  Film: "Cup Final." C13  Music: Mozart's "Mitridate." C13  Obituaries B8  Sports B9-14  Baseball: Rookie pitcher lifts Mets.
B9  Tigers topple Yankees.
B11  Column: Durso on Saratoga.
B9  Football: Simms will stay, Mara says.
B9  Bavaro takes it a day at a time.
B9  Olympics: Unified athletes go separate ways.
B13  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  Back on track.
Cholesterol: still a villain.
Doing drug business, with wbf.
Topics: Calling down Ms.
Ferraro.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: Somalia's plagues.
Fritz W. Alexander 2d: Peace and provocation in New York City.
Jay D. Leventhal: Blind, not incompetent.
Don E. Newquist: The trade pact -- plus a tax.


Pennsylvania Prices Bonds
A $572 million bond sale by the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission was tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by Russell Rea &amp; Zappala with a maximum yield of 6.1 percent for series P revenue bonds due in 2017.
The financing consists of $294.05 million in series O bonds and $277.8 million in series P bonds.


Chattanooga Times Publisher in New Post
Ruth S. Holmberg, publisher of The Chattanooga Times since 1964 and one of the nation's most prominent newspaper women, relinquished her job as publisher yesterday to assume the new position of chairwoman of the Tennessee newspaper.
Paul Neely, the editor and deputy publisher, was appointed publisher.


The Olympics Crown a King With Laurels
When the Olympic Games opened here on July 25, the fear was that Catalan nationalists might heckle King Juan Carlos during his inaugural remarks.
By the time he attended the closing ceremony on Sunday night, the Spanish King had emerged as one of the big winners of the Summer Games.
The reasons might seem anecdotal.
He made the gesture of saying a few words in the Catalan language during the inauguration.
His son, Prince Felipe, struck a fine image carrying the Spanish flag into the stadium.
The King attended events throughout the Olympics.
And when Spaniards won medals, he and Queen Sofia always seemed to be present.


E-Z-EM Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Report Says Justice Department Stole Computer Software in 80's
A Congressional investigation has concluded that senior Justice Department officials stole a computer company's software in the mid-1980's and permitted it to be sold overseas for the financial gain of the officials' private associates, Congressional aides said today.
The investigation's report, adopted today by the House Judiciary Committee, found that Attorneys General Edwin Meese 3d and Dick Thornburgh blocked Congressional inquiries into the dispute involving the computer company, Inslaw, which made the software at issue.


Talks on Maradona
Two lawyers for DIEGO MARADONA met with Naples team officials to dicuss proposals to end the impasse over his refusal to return to Italian soccer.
GIORGIO CURTI of Naples disussed the 31-year-old star's future with JUAN MARCOS FRANCHI and DANIEL BOLOTNICOFF at FIFA headquarters.


Wichita River Oil reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FREE TRADE ACCORD FOR NORTH AMERICA IS EXPECTED TODAY
The United States, Canada and Mexico tentatively agreed today to create a free trade area covering all of North America, eliminating customs duties and other restrictions.
The agreement will allow companies to do business the length of the continent with few barriers.
Several people involved in the negotiations and Administration officials said President Bush was virtually certain to announce the accord on Wednesday morning.


The Path to Harmony; Fostering Racial Tolerance in Linden
To the Mayor and the Police Department of this small industrial city, it seemed like a good idea to create K-9 patrols and use the dogs, in rare instances, to buffer officers from unruly crowds.
To black residents, however, the proposal conjured images of a time when the police used dogs like grenades to dissolve peaceful civil rights demonstrations.
Many of these residents thought that the idea sprang from several run-ins between police officers and groups of minority youths and that the dogs would be used in their neighborhoods, against their children.


Doing Drug Business, With WBF
"The whole spectacle is disgusting," declared Colombia's attorney general, referring to prison conditions for Pablo Escobar.
He wasn't talking about squalor or abuse of the infamous drug trafficker, who escaped last month.
What disgusts him is the
opulence
of the Escobar confinement.
The disclosure of such luxurious conditions raises new questions about Colombia's commitment to the war on drug cartels.
Pablo Escobar surrendered last year under President Cesar Gaviria's program of allowing drug lords to turn themselves in if Colombia pledged not to extradite them to the United States.
In order to entice the legendary leader of the Medellin cartel, negotiators agreed to let him choose guards from his home community and have some say over the design of his prison compound.


INSIDE
2 Killed in Queens Robbery
Two men, one of them a hostage, were killed in a wild shootout between police officers and gunmen after a botched robbery in Queens.
Page B1. 'Ivan' Appeal Advances
Claiming Justice Department misconduct, lawyers for John Demjanjuk urged an appeals court to overturn their client's deportation.
Page A12.
Sergeant Charged in Assault
A Brooklyn police sergeant was charged with punching a community leader when the officer was called to a family dispute.
Page B1.


Donnelly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Using Art as Creative Teaching Force
The art lesson in a recent workshop was no ordinary one: the students were teachers.
They were asked to empty their purses and pockets and, on a white sheet of paper, create a face using as few of the items as possible. .
One face was simply a pair of sunglasses.
Another was single earring representing a mouth.
A third was a profile created by a necklace forming a forehead, a nose and a chin.


Scotts Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Books of The Times; The New York That Used to Be
Up in the Old Hotel  By Joseph Mitchell  718 pages. Pantheon Books. $27.50.
Long before a small group of trendy writers supposedly invented something called the New Journalism -- strongly personal nonfiction writing using certain fictional methods, but without worrying too much about the facts -- Joseph Mitchell of The New Yorker was writing pieces that bore no such boastful category but were elegant in their simplicity, based on shoe-leather reporting and, yes, were factual: the Old Journalism.
And yet his stylish writing had the narrative strength of good fiction.
Mr.
Mitchell's venues were not the Four Seasons or Elaine's on the East Side but McSorley's Old Ale House where the Bowery ends and Sloppy Louie's near the Fulton Fish Market.
These raffish places gave a curious reporter something real to write about.
The memorable pieces assembled in "Up in the Old Hotel" are not putdowns of people, but instead tolerant observations of the human comedy.
The author never intrudes, even when he is writing in the first person, and he never wears a mask of writerly (horrible word) superiority.


Raw Nerves Over Rapes in Queens
Akumansa Prempeh carries a knife with a six-inch blade on her evening walks now.
Instead of cooling off on her front porch at night, Dione Warren chooses to sit in the stifling heat of her house.
Gabrielle O'Flaherty has moved the garbage cans from the back to the side of her house so no one can leap out at her from behind them.
All along the streets of Laurelton, Queens, nervous women are changing their habits and taking precautions as they live in fear of a man who the police say has raped five women over the last year.


Nordstrom Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


When the Heat Is High, It's No Sweat for Wise Cooks
IT has been a Carl Lewis kind of summer, hot but not blazing.
Still, there's been enough heat and humidity to drive most people away from the stove to the phone for Chinese takeout.
But like star athletes, people who enjoy entertaining press on, oblivious to discomfort.
Yet these valiant souls, bearing bowls and platters of conscientiously baked, steamed and grilled food, needn't suffer the triple-digit temperatures radiating from the barbecue as they tend the chicken or blasting from the oven as they remove the bubbling peach pie.
There are ways to prepare a satisfying dinner, one worthy of fresh flowers, linen napkins and candelight, without actually cooking a thing.
Devising a menu that doesn't even require boiling water is challenging because many dishes traditionally served cold are cooked first.
But there is a surprising number of cold dishes that are never cooked.
These are the ones to investigate when it feels like Rangoon outside.


U.S. Intec Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Line Cinema reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AmVestors Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Simms Will Remain a Giant, Mara Says
In one of the Giants' more surprising and impromptu news conferences, Wellington Mara, the Giants' co-owner and president, walked into the team's training camp press room this afternoon and sternly said:
"May I have your attention for a minute. I just heard a report that Phil Simms is on his way to San Diego. Let me just say as emphatically as I can, Phil Simms is not being traded. Not this year, not last year or in the 20th century. To San Diego or anyplace else. Period. O.K.?"


Herbert Steifel, Advertising Executive, 75
Herbert Stiefel, a retired New York advertising executive, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Portland, Ore.
A former resident of Manhattan and Greenwich, Conn., he moved to Sunriver, Ore., since retiring five years ago.
He was 75 years old.
His family said he died after a brief illness.


MEI Diversified reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; Buyout of Prime Computer Limps Toward Completion
One of the last and least successful of the large leveraged buyouts -- the $1.3 billion acquisition of Prime Computer in 1989 -- is struggling to its unhappy ending, with no victors in sight.
Thousands of workers have lost their jobs, Prime computers are no longer being made, and even the investment bank that put the deal together has taken a large loss.
What remains of Prime is its Computervision subsidiary -- itself owned by Prime only because of a hostile acquisition in 1988.
Computervision makes computer software that is used to design everything from planes and cars to cellular telephones.


Leslie Tillett, Textile Designer, 77
Leslie Tillett, a painter, author and textile designer, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 77 years old.
Mr. Tillett died of lymphoma, said a son, Seth.


CHRONICLE
More awards to individuals who have in one way or another enlightened the public were announced yesterday.
LYNNE V. CHENEY, the chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, announced the names of the winners of the Charles Frankel Prizes for 1992, which honor those who have increased public awareness of history, literature, philosophy and other subjects in the humanities.
They are: EUDORA WELTY, the writer; SHELBY FOOTE, the Civil War historian and commentator for the PBS documentary series on the war; ALLAN BLOOM, the author of "The Closing of the American Mind"; RICHARD RODRIGUEZ, the Mexican-American author of "Hunger of Memory," an autobiographical reflection about the American melting pot, and HAROLD K. SKRAMSTAD JR., the president of the Henry Ford Museum and Greenfield Village in Dearborn, Mich.
"The award was created in 1989 to recognize that there are other ways of contributing to the humanities besides the production of scholarship," Mrs.
Cheney said yesterday in Washington.
"There is a tendency in academia to look down on efforts to reach large audiences. This is meant to recognize people who make important contributions by addressing the citizenry at large."
The $5,000 prizes will be presented at ceremonies in November.
Last year, they were presented by President Bush, "but we don't know what his schedule will be this year," Mrs.
Cheney said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
Tentative agreement on a North American free trade area was reached by negotiators for the United States, Canada and Mexico.
People involved in the talks and Administration officials said President Bush was virtually certain to announce the accord to dismantle trade barriers this morning, although the three trade ministers said the deal had not yet been concluded.  [ Page A1. ]
Because Congress will not act on the trade pact until next year, it could change considerably depending on the outcome of November elections, particularly if Bill Clinton should win.  [ D5. ]


The Gold Isn't Worth It for Olympic Gymnasts; Measure Body Mass
To the Editor:
While watching the female Olympic gymnasts, I was struck by the childlike nature of their bodies, which seemed inappropriate for girls well into their teens.
I wondered if the process selected girls for this quality or if the rigors of training somehow caused it.


The Melting Pot on Display


CHRONICLE
BARBARA HERSHEY, the star of such movies as "Hannah and Her Sisters," "Beaches" and "A World Apart," was married Saturday to STEPHEN DOUGLAS, a figurative painter, at Ms.
Hershey's home in northeastern Connecticut.
Leslee Dart, her spokeswoman, said she could not divulge its precise location, to protect the couple's privacy.
The garden ceremony was performed by EDWARD TAPP, who is a justice of the peace in Westport, Conn.
The only guests were the mothers of the couple and Tom Carradine, Ms.
Hershey's 19-year-old son by the actor David Carradine.
A dinner followed, "cooked by Barbara," Ms.
Dart said.
"She even made her own cake."
It is the actress's first marriage and Mr.
Douglas's third.
They have known each other for three years.


Castro's Celtic Roots?
To the Editor:
Your July 29 news article on the visit of President Fidel Castro of Cuba to his ancestral home in Spain did not point out that Galicia, also the native area of the Spanish dictator Francisco Franco, uses a Portuguese dialect as its national language.
Called Galician or Northern Portuguese, this former kingdom differs ethnically, linguistically and geographically from Spain.
Ethnologists are still undecided about Galicia's ethnic foundation, but most point to a Celtic, rather than Iberian origin.
As a term Galicia has the same root as Gaul, Galicia in Poland and Galatia in Anatolia.
BARNARD SHARROW  Whiting, N.J., Aug. 1, 1992


More and More University Alumni Take Intellectual Journeys That Are Just That
Somewhere back in the wilds of Alaska, far from Gothic halls and ivory towers, the acting president of Yale University, Howard Lamar, spent two weeks leading a group of 65 cultured and curious Yale alumni whose idea of a vacation was to pay a lot of money for the privilege of being spoon-fed history.
The Klondike expedition, scheduled before Dr.
Lamar, an expert in American history, was appointed acting president, is just one of 35 academic adventures offered this year by the Association of Yale Alumni.
These studious sojourns span the globe from Geiranger Fjord, Norway, to the orangutan preserve in Sandakan, Borneo, each one with a learned professor in tow and like-minded, well-to-do alumni who travel to pick up knowledge, not souvenirs.


What's In a Name? Perhaps Billions
Marlboro is the world's most valuable brand name, worth $31.2 billion, according to an article in a coming issue of Financial World magazine that places market values on famous brands and corporate logos.
After Marlboro, the Philip Morris cigarette that is the world's best seller, comes Coca-Cola, which the magazine values at $24.4 billion.


The White House Gets Some Gold Trim
President Bush summoned the nation's Olympic athletes to the White House today to salute a Summer Games, which, he said, were finally free of terrorism, boycotts and politics.
Speaking to the more than 400 American Olympians jammed into the White House's formal East Room, the President hailed the athletes for setting an example of what Olympic competition should be, but seldom has been: a pure test of excellence and will.


Spike Consumer Gloom
To the Editor:
Articles like "Shoppers' Vote: No Confidence" (Business Day, Aug. 3) only serve to lower consumer confidence.
Reports on depressed consumers, day in and day out, fuel a lack of confidence without furnishing your readers with any information they don't already know.
True economic recovery, which has shown some signs of life, will never take hold with your always telling the consumer how down he or she is.
If you would stop writing, more people may start buying.
GEORGE COGNARD  Oceanside, L.I., Aug. 3, 1992


Dixon Ticonderoga Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Proposal To Double Park Area On the Shore
The Dinkins administration announced a long-range plan for New York City's waterfront yesterday that would eventually double the area for parks, esplanades and walkways while preventing gargantuan developments that wall off the shoreline.
The ambitious proposals foresee an esplanade that would virtually encircle Manhattan.
Waterside pathways would also be built along the shore in Long Island City, Queens; next to the Harlem River in the Bronx, and rimming most of Brooklyn's south shore and Staten Island's north shore.


New Hampshire In Refunding
New Hampshire is tentatively offering $100.9 million of turnpike system revenue bonds through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
Proceeds will be used to refund bonds sold when interest rates were higher.


Hope Journal; Clinton's Birthplace Is a Shrine to the Dollar Bill
Perhaps Hope these days would better be called Greed.
Ever since the Presidential campaign began, Gov.
Bill Clinton has been trading heavily on the felicitous name of his birthplace.
Now the town would like to return the favor.
In a thoroughly bipartisan way, Hope is hoping to cash in on Mr.
Clinton.


60-Minute Gourmet
THE shortage of bay scallops in the Northeast continues, and those that exist are prohibitively expensive.
Fortunately, the crop of the larger sea scallops is abundant this year, and they can be used in dozens of creative, time-saving ways.
If the sea scallops in the market are particularly large, place each one on its side and cut it in half.
The thinner scallops will cook in half the time and still look attractive on the plate.
I have experimented with many scallop recipes over the years, and the most successful ones add color and texture contrasts to the essentially neutral main ingredient.


Public &amp; Private; Somalia's Plagues
The two children are the last survivors of their family, but not, it appears, for long.
In news footage they sit naked on the ground, their spindly arms wrapped around one another, the inevitability of their imminent deaths in their sunken eyes.
In their homeland, rent by internal power struggles, there is no food, and so they starve while worlds away the politicians puzzle over what to do.
But these children are not in Bosnia, now the center of world attention.
They are in Somalia, an African country living through -- and dying of -- a lethal combination of clan warfare, drought and famine that has wrought what one U.S. official called the worst humanitarian crisis in the world right now.


Life Is Unfair, but Not Always Tragic
EACH of us adds up to an unfathomable total of all we have done and seen.
A precious few experiences rise above the blur to give pause -- to focus the mind.
Irvin Simmons remembers the day he first tried heroin.
He was 15, the drug was 80 percent pure and he was on his way to becoming an addict.


Credit Markets; Bonds Ride a Seesaw, But Yields Settle Lower
After a roller coaster ride, the bond market ended on firm ground yesterday, as the yield on the 30-year bond continued to decline and the new three-year note was auctioned at 4.69 percent -- the lowest yield since that Treasury security became a quarterly regular in August 1978.
As prices and yields seesawed around the first of the three big Treasury auctions this week, the performance of the 30-year bond seemed to reinforce the confidence of investors.
The current rally in long-term rates began last month, and has picked up speed this week.
Long rates have remained quite high in the face of a weak economy, even as short rates have dropped.


ShoLodge Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 12


Topics of The Times; Whistling Down Ms. Ferraro
Geraldine Ferraro seems driven by the first law of political debates: If you think you're ahead, dodge them any way you can rather than give your opponents a platform.
Such behavior may be inevitable, but the public can correct it by applying another law of political debates: Front-runners stop ducking when voters blow the whistle.
Polls show the former Representative now leads her opponents in the race for the New York Democratic Senate nomination, and Ms.
Ferraro doesn't want to spend much public time in their company.
She participated in seven early debates, but none after the one in mid-May during which her rivals roundly attacked her.


Kimball International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


West Coast Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


WELFARE ROLLS HIT THE MILLION MARK IN NEW YORK CITY
In the most telling sign of the tremendous human damage New York City's economic woes have caused, the number of New Yorkers on welfare broke the one million mark last month for the first time since the city's fiscal crisis in the 1970's.
In July, the number of recipients climbed to 1,005,210, a 22 percent rise from the 823,691 recipients in January 1990.
The increase means that almost one of every seven New Yorkers is on welfare.


The Gold Isn't Worth It for Olympic Gymnasts
To the Editor:
As a physician watching young gymnasts competing in the Olympics, I realized that what we are celebrating is a form of female child abuse in the name of sport.


Campus Journal; Far Left and Far Right Meet in a Midwest Library
This town of 68,000, home to mainstream icons like the University of Kansas Jayhawks sports teams and a Hallmark Cards plant, might seem an unusual choice of locales for what many experts call the pre-eminent collection of American extremist political literature.
But for 27 years, the manifestoes, broadsides, books and taped speeches of Communists and crypto-fascists, witches, white supremacists and U.F.O. conspiracy theorists, not to mention countless other fringe ideologies, have been growing in number in the climate-controlled rooms of the Wilcox Collection of Contemporary Political Movements at the University of Kansas library.


Havelange Enters Clinic
JOAO HAVELANGE of Brazil, president of FIFA, the international soccer federation, has entered a private clinic in Zurich for treatment of dehydration, a federation official said yesterday.


Bush-Rabin Accord On Loan Guarantee
President Bush asked for swift action on $10 billion in loan guarantees to Israel after he and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel announced that they had reached an agreement in principle.


The Rotary Valve Engine Gets Another Look
Just because auto engine technology has been stable for a long time does not prevent innovators from trying to make improvements.
Peer under the hood with George J. Coates, proprietor of Coates Enterprises in Wall Township, N.J.
Working with only a handful of people in his shop near Asbury Park, Mr.
Coates has developed an engine head that uses rotary valves to manage the flow of gases into and out of combustion chambers, rather than the poppet valves used in virtually all cars produced now.
Mr.
Coates asserts that the rotary valves increase an engine's power and reduce emissions, and he has outfitted a 1984 Mercedes-Benz 280SE with one of his experimental six-cylinder engines.


Police Sergeant Is Charged in Assault on Brooklyn Civic Leader
A Brooklyn police sergeant was indicted yesterday on charges that he beat a community leader who is a member of his precinct's community council and assaulted one of the woman's sons.
A Brooklyn grand jury indicted the sergeant, Peter Viola of the 81st Precinct in Bedford-Stuyvesant, on a charge of misdemeanor assault, accusing him of punching the council member, Ann B. Dodds, in the forehead.
It also charged him with assault in the second degree, a felony, accusing him of hitting her son repeatedly with his nightstick as the son lay on the ground face down in handcuffs.


Berlin Journal; One More Wall to Smash: Arrogance in the West
Although the popular movement that toppled East Germany's Communist Government three years ago had no single leader, many people in the East still refer to a self-effacing artist named Barbel Bohley as "Mother of the Revolution."
After the Berlin wall fell and the East German state ceased to exist, however, Miss Bohley chose not to enter national politics.
She might have run for a seat in the all-German Parliament or sought a Government post in Bonn, but instead she has all but faded from public view.


Pirates' Punch Was Watching From the Bench
The Pirates were using one of their best pitchers, right-hander Doug Drabek.
The Mets fielded a rookie call-up who had never before started a major league game.
The Pirates are division leaders; the Mets are struggling to stay out of last place.
But last night at Shea Stadium, the Pirates went runless and the Mets won the game.
Want a reason?
An explanation?
The lineup alone provides enough of a clue.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues -- Health Care; Health-Care Policy: How Bush and Clinton Differ
Of all the many differences between Gov.
Bill Clinton and President Bush, none are more profound than their disagreements over health-care policy.
President Bush says health care is "the Grand Canyon of philosophy" that separates him from Mr.
Clinton, and many Democrats agree.


Book Notes
The Putnam Mystery
The "highly confidential" book that was scheduled for publication next month by G. P. Putnam's Sons is now highly available for publication by another publisher.


Crews Set to Scan the QE2's Hull
As pair crews prepared this evening to maneuver the Queen Elizabeth 2 into drydock for the inspection and repair of the gashes in her hull, Federal officials were preparing to determine what clawed through the steel undergirding of the huge luxury liner Friday night and why.
In hearings beginning Wednesday, five members of the National Transportation Safety Board will be trying to determine what failed that night.


Review/Television; 15 Years Since Elvis Died, But Many Beg to Differ
"Crazy About Elvis," tonight's edition of "48 Hours," brings on a gallery of Elvis Presley fans and cultists, impersonators and entrepreneurs.
It is an amusing if slightly unsettling display.


Tech-Sym Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bell Sports Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Review/Film; Using Sports as a Mirror Image For the Brutal Passions of War
War and sports are activities in which passions run high and competition is fierce.
Both involve similar sorts of physical and mental training, and both yield heroes.
Yet making war is generally regarded as the expression of humanity's basest drives, while international sports events are haloed in a mystique of Olympian nobility.
The similarities and contradictions between the two are milked for all they are worth in Eran Riklis's splendid antiwar film, "Cup Final," which opens today at Film Forum 1.
Set in Lebanon in June 1982, the film follows the fortunes of Cohen (Moshe Ivgi), an Israeli Army reservist who is captured by a retreating eight-man unit of Palestinian soldiers during Israel's invasion of Lebanon.


Carriage Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Precision Standard reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRM Copy Centers Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The U.S., Canada and Mexico formally announced a free trade pact that will create a market of 370 million people producing $6 trillion worth of goods and services each year -- surpassing the European Community.
Leaders portrayed it as an opportunity for greater economic growth for all three nations, and business generally cheered it -- with some exceptions.  [ Page A1. ]
Mexico celebrated the pact as transporting it from poverty and protectionism into life as a developed land.  [ D4. ]


Wall St. Investors Reported To Weigh Canary Wharf Bid
A group of Wall Street investors may bid to pick up the pieces of Olympia &amp; York's multibillion-dollar Canary Wharf project in London, a prospective participant in the deal said yesterday.
But he added that it could be weeks before the American group decides whether to try to salvage the development, which is in the British equivalent of receivership.
Lewis Ranieri, a former Salomon Brothers vice chairman, is considering a possible investment in Canary Wharf, a partner of his said.


Anangel-American Shipbuilding reports earnings for Year to June 30


Few Clouds of Dust On Ingram's Horizon
The way Mark Ingram sees it, the Giants have some of the best-kept offensive secrets in the National Football League.
And he is one of them.
Ingram enters his sixth Giants season as a receiver who has at times sparkled, as have wide receiver Stephen Baker and backs Dave Meggett and Rodney Hampton.
And there are others on the offense who are blessed with superb ability but have been bottled in a run-oriented, power-play game long on muscle and short on diversity and flexibility.


Using the Exotic to Help a Cause
IN Sri Lanka, men traditionally make crafts for children.
These Sri Lankan bookends (right), made mostly by male artisans and sold through the CARE catalogue, depict a macaw, an iguana, a toucan, a tree frog and a marmoset against a jade background.
They evoke tropical surroundings, an effect that a wanderlust character like Huck Finn, stuck between bookends, might appreciate.


MEXICAN INVESTORS AGREE TO BUY A DEL MONTE BUSINESS
A group of Mexican investors said Tuesday that they had agreed to buy Del Monte Fresh Produce from Polly Peck International P.L.C. of Britain.
Carlos Cabal, head of Grupo Cabal, told a news conference the agreement had been signed but that the price was still being negotiated.
The purchasers include several Mexican investors in addition to Grupo Cabal, which owns the Banco de Credito y Hipotecario, Mexico's eighth-largest bank.
Del Monte Fresh Produce, with annual sales of about $1 billion and roughly 14,000 workers worldwide, has plantations in the Philippines, Indonesia, Costa Rica, Guatemala and Hawaii.


GROUP SAYS FUEL IS OFTEN MISRATED
Gasoline outlets often mislabel regular fuel as premium, but half the states lack programs to test fuels for correct octane ratings, according to a report released yesterday by Public Citizen.
The report pointed out that Congress told the Environmental Protection Agency in 1978 to monitor octane labeling but that the agency had not conducted a test since 1981.


Damaged Liner Is Finally Put Into a Drydock
After a third day of surveying the ocean area where the Queen Elizabeth 2 struck an unknown object and badly damaged her hull, Federal marine investigators said today that they had discovered a 15-foot rock that was not on navigational charts.
But they also said they did not think it was the object that left a 74-foot gash in the the QE2's steel hull last week.
Meanwhile, the 65,000-ton ship was finally put into drydock today, after several delays because of technical problems at the aging General Ship yard in South Boston.


Health Care Market Has Failed Consumers; Oregon Plan Misfires
To the Editor:
"A Bold Medical Plan, Derailed" (editorial, Aug. 6) shows woeful misunderstanding of the issues involved in Secretary of Health and Human Services Louis Sullivan's rejection of Oregon's misdirected attempt to ration health care.
There are more reasons than the few you attempt to rebut to reject this basic change in the state's Medicaid program.
Oregon lawmakers like me who opposed the rationing plan have been frustrated by the news media's inability to look behind the scheme's fashionable attractiveness and to examine the fundamental issues it presents.
The Oregon plan ignores, and perhaps exacerbates, the most pressing necessity for health care reform in America: cost control and reduction.
Instead of restricting the profits of care providers, the Oregon proposal allows payments to increase by 30 percent.


Early Saratoga Sales Reflect Drop in Market
The decline in the horse market seemed to be steepening today after Saratoga's 72d annual summer sales opened and the average price for a yearling dropped 26 percent from last year's auction.
The Saratoga sales opened Tuesday night, one month after prices slipped 19 percent at the more prestigious Keeneland sales in Kentucky, and the same pattern was reflected here: Foreign buyers, notably the Arabians and Japanese, the big spenders of the last decade, showed much less interest and cash.
And D. Wayne Lukas, the most active American spender in recent years, wasn't even on the scene.


An Outsider Nation at Last Arrived, Mexico Is Embracing the Agreement
Mexico celebrated its negotiation of a free-trade agreement with the United States and Canada today as a great symbolic stride in its march from decades of protectionism and poverty to a future in the developed world.
Then, Government officials turned to what they described as the larger challenge of selling the agreement to a divided and skeptical nation.
They meant the United States.


Health Care Market Has Failed Consumers; No to Canadian Model
To the Editor:
"Canada's Medical System Is a Model. That's a Fact" (Op-Ed, July 23) by Theodore R. Marmor and John Godfrey paints a very rosy picture of our neighbor to the north's universal health care system.
Canada's health care system does not fully meet the needs of subscribers.
Canadians can and often do enter the United States to get the treatment they seek without the inconvenience of rationed care or financial barriers.
Some areas of the United States -- especially border cities -- openly accept and solicit the importation of care from Canadian subscribers.


A New Place To See And Be Seen: The Phone
DAY 1 OF THE VIDEOPHONE
Nothing much was happening at home -- the best offering on television was a "Simpsons" rerun I had seen twice -- so I called my friend Peter Finch to see how he looked.
I used to call people to see how they were, but that was pre-videophone.
Now appearance was uppermost in my mind.
If someone looked bad, I might just hang up.
Once Pete had picked up, I saw that he had on a white sport shirt and jeans, neatly arranged.
For some reason, his eyes resembled two pieces of coal, but then I didn't know what he had been doing all day.
His nose was rent with blotches, and I told him he probably needed to tinker with the focus.


Utilities Plan Windmill Unit
Two days after it said it would retire its only nuclear plant, the Portland General Electric Company said yesterday that it would participate in the development of a 50-megawatt windmill complex near Hanford, Wash.
At least three other companies plan to participate: Pacificorp, the Puget Sound Power and Light Company, and the Idaho Power Company.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  A THREE-WAY TRADE PACT
The United States, Canada and Mexico announced a plan for free trade across North America, portraying it as an opportunity for greater economic growth for all three nations.
The accord was greeted enthusiastically by business groups.
A1  AIDES FAULT U.S.
ON LOST G.I.'S
Three Reagan Administration officials told a Senate panel that the Government has long known that some American prisoners of war may have been alive in Indochina when troops were withdrawn in 1973.
But they expressed doubt that any remain alive in captivity.
A1  Former U.S. officials deny any negligence on missing servicemen.
A6  SOMALI FIGHTER ACCEPTS U.N.
UNIT
In a step that could increase shipments to the starving people of Somalia, a senior United Nations official there said he had won an agreement from a recalcitrant warlord for the deployment of 500 armed United Nations troops to protect the delivery of food and medicine.
A1  NO SELLOUT, RUSSIAN SAYS
Russia's Acting Prime Minister, Yegor Gaidar, denied in an interview that compromises with the industrial sector had undercut the country's ability to make good on promises to the International Monetary Fund.
He reaffirmed targets for reining in inflation and deficit spending.
A3  EVACUEES WARILY LEAVE SARAJEVO
Under guarantees of safety from the Serbian forces besieging Sarajevo, five buses carrying 297 mothers and children left the Bosnian capital on the first leg of a journey to sanctuary in Slovenia and Austria.
A10  Britain concedes that it deported 36 Balkan refugees.
A10  JETS FOR SAUDIS, AID FOR ISRAEL
In pressing the Bush Administration to sell advanced fighter jets to Saudi Arabia, lawmakers seem to believe this is the moment to strike.
In an election year, many see the deal as a counterweight to the decision to grant loan guarantees to Israel.
A10  LOAN PLEDGE WORRIES ARABS
Palestinian leaders and some Arab countries expressed concern that the United States, by agreeing to guarantee up to $10 billion in Israeli loans, had planted itself on Israel's side in peace talks.
A10  A political captive in China is thought to begin a hunger strike.
A11  Italian town boasts of a rare mutation that fights heart disease.
A7  Blackpool Journal: At a resort, hard times put a chill into things.
A4  Japanese-Brazilians catch the eye of labor-short Japan.
A5  National A16-21, B10, D19  GOOD NEWS IN TB FIGHT
Scientists reported identifying the genetic trick that allows some strains of tuberculosis to become drug-resistant, a finding that opens the way for new treatments of the disease.
A1  TWISTS IN 'FAMILY VALUES'
News analysis: As President Bush's comments on a hypothetical family abortion decision made clear, the "family values" tack of the Republican Party is not nearly as simple as it seems.
A1  A SOMBER HOUSTON FOR G.O.P.
For decades, Houston reveled in its wildcatting, can-do spirit.
But as the city prepares to host the Republican convention, the mood is decidely different.
A1  Democrats and Republicans trade charges on values.
A21  An announcement is expected on heading the Bush campaign.
A20  NOW AT THE NIXON LIBRARY . . .
Yorba Linda Journal: With the unveiling of a mammoth oil painting, another new Nixon is set to emerge at the former President's library in California.
A16  MOVING ON MEESE
Iran-contras prosecutors notified lawyers for former Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d that he is a subject of their inquiry.
A16  OFFICIAL DENIES BREAKING LAW
Taking the stand at his trial, Clair George, the former director of covert operations at the C.I.A., denied lying to Congress about the Iran-contra affair.
A16  PANEL REBUKES A SENATOR
The Senate Ethics Committee said Senate Mark Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, violated Federal law by failing to report expensive gifts he received.
B10  HEPATITIS VACCINE REPORTED
Researchers have used a vaccine to completely prevent the spread of hepatitis A, a often-deadly liver infection.
D19  H.I.V.
TESTING URGED
In one year alone, routine voluntary H.I.V. testing of patients at hospitals where AIDS is relatively common could identify 11 percent of all Americans who are infected with the virus but do not know it, a Federal report said.D19  The official death toll in the Los Angeles riots was lowered.
D19  A report charged widespread fraud in gasoline sales.
D19  Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-12  At home with Virginia Kelley.
C1  A laid-back look that isn't easy.
C1  See and be seen -- on the phone.
C1  Parent &amp; Child C12  Arts/Entertainment C15-24  Unsung Bernini show in Venice.
C17  Theater: "Ali." C17  Music: "1600 Pennsylvania." C17  Music Notes C17  Obituaries D20-21  JOHN CAGE DIES
John Cage, the prolific and influential composer whose Minimalist works have long been a driving force in the world of music, dance and art, died at the age of 79.
A1  Richard B. Black; assisted Admiral Byrd on Antarctica.
D20  LaDonne H. Schulman; geneticist who studied RNA molecule.
D20  Sports B11-17  Baseball: Pirates defeat Mets.
B11  Yankees beat Tigers.
B11  Expos win 5th straight game.
B12  Orioles sack Blue Jays again.
B13  Randolph joins disabled list.
B13  Boxing: Official takes the Fifth in Senate testimony.
B14  Columns: On Baseball B11  Moran on Olympic baseball.
B14  On Pro Football B15  Football: Exchanging calories for cash.
B15  Golf: Preview of P.G.A.
Championship.
B11  Horse Racing: Notebook B14  Outdoors: A true (really) fish story.
B17  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  For America's common wealth.
Strange new pals in the K.G.B.
How to judge South Africa.
Letters  David Bositis: Clinton has the black vote -- or does he?
Paul A. Goble: Serbians' success echoes in Russia.
Amy Wilentz: Haiti's lies.


Rocky Mount Undergarment Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Legendary Catch Born of the Search for Food
Georgia might be the only state with a historical marker that commemorates the site of the catch of a world-record sport fish.
The locale celebrated by that marker, Montgomery Lake, lies deep in a cypress swamp in south-central Georgia.
There, 60 years ago, a 20-year-old farm boy named George Perry caught a 22-pound, 4-ounce largemouth bass, a fish that was certified by Field &amp; Stream magazine, then the caretaker of freshwater world records, as the biggest of its species taken by rod and reel.
That catch has become the sixth-oldest all-tackle freshwater mark and the most coveted record of all.
Unchallenged for most of the last 20 years, it has recently been threatened by a succession of huge largemouth bass from southern California.
There is a lot of excitement in angling circles about the possibility of breaking the record.
In 1991 two largemouth bass over 20 pounds were caught in Castaic Lake, Calif.
One of those, a 22.01-pound fish, was released alive.
Many observers expected a new record fish to have been produced there this spring, which is when the bass spawn and the heaviest specimens are usually caught, but the largest to date is an 18-pounder.


Professional Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Friedman Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Trisha Brown Performance
The Trisha Brown Dance Company, whose performance in the Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival was rained out on Tuesday evening, is to give a makeup performance at 8:15 tonight in Damrosch Park.
The free show is sponsored by the Martin Gruss Foundation.
The festival runs through Aug. 30.
Information: (212) 875-5400.


Oxboro Medical International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Home Video
It's not often that a big studio gets behind the work of a small, independent film maker.
Next month Disney's Touchstone division will release John Cassavetes's "Woman Under the Influence" for the first time on tape.
The film, made in 1974, is the first of five movies by Mr.
Cassavetes, the actor and director who died in 1989, which Touchstone plans to release over the next year.
To hear the studio tell it, a major Hollywood producer has the same problems as smaller producers when it comes to promoting lesser-known movies.


Outlet Communications Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Metro-Richelieu reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Convention City; In No Mood to Party, Houston Awaits the G.O.P.
The official poster for the Republican National Convention features a rodeo cowboy atop a huge bull with the Houston skyline in the background.
A safe choice?
Not in a city that has struggled with its identity for a decade and now, grappling with a series of setbacks, is in a grumpy mood as it prepares to host the President and his party.
The poster caused a tiff over whether the Wild West image was the right one for a major city of the 1990's that is trying to lift its flat economy by promoting itself as a sophisticated international business center.


Nymagic Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


7 Men Held in Thefts Tied to Chop Shop
Seven men have been arrested on charges involving an extensive car-theft network linked to organized crime and based in a Brooklyn chop shop where law-enforcement officials say late-model cars were dismantled for their parts.
The arrests were the culmination of a one-and-a-half-year investigation that included wiretapping and videotaping suspects, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said in announcing the arrests on Tuesday.


Health Insurance of Vermont reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NFL TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Buffalo Bills
A major question about the Bills' defensive plans may be answered today, but possibly not to the team's liking.
Bruce Smith, who has been slow to recover from an off-season knee operation, is flying to Vail, Colo., where he and the Bills hope his doctor, Richard Steadman, will fix a date when he can begin practicing.


Children Are Evacuated From Sarajevo


Selling Jets to Saudis a Tough Issue for Bush
President Bush is facing a decision to sell advanced F-15 fighter planes to Saudi Arabia, an issue fraught with election-year politics as well as sensitive foreign policy considerations.
The question of whether to proceed with the $5 billion sale of 72 of the warplanes has been percolating for months.
But it was brought to the fore on Tuesday after Senator Christopher (Kit) Bond, a Missouri Republican, urged Mr.
Bush during a White House meeting to move quickly on the sale.


Rockefeller Is Officially Excluded From Ballot for Senate Primary
Larry Rockefeller, an environmental lawyer making his first bid for public office, was officially excluded today from the ballot for the Republican primary for United States Senator when the State Board of Elections ruled that he had not collected enough valid signatures to qualify.
At the end of a two-day hearing, David Flanagan, a board spokesman, said 3,914 signatures of the 10,774 submitted by Mr.
Rockefeller were declared invalid for a slew of reasons, most commonly because the petitions incorrectly listed such information as what election district or Assembly district the signer came from.


U.S. Panel Asks More For Science
A Federal panel said yesterday that scientific research by American business was in a perilous state of stagnation and recommended tough steps to strengthen industry against foreign rivals, including a series of actions by the Federal Government.
While many experts have issued such calls to action, this one is unusual for its breadth and authority.
Its author, the National Science Board, is the policy-making arm of the National Science Foundation, a Federal agency that supports general science research in the United States and is responsible for monitoring the nation's overall scientific health.


Epitope Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed Rene Gonzales, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Damion Easley, infielder, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Named Bob Wolfe senior vice president of administration.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Signed Chad McConnell, outfielder.


Advanced Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


San Francisco Turns To a Top Sports Agent
In America's sports pages, Leigh Steinberg is considered among the most influential and successful player agents in the country.
So what is he doing trying to keep the Giants in San Francisco?
It is like this, Steinberg said today: If the Giants take flight for Florida next season, San Francisco will lose one of its civic treasures.
And his 6-year-old son, Jonathan, will lose his favorite baseball team.


Corrections
A picture caption in some copies on Saturday about Croatia's delegation at a session of the United Nations Security Council misidentified the seated delegate.
He was Neven Pelicaric, an attache at the Croatian Mission, not Dr.
Zvonimir Separovic, Croatia's chief delegate.
The caption also misstated the topic of the debate.
It was enlargement of the mandate to control Croatia's borders, not the dispatch of a peacekeeping force to Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Jacor Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bar Group Approves Transfer Of U. of Bridgeport Law School
The transfer of the University of Bridgeport's law school to Quinnipiac College was approved by the American Bar Association today as it granted provisional accreditation for the school, now known as the Bridgeport School of Law at Quinnipiac College.
The law school seceded from the University of Bridgeport last winter and affiliated with Quinnipiac, a liberal arts college in Hamden, because the law faculty opposed a merger being discussed between the financially troubled university and Sacred Heart University in Fairfield.


Police Detail Why Gunmen Came to Club
The gunmen whose botched robbery at the Corona Social Club in Queens left two men dead and one critically wounded were trying to steal money from two illegal gambling machines, the police said yesterday.
Officers were still searching last night for as many as two other suspects who might have slipped away from the club at 101-17 43d Avenue in the uproar that followed a wild shootout between two of the gunmen and police officers.


Clorox Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Theater; A Life of Ali, Who Fought for Prize and Principle
The life of Muhammad Ali has extraordinary highs and lows, from the surprise victory over Sonny Liston in 1964, which made him the heavyweight champion of the world, to his continuing battle against Parkinson's syndrome.
There is more than enough material here for a novel or a Spike Lee film.
In the new play "Ali," Geoffrey C. Ewing and Graydon Royce brush in the highlights and succeed in jogging one's memory about this admirable athlete, a man of principle as well as punch even as he became a self-made egotist.
He was, as he proclaimed, the Greatest, and he had the record to prove it, a record that was interrupted during his prime years when he was stripped of his title because he protested against being drafted for service in the Vietnam War.
As it turns out, there is more heat in Mr.
Ewing's performance in the title role than in the monodrama he and his collaborator have constructed around Ali's life.
As directed by Stephen Henderson, Mr.
Ewing is an artful imitator of his character, assuming the muffled voice of Ali today as well as the boisterous braggadocio of the young champion.
But the play is an episodic collage, pasted together from public statements and interviews, testimony from others and guesswork on the part of the authors.


Bridge
A few centuries ago, European rulers who could afford it often hired efficient mercenaries, usually from Switzerland.
Something similar has been happening recently in the bridge world, although the Swiss are not involved. (It is not Swiss Teams.) Four of the 11 top-ranked teams in the Spingold Knockout Team Championship in Toronto last month had hired guns from other continents, all of them partnerships with world reputations.
They were from Brazil, Britain, the Netherlands and Poland, and as mercenaries they proved to be surprisingly unsuccessful: All the teams that sponsored their appearance in Canada were eliminated before the qualifying stage by lower-ranked squads.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Bill Frisell  Guitarist Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South (at Perry Street) Manhattan Through Sunday
The guitarist Bill Frisell produces some of the least declarative music to be found in the gray area between jazz and improvised music.
Mr.
Frisell has taken his record collection seriously, and all sorts of music, from country to jazz to tango to rock -- appear in his compositions.
That's nothing new, but where lesser composers let their references rule them, Mr.
Frisell has made his sources completely elliptical.
As a result, his music suggests more than it makes explicit.
It's like a gesture made by a stranger across a dark room: it's not clear that it happened, and if it did, its relevance is uncertain.


Two Regulators Say Testimony Led to Demotions
Two Government lawyers who raised questions about the Federal commitment to recover money from officials of failed savings and loans said today that their efforts had placed them in a professional twilight zone.
Jacqueline P. Taylor and Bruce Pederson had harshly criticized their employer, the Resolution Trust Corporation, in a Senate hearing on Tuesday, lamenting what they regarded as the political influence that is weakening their agency's efforts to recover money from wrongdoers in the savings and loan industry.


Electro Rent Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Music Notes; Paris Opera Shaken by Fatal Accident in Spain
An accident that killed one chorister and injured several dozen others has brought to light deep divisions in the administration of the Bastille Opera, and has led to a handful of resignations, according to reports in Paris newspapers.
The accident occurred on July 16 at the Teatro de la Maestranza in Seville, Spain, where the company had planned to present Verdi's "Otello." During a piano rehearsal, a suspended platform that was part of the scenery collapsed and fell on the chorus, killing one singer and injuring at least 30 chorus members and technicians, 4 of them seriously.
The performances were canceled.


L. L. Callaway Jr., 84, Publisher of Newsweek
Llewellyn L. Callaway Jr., a former publisher of Newsweek, died on Monday at his home in Napa, Calif.
He was 84 years old.
He died of an inoperable brain tumor, Newsweek said in New York.


Michael Jackson, Live, On HBO in October
In what is being described as the largest financial deal for a concert performance on television, Michael Jackson's concert from Bucharest, Romania, on Oct. 10 will be broadcast live by the Home Box Office cable network, the network said today.
HBO would not disclose the terms of its agreement with Mr.
Jackson, but music industry executives familiar with the deal said that the figure was close to $20 million.
The exclusive two-hour broadcast -- the first time that a full-length concert by Mr.
Jackson has been televised -- is to feature the entertainer performing hits from his four solo albums: "Off the Wall," "Thriller," "Bad," and the current "Dangerous." The concert will mark the culmination of the European leg of Mr.
Jackson's "Dangerous Tour," which began on June 27 in Munich, Germany.


Thompson Returns to Cheers
Swimmer JENNY THOMPSON returned home in triumph yesterday after winning two gold medals and a silver in the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
Friends and relatives cheered as the 19-year-old Dover, N.H., resident arrived at Logan International Airport in Boston.


A Child's Discovery in the Shake of a Leg
AT the Rhinelander Children's Center in Manhattan, students discover in the stage-fencing class that the medieval sport requires the balance and body alignment of a ballerina -- not just a few thrusts and guttural shouts.
In the music lab, 7- to 9-year-olds tune their own guitars.
In the "Shake Your Sillies Out" class, children ages 3 to 4 discover that the irrepressible urge to jiggle, jump and shake helps make sense of this hectic world.


Bowman's Back. Well, Almost.
The more he talks about not coaching, the closer SCOTTY BOWMAN moves to returning to the Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins.
CRAIG PATRICK, the Penguins general manager, has reportedly offered Bowman, one of the most successful coaches in National Hockey League history, a contract worth about $300,000.
Bowman wants about $50,000 more a season.


Turner Broadcasting System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Clinton Making Transition Plans
While insisting that he is not getting carried away by favorable polls or by White House political stumbles, Gov.
Bill Clinton said today he had already begun thinking about, and planning for, a White House transition.
In response to a question at a meeting with editors and reporters at USA Today, Mr.
Clinton said he had begun assembling policy groups to develop detailed proposals on issues like health care.
A smaller group, he said, would focus on examining the details of "how you go about staffing the White House."


Haiti's Lies
There are signs the U.S. is thinking hard about ending its support of the embargo of Haiti.
Last month, Francois Benoit, the Foreign Minister of Haiti's de facto regime, went to Washington to argue that the ban should be lifted because it was starving the Haitian people.
Several U.S. officials met with Mr.
Benoit, even though the Administration does not recognize the regime.
An embargo by the Organization of American States, in effect for 11 months, was intended to force the regime to enter into negotiations for the return of Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's first freely elected President.
So far, no progress has been made toward that goal.


Tristate Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Amid the Gentility of the East End, A Town Confronts Domestic Abuse
For a moment, Martha E. seems far from the cushioned chair and calm office where she speaks.
In her eyes, it is 1990, and her husband is shouting at her, his anger building.
Suddenly, he strikes.
Pregnant, she closes herself like a shell over the baby, protecting it from the kicks that rack her from skull to knees.
Afterward, she picks herself up and limps out with the couple's 2-year-old son.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
SUNDAY: 11:30 A.M., ABC, "This Week," interview with David Brinkley.  Gov. Bill Clinton
TODAY: 8-9 A.M., C-Span, meeting with the editorial board of USA Today.
Vice President Quayle
FRIDAY: 7-7:30 A.M., "CBS This Morning," interview. (Channel 2 in New York)


Neurogen Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Britain Deports 36 Seeking Asylum From Balkans
The Government acknowledged today that it had deported 36 people from the Balkans who had come here in search of asylum, prompting new criticism from relief groups and opposition politicians that Britain is not doing enough to help refugees from the conflict.
A spokesman for the British Home Office said the asylum seekers were not returned to the war zone, but rather sent back to safe third countries in Europe, including Germany and Belgium, where they had first fled after leaving Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia.


Robinson Nugent Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Atmos Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Giants Sign Dave Brown
The Giants today signed the former Duke quarterback Dave Brown to a four-year, $4.6 million contract that included a $1.6 million signing bonus.
He is expected to report to training camp on Thursday.
Brown was selected by the Giants in the supplemental draft and cost the team its No. 1 pick in the 1993 National Football League draft.
He joins a crowded quarterback crew that includes Jeff Hostetler and Phil Simms.


Orange-Co Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Suspension Lifted for Sergeant Accused in Beating
A police sergeant indicted on charges of hitting a Brooklyn community leader and beating her son was restored to the police payroll yesterday and placed on desk duty.
The decision to lift the suspension, which came one day after the sergeant was indicted, was a routine one, said Suzanne Trazoff, deputy commissioner for public information.


SCIENTISTS IDENTIFY WHAT IS MAKING TB RESISTANT TO DRUGS
Scientists say they have identified the genetic trick that allows some strains of tuberculosis to become resistant to drugs, a finding that paves the way for new medicines to conquer these often fatal strains of the disease.
In the near future the discovery should also lead to new tests to identify cases of drug-resistant tuberculosis quickly.
Current tests take months, and in the meantime patients receive ineffective treatment and can still spread the disease.
The researchers reported in today's issue of the journal Nature that strains of the tuberculosis bacterium that are resistant to the drug isoniazid, the mainstay of tuberculosis treatment, had lost a single large gene.
When the scientists reinserted the missing gene in the laboratory, the bacterium once again became vulnerable to the drug.
Resurgence of Disease


It Gets Worse: Mets Lose and Randolph Is Hurt
The numbers on the Shea Stadium scoreboard never looked larger, as if swollen by the tension and definition of the moment.
The score read Pirates 7, Mets 6.
The bases were loaded in the last of the 10th inning.
Eddie Murray was at the plate.
The count was 2-2.
And then, with one swing of the bat, one flash of leather in center field, the numbers were gone, vanished, the plug pulled on another game for the Mets, the afternoon's electricity stolen in an instant.


No Headline
This issue that has haunted America for 20 years has not haunted it falsely. -- SENATOR JOHN F. KERRY, on Americans unaccounted for since the Vietnam War.  [ A6:2. ]


Sundowner Offshore Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hostage in Queens Is Returning to Pakistan in a Coffin He Built
Through his work, Saeed Ahmad, a carpenter, left his mark all over his Queens neighborhood.
Tonight, he will go home to Pakistan in one of the last things he built -- a coffin made of particle board.
In Corona, Queens, yesterday, along 43d Avenue and National Street where Mr.
Ahmad lived and worshiped, his friends pointed to his handiwork: the shelves that held the shoes removed for Muslim prayers at the Alfalah Mosque, the butcher store cabinet for the meat slaughtered according to Islamic standards, the fixtures and paneling in the basement apartment he had painstakingly renovated for his wife and two children.


Jobs Lure Japanese-Brazilians to Old World
Only 30 miles east of South America's most populous city, vegetable farms languish abandoned after the Japanese-Brazilian owners departed for greener pastures: factory jobs in Japan.
"Six of my nieces and nephews have gone to Japan," said Izumi Yanai, a doctor in this truck farming town, once a rural heartland for Sao Paulo's Japanese immigrants and their children.


John Cage, 79, a Minimalist Enchanted With Sound, Dies
John Cage, the prolific and influential composer whose Minimalist works have long been a driving force in the world of music, dance and art, died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a stroke, a hospital spokesman said.


United Thermal Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Alabama Power In 2 Offerings
The Alabama Power Company, a unit of the Southern Company, is selling $275 million in first-mortgage bonds in two offerings that were competitively priced on Tuesday.
A $175 million issue of first-mortgage bonds due in 2007 was awarded to underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The bonds were reoffered to the public with a 7.25 percent coupon and at a price of 98.65 to yield 7.4 percent, or about 95 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.


Furr's/Bishop's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Don't Be Fooled: These Objects Are Useful
SIMPLE baskets woven from the wild grasses of the Savannah River, asymmetrical salad bowls made of celadon porcelain, and Isamu Noguchi-inspired tables made of plywood are some of the 200 or so objects in "More Than One: Contemporary Studio Production" at the American Craft Museum.
The exhibit, which includes works by 21 artists, opens today at the museum, 40 West 53d Street in Manhattan, and runs through Nov. 8.
"Studio production means that more than one object is produced, and that the artist has either hands-on contact with the object from start to finish, or complete supervision or approval of the final object," said John Perreault, the museum's senior curator.
"Artists make multiples both from economic necessity and from an idealistic ideology that it's important to make beautiful handmade objects for everyday use that ordinary people can afford."


Seeking the Truth in Refuse
After 20 years of sorting through garbage cans and landfills, the archaeologist William L. Rathje has accumulated precious memories.
There are the 40-year-old hot dogs, perfectly preserved beneath dozens of strata of waste, and the head of lettuce still in pristine condition after 25 years.
But the hands-down winner, the one that still makes him shake his head in disbelief, is an order of guacamole he recently unearthed.
Almost as good as new, it sat next to a newspaper apparently thrown out the same day.
The date was 1967.
The guacamole that would not die reinforces a point that Mr.
Rathje and his co-author, Cullen Murphy, make in "Rubbish!" recently published by HarperCollins ($23).
The garbage dumped in landfills tends not to biodegrade.
It becomes mummified.


Economic Scene; Clinton's Luck . . . Or His Albatross?
"YOU can help by putting a nice, positive interpretation on the fact that there are 200,000 more jobs created," President Bush told reporters assembled last Friday to hear the White House's spin on the July employment figures.
But economists seem more inclined to view the small decline in joblessness, to 7.7 percent, as just the puddle at the bottom of a nearly empty glass.
Many are hunkering down for a long, dry season in the labor market -- one in which the growth in national output is barely sufficient to absorb the natural growth in the work force.


Granges Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Learning a Language With a Crayon
RUSSIAN is one of several languages children can get to know through Teach Me Tapes, foreign-language kits produced by a Minneapolis company of the same name.
There are also German, Spanish, Japanese, Hebrew and French -- as well as Italian, when that language debuts this fall.
The kits consist of a coloring book, a cassette tape with familiar songs in English and in the second language, and short dialogues in the foreign language only.
"They can adapt to each part of it as they grow," said Bonnie Young, the marketing director.
With the Russian kit, children may be able to decipher the characters at left (clockwise, from top left, "my daddy," "my mommy," "my brother" and "I").


Health Care Market Has Failed Consumers; What of Uninsured?
To the Editor:
Most thoughtful reformers agree managed competition should be a basic ingredient of any national health care ("The Guts to Reform Health Care," editorial, Aug. 2).
However, there are some essential components that must also be addressed:
(1) How will the 68 million Americans who are uninsured or underinsured obtain universal coverage for care provided through managed competition?
The choices are either through general taxes (single payer), employer-based (mandated) or individual contributions through the elimination of tax deductions on health benefits.


The Baltimore Brat Pack Makes Move on Jays' Turf
For the second time in four seasons, the Baltimore Orioles are trying to ride youthful exuberance past a post-season tested team of veterans.
And for the second time in four years, that veteran team, the Toronto Blue Jays, embarking on one of their typical stumbles through the second half, are making Baltimore's goal seem tantalizingly attainable.
While the outcome of this particular race won't be decided for over a month, the Orioles right now are concentrating on what is tantalizingly close.
And that is first place in the American League East, thanks to a 11-4 spanking of the first-place Blue Jays tonight.


Health Care Market Has Failed Consumers; Keeping Them Healthy
To the Editor:
I am concerned about the assertion that a fixed fee per patient, independent of the amount of care provided, would encourage physicians to "keep patients healthy and provide the most efficient care when they are sick" ("The Guts to Reform Health Care," editorial, Aug. 2).
This is simplistic and misleading.
Hospitals receive fixed reimbursement under the Medicare system, and this has probably helped slow the growth of health care costs.
To infer that this is the result of increased efficiency, however, is naive.
The concept of fixed reimbursement implies that the approach to the same problem in different patients need not vary to any great degree.
This is simply not the case.


Providence Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Saving a Silver Screen in Jersey City
In 1939 moviegoers sat mesmerized before the 50-foot screen at the Loew's Jersey theater as Atlanta burned nightly in "Gone With the Wind." In 1967, thousands lined up beneath the theater's glittering marquee for tickets to "Dr. Zhivago."
Today a new generation of viewers gathered in the lobby of the now-closed Loew's Jersey movie palace, where a $4 million fund-raising effort is under way to save the 63-year-old theater.
The city hopes a first-run "big screen" theater and performing arts center will open here in 1994.


COMPANY NEWS
CEPHALON INC., West Chester, Pa., completed a $45 million private placement of limited partnership interests in Cephalon Clinical Partners L.P.
GE AEROSPACE said it would eliminate some 100 jobs by year's end at its Broome County, N.Y., manufacturing facility.
The cuts are a result of reduced military sales and the troubled commercial airline industry.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Baker Is Expected to Switch To Bush's Campaign Today
President Bush is expected to announce Thursday that he is putting Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d in charge of his campaign, carrying out the much-debated shift before next week to avoid having it overshadow the convention, White House and campaign officials said today.
Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said that no formal decision on the move had been made and that Mr.
Bush had told him he had nothing to say on the matter.


Northgate Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Test Indicates New Vaccine Works Against Hepatitis A
For the first time, researchers have used a vaccine to prevent the spread of hepatitis A, a sometimes deadly liver infection.
Hepatitis experts said the vaccine was a major advance against the disease, which afflicts tens of thousands of Americans.


Senate Panel Cites Hatfield For Failing to Report Gifts
The Senate ethics committee concluded today that Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, had violated Federal law and Senate rules by failing to report expensive gifts he had received.
The panel formally rebuked him, a step less severe than censure or expulsion and one that requires no further action by the full Senate.
It concluded that Mr.
Hatfield had "demonstrated a serious lack of concern for, and negligence in connection with, his legal obligation to disclose such gifts."


CHRONICLE
The party to be given on Saturday evening at the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts in Katonah, N.Y., for DAVE BRUBECK by BARBARALEE DIAMONSTEIN-SPIELVOGEL and her husband, CARL SPIELVOGEL, started out as a celebration of the jazz maestro's 60th anniversary in music.
But when it turned out that Mr.
Brubeck had actually been playing the piano for 66 years, starting at age 5, and professionally for 57 years, no one was particularly perturbed by the discrepancy.
"We're honoring him because he is the icon of jazz," Ms.
Diamonstein-Spielvogel said.
"His music transcends any compartmentalization; it's worldly and it's religious."


Unilab Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reflectone Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mulroney's Task: Selling Trade Pact to Canadians
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney today opened his campaign to sell closer North American trade ties to a skeptical Canadian public.
Business leaders generally endorsed the free trade pact just concluded by the North American partners, while the political opposition, including organized labor, tried to tear it to pieces.
An indication of the likely intensity of the coming storm was an exchange between Mr.
Mulroney and Bob Rae, Premier of Ontario and a member of the Socialist-leaning New Democratic Party that opposes the Prime Minister's Progressive Conservatives.


Preparing for Abortion Protests at the Republican Convention


Review/Television; HBO Late-Night Show That's for Adults Only
"Real Sex" is not for the kiddies or for people worried about family values or for anyone who believes that pornography leads to rape.
Evidently there are enough other categories of viewers to make this late-night take-it-off a hit on HBO.
The fourth program in a magazine series that began in November 1990 with visits to a vibrator workshop, a striptease class and a porn-for-women studio is as frank and good humored as its predecessors, not quite hard-core (no intercourse) but definitely on the firm side of soft.


Beard Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TheraTech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For America's Common Wealth
Millions will save a few cents every time they buy orange juice, a few dollars on shirts and sweaters and a few hundred dollars on automobiles because of the North American Free Trade Agreement concluded in Washington yesterday.
All told, if Congress approves, consumers will save billions.
But none of the savings will come labeled "Courtesy of the Trade Agreement" and few consumers will know to be grateful.
On the other side of the ledger, however, the losers, though few, will be highly visible -- and vocal.
Some factories in the textile, glass and automobile industries will shut down, throwing workers onto unemployment lines.


Trimark Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Networked Picture Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Laurentian Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


RehabClinics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


LeMond Pulls Out of Race
GREG LeMOND of the United States pulled out of the Tour of Britain before the start of the third day of racing in Middlesborough, England.
SERGE BEUCHERIE of France, his team manager, said: "Greg had a sleepless night. He complains of having no energy and throughout the race yesterday was not feeling well."


TVX Gold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


LDDS Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cats And Dogs And Masks, Oh, My!
DAVID KIRK'S cat and dog masks are mostly modeled after real mutts and strays.
But Mr.
Kirk, a toy maker, admits that they could have been plucked from the twilight zone, too.
"Some of the dogs are goofy, some are serious," he said.
"The cats are more bizarre, like something out of a nightmare."
The masks make up "Dogs and Cats" (Rizzoli International Publications, $10.95), a book by Mr.
Kirk due out in September that is as straightforward as its title.
The book, part of Rizzoli's Children's Universe Paper Products line that is reintroducing old-fashioned paper toys, is meant to be taken apart.
Children punch out the 12 masks' eyes and snouts, attach string to the masks and become a floppy-eared Tramp or a shifty-eyed Siamese.
No glue and scissors are needed, just tucking and folding.


Players Request Schedule
The Major League Baseball Players Association formally asked the National League yesterday for a draft of its delayed 1993 schedule.
The union's executive director, DONALD FEHR, made the request in a three-page letter to Commissioner FAY VINCENT and President BILL WHITE of the league.
The union had considered filing a grievance, but decided instead on the less confrontational letter.


Electronic Clearing House Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Security Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Producer Prices Rise 0.1% As Inflation Stays in Check
Prices received by American producers for finished goods rose a skimpy one-tenth of 1 percent in July, as the economy's weak recovery kept a tight rein on inflation, Labor Department figures showed today.
The price of energy fell for the first time in six months, and peaches and other fresh fruits slid by the biggest amount in more than two decades to help food prices remain steady.


Clinical Homecare reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sanderson Brings Yankees Back to Life
Maybe the frustration had reached its peak.
Maybe Buck Showalter's stern lecture took an extra day to sink in.
Maybe the embarrassment of being mired in last place finally motivated the Yankees to play a superior brand of baseball.
Whatever the reason, the Yankees actually looked like a team that wanted to play today and they played well while whipping the Tigers, 10-0, at Tiger Stadium.
The victory was only their fourth in the last 17 games.
The Yankees remained tied for last place with Cleveland, which defeated Boston.
Tigers Scratch for Hits
Scott Sanderson stifled the sizzling Tigers on two singles and struck out eight as he pitched into the eighth inning for his second straight victory.
When a starter gives that sort of neat effort, the rest of the team is bound to look better and the Yankees certainly did.
Don Mattingly stroked 4 of the team's 16 hits, and three Yankees rocked two-run homers to assure that they would not move into sole possession of last place today.


PHLCorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
Sophie B. Hawkins  Symphony Space
One of the year's brighter pop moments has been the Top 10 success of Sophie B. Hawkins's debut single, "Damn, I Wish I Was Your Lover." In this rough-and-ready rock ballad, the New York City-born singer and songwriter exuberantly invites a potential mate into her "jungle book," promising hours of kisses and motherly care as well as a lover's passion.


Penn Engineering &amp; Mfg.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jets Will Let White Turn In Extra Calories for Cash
The Jets think right guard Dwayne White is one of their best offensive linemen.
That's why they recently renegotiated his contract, giving him $1.8 million over three years.
They also want White to stop living by the credo that a waist is a terrible thing to mind.
To that end they have put a few carrots into his contract, tying bonuses to his pay if he can come in at 305 pounds or less during certain points of the regular season.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday, about Prime Computer's outlook, misidentified the company that controls Prime.
It is DR Holdings.


ISM Information Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Where a Quiet Art Boom Resounds
LONG overshadowed by nearby Kent as northwestern Connecticut's artistic center, this historic community has gained a measure of prominence in the New England art world as more than a half dozen galleries and an active artists' guild have opened in the last year.
Although Litchfield and its rural environs have long been a mecca for artists -- as well as affluent owners of summer homes -- the recent art boom stems from a combination of local artists' new-found self-confidence and the opening of choice real-estate for galleries along the picturesque town green.


Magainin Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Year to June 30


Ex-C.I.A. Official Takes Stand in His Own Defense
Clair E. George, once the Central Intelligence Agency's director of covert operations, took the witness stand in his own defense today and firmly denied charges that he had lied to Congress and investigators about the Iran-contra affair.
In answers to questions put by his lawyer, Richard A. Hibey, Mr.
George painted a picture of his agency as one struggling with competing pressures during the Reagan Administration's covert arms sales to Iran and its diversion of profits to the Nicaraguan rebels.


Senate Opposes a Cut In Capital Gains Taxes
The Senate rejected an effort by Republicans to cut capital gains taxes today, as it quit for three weeks without completing action on enterprise zone legislation that was originally proposed in response to the rioting in Los Angeles four months ago.
The Senate vote was not unexpected, and it appeared to reflect strong Democratic opposition to even a narrower capital gains cut that would provide the tax benefit to businesses investing in selected inner-city neighborhoods, impoverished rural communities and Indian reservations.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Shrugs Off Republican Attacks On His Wife's Work
The Democrats and Republicans fell to combat in earnest today, tossing darts back and forth in a battle for the attention span of the average American voter.
Richard Bond, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, became the second ranking Republican in two days to criticize Hillary Clinton, the lawyer who is married to Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the Democratic nominee.


Fibronics International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Randolph Can't Find Answers
It was after the X-ray was taken, after the trainer had left him, after the tape and the gauze and the bandage had been applied.
Willie Randolph sat in the trainer's room and tried to figure out how it could have been avoided -- how he could have escaped Bob Walk's pitch, how he could have protected his now-broken left hand, how he could have prevented his season from effectively ending yesterday afternoon at Shea Stadium.
And then, after he gave up on the how -- gave up trying to figure out the mechanics of his seventh-inning injury -- Randolph started in on the why.
Why has the Mets' season gone so sour?
Why have so many men landed on the disabled list?
Why did it have to be Walk who was pitching that inning?
Why was Randolph chosen to pinch-hit?
And why, of all things, did he have to end this season this way -- in the sterile confines of the trainer's room -- rather than with his teammates on the field?


Alta Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Caldor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


A Not-So Moving Story
IF the Giants move from San Francisco to St.
Petersburg, Fla., do not feel sorry for these people:
*San Francisco fans: They didn't care about the traumatic effect the Giants' move to their city had on New York fans 35 years ago.


Anderson Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Violence, Then Grief, Shatter Family's Picture of Success


EX-OFFICIALS DENY LAXNESS ON M.I.A.'S
Former American officials insist they did all they could to ascertain the status of American servicemen missing in Vietnam in the early 1970's, and they deny they were negligent in any way.
Moreover, the former officials said they did not knowingly abandoned any American servicemen who fought in Indochina.


Quayle Rails Against Media 'Sleaze'
Vice President Dan Quayle sharply criticized the news media today for repeating unsubstantiated accusations about President Bush's private life, saying that bad journalism in America had overwhelmed good journalism.
"When you start talking about sleaze, I think some in the media ought to look in the mirror," Mr.
Quayle said.
"Now what's the motivation in this? I can't think of any other motivating factor other than that you want to hurt the President and help Bill Clinton."


Killearn Properties Inc. reports earnings for Year to April 30


Trans Leasing International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Apartheid Shielded Displaced Afrikaners
To the Editor:
"Pretoria Picks Group for a Gentler Displacement: Middle-Class Afrikaners" (Aug. 1), your sympathetic news article on Afrikaners displaced by land reform, is appalling.
While working as a journalist in Namibia last year, I found the same issue kept coming up there: what should the Government do about the large numbers of uninvolved whites who had contributed to apartheid under the South African occupation but who were never actively racist?


Slight Easing in Treasury Prices
The bond market took a breather yesterday.
After two days of a strong rally right into the teeth of the Treasury's big August auctions, prices eased slightly across the board and some yields rose.
The 10-year auction saw adequate demand, although some dealers were apparently spooked by some last-minute rumors of aggressive bidding.


Books of The Times; Of Fascists and Felons in a Pirandellian Setting
Open Doors And Three Novellas  By Leonardo Sciascia  Translated by Marie Evans, Joseph Farrell and Sacha Rabinovitch. 293 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
More so than in any of Leonardo Sciascia's previous metaphysical mysteries, the shadow of Luigi Pirandello, his fellow Sicilian who was a Nobel laureate in literature, hovers over "Open Doors and Three Novellas," his latest, and perhaps last, work to be translated here.
Admirers of Sciascia's stories will find that his writing grew darker and more complex, as if he wanted to make a final statement about his main concerns: political corruption, class distinctions, injustice and the oppression of church and state.


Bull &amp; Bear Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mangling the Language Is Bipartisan
To the Editor:
Thanks to Midge Decter, the mean-spirited assaults on Vice President Quayle's spelling gaffe may be put to rest ("Quayle's Just the Tip of Misspelling Iceberg," letter, July 30).
Ms.
Decter ended by suggesting that today's intellectuals not only cannot spell but also have no competence in grammar.
With her customary restraint and generosity, however, she did not illustrate her remark with reference to Bill Clinton.
Has Governor Clinton, Rhodes scholar, ever made a speech without fracturing the English language?
Repeatedly, for example, as reported in your July 23 front-page account of his speech in St.
Louis, he says, "for Al Gore and I." Yet curiously, his demonstrations of grammatical incompetence are neither criticized nor ridiculed nor even mentioned.


A Laid-Back Look That Just Looks Easy
THE sun is shining, the breezes are wafting, the grass is perfectly trimmed, the roses are flourishing wildly.
All is right with the world at Sig Bergamin's little weekend house.
"Relaxing, relaxing, relaxing, that's what it's all about," said Mr.
Bergamin, a Brazilian decorator who is extending his work to the United States.
Recently he was busy unwinding in his newly designed country house just off Hill Street here.


Chang Pines for Gstaad
When someone asked MICHAEL CHANG yesterday about his trip to Gstaad, Switzerland, where he played in a tournament in July, he waxed so long and so effusively about the breathtaking scenery and the crisp, clean air you could almost see the organizers of the Waldbaum Hamlet Cup tournament in Commack, L.I., wince.
That was because it was they who had arranged the conference call with Chang, who will play in the tournament, a United States Open tuneup, later this month.
Whatever else its charms, Commack has never been mistaken for a resort in the Swiss Alps.


Getting More Camp for Less Money
DESPITE a straitened economy, children all over the country went to summer camp this year.
But to pay for it, many families had to be more resourceful than they had been in the past.
Some parents sent their children to less-expensive camps run by schools or nonprofit groups, or to camps offering financial assistance and gradual-payment plans.
Some even worked at camps their children attended, in exchange for reduced fees.


CS Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Poco Petroleums reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kentucky Central Life reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Palestinians Wary About U.S.-Israeli Friendliness
Palestinian leaders and some Arab countries expressed concern today that the United States, by agreeing to guarantee up to $10 billion in Israeli loans, had planted itself on Israel's side in peace talks that are about to resume.
A day after President Bush talked glowingly of Israel as a "strategic partner," Syria declared through an official newspaper that the peace process had been damaged.
The promised assistance, which Israel sought to help resettle immigrants from former Soviet republics, would "encourage Israel to continue its obstinate policy and its rejection of peace," the Syrians said.


Growing
MY cat, Mrs.
Gray, got declawed a couple of weeks ago.
I guess I use the passive voice because I don't want to be implicated, but I am guilty.
Mrs.
Gray came to live at the family farm in Maryland when I moved to an apartment two years ago and it's been a good arrangement.
She has fields to roam in and a Victorian couch to nap on and I visit her often.
My mother enjoys her company -- as well as the company of my aging mutt, Molly, who can't climb the stairs of my fifth floor walk-up.
The only problem was the Oriental rugs.
She wouldn't stop scratching them, no matter how many times we clapped our hands and yelled: "Mrs. Gray! Stop that!" Even the water pistol didn't discourage her.
She'd just give us a devilish look -- her yellow eyes round lanterns in the middle of a gray velour face -- and scamper off.


Daxor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Phillips Cables reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Telemundo Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


297 Women and Children Leave Sarajevo by Bus
Under guarantees of safety from the Serbian forces besieging Sarajevo, five buses carrying 297 mothers and children left here today on the first leg of a journey to sanctuary in Slovenia and Austria.
It was the largest group of evacuees in many weeks from a city where most of the 400,000 residents have become, in effect, inhabitants of a ghetto, and it provided an occasion for a torrent of feelings: Relief, on the part of fathers eager to see their families away from the daily hazards of life here; tears, from those leaving, and widespread envy, from other families that were too tardy, or had too little influence, to get their names on the heavily oversubscribed list for the buses.


Race for New York Senate Signifies Republicans' Turmoil
No one planned that Mary B. Goodhue, a 71-year-old institution in New York State politics, would be out ringing doorbells this summer.
She was either supposed to glide toward easy re-election as the only woman in the Republican majority of the State Senate or she was to step aside gracefully after seven terms to make room for a younger and more conservative Republican, 47-year-old Assemblyman George E. Pataki.


In a Strategic Gambit, Ferraro Is First to Show Television Ads
Hoping to solidify her lead in the polls and force her rivals to spend precious money, former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro has become the first candidate for the Democratic Senate nomination to broadcast television advertisements, releasing two commercials that are to begin airing statewide today.
One is a 60-second biographical piece, using news footage, soft music and old family photographs to depict Ms.
Ferraro's life as a triumphant passage from her childhood as the daughter of a widowed seamstress to her career as teacher, mother, lawyer, prosecutor and the first major- party Vice-Presidential candidate.


Tejon Ranch Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the military style of Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign organization referred incorrectly to an exchange between the Clinton camp and Gov.
Carroll A. Campbell Jr. of South Carolina.
Mr.
Campbell's criticism, and the Clinton organization's response, dealt with an economic development plan that Mr.
Clinton had created for Arkansas, not with welfare reform.


Review/Music; The City Opera Revives Its 'Rigoletto'
Whatever arguments might be made for or against the New York City Opera's recent productions, one has to give the company credit for reconsidering its stagings when they are revived.
Revisions usually take the form of deletion, with unsuccessful notions and conceits quietly dropped.
This season has already seen a somewhat toned-down revival of last year's Eurotrash update of "La Traviata." And when Tito Capobianco's 1988 staging of "Rigoletto" returned to the New York State Theater on Tuesday evening, operagoers could celebrate the disposal, or at least the removal, of that production's principal eyesore, the grotesque statue of the Duke that used to dominate the first act.
Otherwise, the production's spirit and many of its quirks remain intact.
Cynthia Edwards, who has taken over the stage direction, has retained Mr.
Capobianco's principle of accentuating the obvious.
The Duke's court, for example, is not merely reputed to be the den of a lecherous rogue but is presented as a ritzy brothel.
A woman bounds out of his chamber partly dressed, and during Monterone's bitter lament, the Duke rolls around the floor with a bevy of scantily clad nymphs.


Campbell Names New Chicago Head
Campbell-Mithun-Esty said yesterday that Michael Garcia had been named president and chief operating officer at its Chicago office, succeeding Bruce K. Beach, who resigned after eight months as chief executive there.
Mr.
Garcia, 42 years old, was previously an executive vice president and group account director on the Texaco and Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco accounts at Campbell's New York office.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
MATHEMATICS may be the most anxiety-provoking subject taught.
For many adults, especially those who avoided math in school, facing a column of numbers, a graph or a set of fractions still makes the palms sweat and the heart race.
And they, like the children now grappling with math, probably learned their fear from parents or elementary-school teachers who felt incompetent, too.
"Math anxiety is not genetic, but it's highly contagious," said Elisabeth Ruedy, a math teacher at the Trinity School in Manhattan who wrote "Where Do I Put the Decimal Point?" (Henry Holt, $19.95).
"I have never found a toddler who didn't love numbers. It gives them a feeling of power. The problems arise when they start kindergarten."


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about a retired New York advertising executive rendered his surname incorrectly.
He was Herbert J. Stiefel.
The obituary also referred incorrectly to his wife and to another survivor.
His wife was the late Lucy Hillary Stiefel.
The other survivor, Ginger Stiefel, was Mr.
Stiefel's daughter-in-law.


INSIDE
A Warning on Research
A Federal panel said scientific research by U.S. business was in a perilous state of stagnation and recommended tough remedies.
Page D1.
Vaccine for Hepatitis A
A vaccine has been found to be completely effective in halting the spread of hepatitis A, a liver infection that can be fatal.
Page D19.


Liposome Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


F.C.C. Chairman Wants to Cut Back 'This Is Only a Test'
Another icon of the cold war is being transformed.
The Emergency Broadcast System, built during the 1950's to provide information to civilians over radio and television in case of a war, is on the verge of being overhauled by the Federal Communications Commission to make it useful in a time when people are more worried about chemical spills than nuclear attacks.
Though it has never been used for its original purpose, in recent years the system has been used increasingly by state and local governments to warn people about blizzards, tornadoes and other disturbances.
The police in Los Angeles used the system earlier this year when rioting broke out over the acquittal of four police officers in the beating of Rodney King.


Stenciling Joins the Computer Age
IN the 19th century, people in New England used them to liven up their furniture, fabric and walls.
The Victorians embellished ceilings with them, and Pennsylvania farmers applied them to barns.
But it took the late 20th-century computer to make stencils an elaborate and sophisticated decorating tool.
"You couldn't cut an intricate design like this by hand," said Mary Lou Smith, holding a stencil that looked like a plaster ceiling cornice.
"But a laser computer can read a design exactly as an artist draws it. The computer can also produce stencils in quantity."


I.B.F. President Refuses to Answer Senators' Queries
Bob Lee, the president of the International Boxing Federation, invoked his Fifth Amendment rights before a Senate hearing today and refused to answer questions about an accusation that he received a bribe in 1981 when he was a boxing official in New Jersey.
Lee was called to testify before the Senate Permanent Subcomittee on Investigations, which is looking into charges of corruption in boxing.
Earlier in the day, the subcommittee heard accusations that linked the promoter Don King to organized crime.


Events: Plants, Homes And a Hoedown on L.I.
Gardening Competition  Gateway National Recreation Area, Floyd Bennett Field, near Exit 11S on the Belt Parkway, Brooklyn; (212) 233-2926 or (718) 338-7441.
The City Gardeners' Harvest Fair will be held from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. on Saturday and Sunday.
The 34 gardening competitions will include awards for the largest tomato and pumpkin, and best roses, dahlias, figs, peaches, arrangement of herbs and garden floral bouquet.


Forget the Exercise, Look for Mutant Proteins
Lodged between the limestone drop of the Dolomites and the indigo spread of Lake Garda, the 996 residents of Limone possess 63 hotels, plenty of restaurants, the income from a million tourists a year and, in a modest way, the secret of life.
For a decade, the people of this Italian resort have known that somewhere in their genes lurks a mutation that produces a protein that, as Felicita Fava puts it, "cleans the blood."


Oshap Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Heartland Partners reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Buffett Lifts Stake in Wells Fargo to 10.75%
Warren E. Buffett, chairman of Berkshire Hathaway Inc., has increased his stake in Wells Fargo &amp; Company to 10.75 percent, up from 9.7 percent, by buying shares worth about $41.5 million, according to filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Wells Fargo shares closed today at $69.625, up $1.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Mr.
Buffett bought 613,500 shares in Wells Fargo, California's second-largest bank, between Aug. 4 and 10, at prices from $66.80 to $68.22 a share, according to S.E.C. filings.


Washington Hts. Drug Sweep Nets 49
There was a jeweler, a carpet layer and an electrical engineer, a pipe fitter, a college student and an auditor at the Internal Revenue Service.
There were men and women, from 18 to 63 years old, most of them white, most of them from New Jersey suburbs, and all of them arrested for buying drugs in Washington Heights.
In a 12-hour undercover operation that was intended to send a clear message to residents on both sides of the Hudson River, the police arrested 49 people on Tuesday and seized 36 vehicles they say were used in buying drugs.


IDB Communications Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sunshine-Jr. Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Witness Cites A Phone Plot To Aid Uncle
In a crucial and bitter day of testimony, the nephew of Alejandro Henriquez said yesterday that his uncle, sitting in jail, asked him to call the police and news organizations to convince them that the killer of a woman and two girls was still on the loose.
"He wanted me to pretend like I was the killer," the nephew, John Anthony Ramirez, 20 years old, said in State Supreme Court in the Bronx.
"He told me to disguise my voice, to be careful not to get caught, to keep it a secret between me and him."


Integrated Waste Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


HOME IMPROVEMENT
MANY old-fashioned techniques for using paint to simulate depth and texture on walls and other flat surfaces have gained new popularity in recent years.
Sponging and cloth distressing, or ragging, are two of the simplest.
Each involves applying two or more colors of paint and requires a moderate amount of experimentation and practice.
But both are basically easy and can produce stunning effects.
Ordinary acrylic latex or alkyd interior house paint can be used.
Latex paint dries quickly, allowing several layers to be applied in a short time, and it can be thined with water and cleaned up with soap and water.
Alkyd paint dries more slowly, which is sometimes an advantage, but thinning and cleanup require paint thinner. (When using thinner, follow the manufacturer's safety precautions. Wear a mask with a charcoal filter to avoid breathing fumes, and rubber gloves to prevent getting thinner on skin.)


Another Remarkable Story Of the Brand-Name Lexicon
THERE'S Landmark and Lifemark, Goodmark and Gulfmark, Southmark and Torchmark.
Is there room for another such name to make its mark?
A bevy of advertising, communications and corporate identity companies fervently hope so as they embark on an extensive, and expensive, effort to persuade consumers to associate the name Lexmark with a line of office supplies and equipment like typewriters and laser printers.


Two Leaders at the Opposite Ends of the Fairway
As the final major tournament of the year, the 74th P.G.A.
Championship, which begins Thursday at the Bellerive Country Club, is most attractive as a battle between a select few to win the official stamp as the best player of 1992.
This year's chosen elite are Fred Couples, winner of the Masters; Nick Faldo, the British Open champion; Tom Kite, the United States Open champion, and Davis Love, a three-time winner.
Their edge is so clearcut that the PGA of America, showing admirable stage presence, has joined Couples, Faldo and Kite in a threesome for the first two rounds.


The Trade Accord; ECONOMIC ACCORD REACHED BY U.S., MEXICO AND CANADA TO LOWER TRADE BARRIERS
The United States, Canada and Mexico today formally announced a comprehensive plan for free trade across North America and portrayed it as an opportunity for greater economic growth for all three nations.
The agreement was greeted enthusiastically by business groups generally, although some American executives complained about last-minute concessions by American negotiators.


CHRONICLE
When Gilda Radner, who died of ovarian cancer in 1989, was in remission, "She would go out, a turban wrapped around her little bald head, and play tennis with Mel Brooks and Anne Bancroft and Dick Van Patten and other friends," her husband, GENE WILDER, recalled yesterday.
"She would laugh and dance and play, and tennis became a symbol of life for her."
That is why tennis is the centerpiece of a benefit that Mr.
Wilder, MANDY PATINKIN and JOEL SIEGEL, the television entertainment critic, have organized.
It is to be held on Saturday at Ivan Lendl's Grand Slam Tennis Club in Bedford, N.Y.
Proceeds from the event, a round-robin tennis tournament, will go to the down payment on a house in Manhattan that will be called Gilda's Club.
It will be a support center for people with cancer and their families.


RPS Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Global Ocean Carriers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Boston Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Courier Advances in Ohio  Top-seeded Jim Courier had little trouble defeating Richard Schmidt, 6-3, 6-2, last night in the second round of the $1.4 million ATP Championship at Mason, Ohio.
Courier, who won the Australian and French Opens this year, said he was having no truble adjusting to the hardcourt surface, similar to the one that will be used at the United States Open, which begins Aug. 31 in Flushing Meadows.
GOLF  U.S.
Takes Junior Title  The United States won the first world junior team championship yesterday at Izumo, Japan, with a three-round total of 1,109 strokes by five players.
Justin Roof had rounds of 70-74-74 for a 218 total, the best among the participants, to lead the American team to the 18-stroke triumph over Sweden.
The championship, for golfers 17 years old or younger, was held on the 6,697-yard, par-72 Izumo Taisha Country Club course. (AP) Muehr Continues Hot Hand: Michael Muehr, a 20-year-old junior at Duke, was the medalist yesterday in the United States Golf Association Amateur qualifying at the Shore Oaks Golf Club at Farmingdale, L.I.
Muehr, of the Roxiticus Golf Club of Mendham, N.J., and winner of the Metropolitan Golf Association Amateur championship Sunday, had rounds of 72-69 for a one-over-par 141 total over the 6,845-yard course.
Muehr and four others advanced to the finals Aug. 25-30 at Muirfield Village at Dublin, Ohio.
Joining Muehr were Vic Gerard of the host club with a 68-74-142; Paul Antenucci of Ridgewood Country Club, Paramus, N.J., with 71-73-144; Robert Fisher of Bowling Green, Milton, Conn., with 73-72-145, and Craig Kamps of South Africa, with 71-74-145. (AP)


Defying Veto Threat, House Passes Education Bill
Brushing off the threat of a veto, House Democrats overwhelmingly passed a bill today that would funnel $846 million a year to state and local governments to devise comprehensive changes in elementary and secondary education.
The strongest Administration complaint is that the measure provides neither a way for the Federal Government to subsidize tuition at private or parochial schools nor a program to enable parents to choose public schools outside their children's district.


How to Judge South Africa
In a remarkable scene last week, the once-illegal African National Congress marched peacefully on Pretoria, erstwhile seat of apartheid.
There Nelson Mandela addressed a protest rally on the steps of the building in which his former jailer, President F. W. de Klerk, has his office.
Commendably, the two leaders each spoke with sober urgency -- for if they cannot find common ground, South Africa may well come apart.
This has been a tense and violent summer for South Africa, beginning with the Boipatong massacre on June 17, which claimed more than 40 lives.
Mr.
Mandela broke off constitutional talks with a Government he blamed for the bloodshed.
To hammer home their outrage, the A.N.C. and its allies called a two-day general strike that resulted in 50 more deaths.


Berry Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Ornamental Grasses
Q.
To improve the foliage texture in a partly shaded area, I would like to add some ornamental grasses.
Are there any that will manage with about four hours of sun? -- Ronald Davids Jr., Columbus, Ohio.
A.
It is true that the majority of ornamental grasses do best in full sun, but a number will also tolerate shade, where their narrow foliage adds elegant contrasting lines.


Richard Black, 90, Antarctic Explorer With Admiral Byrd
Richard B. Black, a retired rear admiral in the Naval Reserve who assisted Rear Adm.
Richard E. Byrd in his explorations of Antarctica, died on Tuesday at the Fernwood Nursing Home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 90 years old.
Admiral Black died of cancer, his family said.


Noven Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


United Systems Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In-House Move By Big Coke Bottler
Coca-Cola Enterprises has decided upon an in-house consolidation of its local media planning and buying, a spokeswoman said yesterday, confirming a report this week in Inside Media.
The decision means that responsibilities for more than $50 million in annual billings will be relinquished by McCann-Erickson in New York, which has handled those duties from regional offices in cities like Los Angeles.
The spokeswoman, Laura Brightwell, said the decision was made to conform with previous practices at the Johnston Coca-Cola Bottling Group, which merged with Coca-Cola Enterprises in December and whose executives now run the company.
She added that it had "absolutely no bearing on McCann's relationship with the Coca-Cola Company," for which the agency creates campaigns for brands like Coca-Cola Classic.
The Coca-Cola Company is a minority owner of Coca-Cola Enterprises.


Millionaire Marathoner? It'll Be a Two-Hour Drill
Ten years after Fred Lebow predicted that a marathoner would break the two-hour barrier by the year 2000, the New York Road Runner's Club is putting its money where his mouth is.
Lebow, the club president and the director of the New York City Marathon, announced yesterday that anybody who crosses the finish line of the 1992 Marathon on Nov. 1 in less than two hours will stagger away with $1 million, a bonus also being offered to any woman who breaks 2 hours 15 minutes.
The bonuses will be in addition to the standard first-place prize of $20,000 and a Mercedes-Benz auto.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Winard Harper Quartet  Condon's 117 East 15th Street Manhattan Through Sunday
For perhaps a third of his quartet's late set on Tuesday night at Condon's, Winard Harper used brushes, a drummer's quietest and least showy implements.
With them, he stirred up crosscurrents of rhythm, making the drums swish, scurry, whisper and snap as he urged the soloists along.


Bulls Sign Houston, Top Pick
The National Basketball Association champion Chicago Bulls signed former Oklahoma State forward BYRON HOUSTON, the 27th player selected in the first round of the N.B.A. draft, to a multiyear contract yesterday.
Terms of the pact were not revealed.


Zynaxis Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yorba Linda Journal; Painting of Heroic Size Shows Nixon to Match
His gaze is grim and earnest.
His white raincoat is tugged slightly by the breeze.
One hand rests protectively on the head of a child while the other reaches out to succor a desperate refugee.
Yet another Richard M. Nixon has emerged in a painting, 10 feet by 6 feet, to be unveiled Thursday at his Presidential library, alongside replays of the Checkers speech, excerpts from the Watergate tapes and mementoes of diplomatic triumphs.


Review/Music; 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue' Tries For a Comeback in Washington
"1600 Pennsylvania Avenue" was run over on its way to Broadway 16 years ago and has been in traction ever since.
Its producers wanted one more smiling face for the Bicentennial, but Leonard Bernstein and Alan Jay Lerner, who wrote the music and the words, had more earnest matters on their minds.
Revised (or vandalized, according to your tastes) by others, the show ran for seven performances at the Mark Hellinger Theater and disappeared.
This musical-as-social-tract has been revived by the Indiana University Opera Theater, which brought a basically student production to the Kennedy Center Tuesday night.
Presenting the show as a rehearsal, with the players in street clothes and a small orchestra concealed at the back of the stage, the Indiana company operated from an original script and score submitted by the two creators before the first run-throughs, long before the ultimate editing in which they had no voice.


Getting a Running Shoe in the Door
Call it the power of the press.
Since Consumer Reports awarded the Saucony Jazz 3000 shoe the magazine's top rating and the coveted "best buy rating" for good value in May, the $68 running shoe has been flying off retailers' shelves.
Sales have doubled in the last few months, depleting inventories and causing some shortages for retailers.
For the manufacturer, Hyde Athletic Industries, the rave review represents another chance to siphon some sales from Nike and Reebok, which together hold about half the $552-million-a-year market, compared with Hyde's 3 percent.


Systemix Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Creative Technology Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Court Date Set for Jemison
The Rev.
T.
J.
JEMISON pleaded innocent yesterdayin Lafayette, La., to Federal charges that he lied when he told a jury he didn't try to buy the silence of DESIREE WASHINGTON, the victim in the rape trial of MIKE TYSON.
Tyson was found guilty last February and is serving a six-year prison sentence.
United States Magistrate PAMELA TYNES then set an Oct. 5 trial date and allowed Jemison to remain free on a $100,000 unsecured appearance bond.
Tynes said Jemison's travel will not be restricted as long as he appears in court when required.


More Trouble for Phar-Mor
Youngstown (Ohio) State is suing the World Basketball League team owned by the chairman of the university's trustees for unpaid arena rent.
The suit was filed against the Youngstown Pride, which is owned by MICHAEL I. MONUS, the ousted chairman of the Phar-Mor drugstore chain.


National Sea Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Knew of Possible Survivors In Indochina, Reagan Aides Say
Three top Reagan Administration officials responsible for tracking the cases of United States servicemen missing in Vietnam said today that the Government had known for nearly 20 years that some American prisoners of war may have been alive in Indochina when troops were withdrawn in 1973.
But in testimony to the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs the three officials expressed doubts that any prisoners remained alive in captivity now.
U.S.
Lost Its Chance
The officials, part of an Administration that sought to focus new attention on the issue in the 1980's, testified that they had always assumed that there were American prisoners of war alive in Indochina in 1973.
They also charged that the United States lost its best chance of finding out what happened to all unaccounted-for Americans by not pressing the issue forcefully in the years immediately after its withdrawal from Indochina.


Windmere Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Riverside Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Science &amp; Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Top Yield Is 6.13% For Seattle Issue
Seattle is offering $179.5 million of municipal light and power revenue and revenue refunding bonds through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
The maximum yield is 6.13 percent for bonds due in 2015 through 2017, with the rest of the offering priced to yield from 4.6 percent in 1993 to 4.05 percent in 1995, 4.60 percent in 1997, 5.35 percent in 2002, 5.90 percent in 2007 and 6.10 percent in 2012 through 2014.


Radiation Care Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SafetyTek Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Presidential Realty Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Chair, A Drawer: It's Magic
ROBERTO GIL, a Harvard University-trained architect, started designing a small chair for himself and ended up making chairs for children.
"I wanted a little stool from which to do my painting," he said.
"Then I realized it could be for children."
Mr.
Gil, who has no children, was also influenced by a friend in charge of a children's-design advocacy group, who bemoaned the lack of well-made children's furniture.


Protein Databases Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; Its Red Menace Gone, G.O.P. Platform Re-Aims
Since the 1920's, the foreign policy plank of the Republican Party's platform has been grounded in anti-Communism.
Just four years ago, the platform emphasized freedom for "all those living in captive nations," proclaimed "America's commitment to aid freedom-fighters against the Communist oppression" and promised "resistance to Marxist expansionism."


American Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kabul Bombs Rebels, But Shelling Continues
Countering a week of rocket attacks on the capital by renegade rebels, the Afghan Government sent fighter jets today to bomb guerrilla positions east of Kabul.
There were no immediate reports of casualties from the bombing raid, which trapped terrified families in their homes.
Residents say the violence is the most intense since the Muslim rebel factions banded together to topple the Communist regime of President Najibullah in April.


Maxim Integrated Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Signal Apparel Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Richfood Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


North European Oil Royalty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Apolitical L. L. Bean?
To the Editor:
Leon A. Gorman, president of L. L. Bean, claims in his Aug. 4 letter that his company "does not endorse any political campaigns and never makes any contributions to political parties or candidates." Yet you report in your July 27 news article on Linda Lorraine Bean's campaign for Maine's First Congressional District, Ms.
Bean was permitted to use an L. L. Bean boot stitching room for a television advertisement and to make a point of connecting the company's name, which she says "means integrity and reliability," with her own.


Strange New Pals in the K.G.B.
Many Americans grimly recall the fearful 1950's when the mere allegation of Communist sympathies could destroy careers and reputations.
Nobody was immune from suspicion, and it made no difference that accusers were frequently anonymous -- and mistaken.
Now, though the Soviet threat has evaporated, the search for Red spies has revived -- with former K.G.B. agents serving as trusted sources for judgments about the probity of deceased Americans.


On the Flip Side of Fame


Patrick Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


LaDonne H. Schulman, 56, Dies; Geneticist Studied RNA Molecule
Dr.
LaDonne H. Schulman, a prominent researcher in advanced genetics at Albert Einstein College of Medicine, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 56 years old.
The college said the cause of death was cancer.


Money Market Fund Yields Take a Slight Downturn
Yields offered by money market funds took a slight downturn in the latest week after appearing to stablize the week before, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
The seven-day compounded and simple average yields for tax-exempt funds were both down 4 basis points, to 2.18 percent and 2.16 percent, respectively.
With the 30-day average compound and simple yields at 2.17 percent and 2.19 percent, respectively, both averages were down a basis point from last week's computation.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Market Place; Syntex Prospects Are Re-evaluated
IN the best of times, the Syntex Corporation has been the subject of takeover speculation simply because it is one of the few remaining relatively small independent companies in the traditional pharmaceuticals industry.
So when the company announced a shortfall in earnings last Thursday, sending its share price plunging, it set analysts to work speculating anew.
Syntex shares, which were trading at $34 at the beginning of last week, fell to a 52-week low of $29.375 on Friday, a day after the company said earnings for its fourth fiscal quarter would be equal to or just above the 38 cents a share it reported in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Analysts estimated earnings at 41 cents to 51 cents for the quarter, which ended July 31.
The shares closed yesterday at $30.875, up $1.


Leon's Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Boy, 5, at Day Camp Drowns in City Pool
A day camp's normal summer outing at a public swimming pool in Manhattan took a deadly turn yesterday when a 5-year-old boy drowned.
Shortly before noon, Jason Chalas of 90 Ellwood Street in Manhattan was found unconscious in a shallow pool at Highbridge Park, at 173d Street and Amsterdam Avenue in Washington Heights, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
The boy was pronounced dead on arrival at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
Officer McInnis said he was with a summer day camp called Qisqueya at Public School 218 in Manhattan.


Review/Art; Unnoticed, A Bernini Trove In Venice
While the crowds here this summer have been lining up to see the well-publicized shows of Antonio Canova's sculptures at the Museo Correr and of Leonardo drawings at the Palazzo Grassi, one of the most surprising exhibitions of the season has gone largely unnoticed.
It is off the beaten track, on an upper floor of the Ca' d'Oro, a museum whose permanent collection of paintings and sculptures attracts a steady but relatively small number of tourists.
Fewer than half a dozen of the people who visited the Ca' d'Oro one recent morning found their way to the exhibition of 69 terra-cotta sculptures, which has been somewhat misleadingly titled "On the Origins of Canova," apparently to link it, however tenuously, with the popular Canova retrospective.
There is not a Canova to be seen.
But there are more than a dozen terra cottas attributed to Giovanni Lorenzo Bernini, and almost as many by Alessandro Algardi, whose reputation trailed only Bernini's in Rome during the middle of the 17th century.
Francois Duquesnoy is represented, along with Stefano Maderno, Pierre Legros, Camillo Rusconi and many of the other leading sculptors working in Italy during the extraordinarily fertile years between roughly 1600 and 1750.


Surgical Technologies Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mid-South Insurance Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Tricks for the Dog Days of Summer


Mercer International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Swift Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A chart on Tuesday with an article about the search committee for a New York City Police Commissioner referred incorrectly to Gerald W. Lynch, president of the John Jay College of Criminal Justice.
Mr.
Lynch is a former chairman of the New York City Police Foundation.
The current head is Robin L. Farkas.


Parker &amp; Parsley Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tele-Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TransNet Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Charter Federal reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY CROSSING THE BRIDGE TO BUY DRUGS
There were a jeweler, a carpet layer and an electrical engineer, a pipe fitter, a college student and an auditor at the Internal Revenue Service.
There were men and women, from 18 to 63 years old, most of them from the suburbs of New Jersey, and all of them arrested for buying drugs in Washington Heights.
In all, 49 people were arrested and 36 vehicles seized in a 12-hour undercover operation intended to send a clear message to residents on both sides of the Hudson River.
B3.
POLICE SERGEANT RETURNED TO PAYROLL
A police sergeant indicted on charges of hitting a Brooklyn community leader and beating her son was restored to the police payroll.
B2.
A NEPHEW'S TESTIMONY
In a crucial and bitter day of testimony, the nephew of Alejandro Henriquez said in court that his uncle, sitting in jail, asked him to call the police and news organizations to convince them that the killer of a woman and two girls was still on the loose.
B3.
An Amtrak train on its way from Penn Station to Newport News, Va., derailed, injuring 70.
B10.
REGION PROVIDING HELP FOR THE ABUSED
Though wife beating seems improbable amid the beachfront mansions of East Hampton, it is serious enough that the town has taken the highly unusual step of financing a private shelter for battered women, one of only three shelters for all of Long Island.
A woman named Martha is one of those who have already benefited from the community's concern.
Before turning to the shelter she lived through a menacing marriage punctuated with abuse.
B7.
ACCREDITATION FOR LAW SCHOOL
The transfer of the University of Bridgeport's law school to Quinnipiac College was approved by the American Bar Association as it granted provisional accreditation for the school, now known as the Bridgeport School of Law at Quinnipiac College.
The law school seceded from the University of Bridgeport last winter.
B7.
A NEW MECCA FOR ARTISTS
With its picturesque town green, Litchfield, Conn., has always been attractive to tourists.
But in the last year, it has also become a center for artists, as more than a half dozen galleries and an active artists' guild have opened.
Litchfield Journal, B7.
FERRARO TO START SHOWING TV ADS
Hoping to solidify her lead in the polls and force her rivals to spend precious funds, former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro has become the first candidate for the Democratic Senate nomination to broadcast television advertisements.
B4.
The Reverend Al Sharpton shows up in FBI videotapes with a Genovese capo. B14.
SEEKING TO SAVE PAST SPLENDOR
In 1939, moviegoers sat mesmerized before the 50-foot screen at the Loew's Jersey Theater as Atlanta burned nightly in "Gone With the Wind." Last week, a new generation of viewers gathered in the lobby of the now-closed movie palace, where a $4 million fund-raising effort is under way to save the 63-year-old theater.
B4.
Chronicle B4


Accounts
*
Tyco Toys Inc., Mount Laurel, N.J., consolidated its European product advertising, previously divided among several agencies, at Bozell Worldwide Inc., London.
Bozell also handles Tyco's advertising in the United States.
First-year billings were estimated at $30 million. *
Alpert Nipon, New York, to Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, New York, to handle worldwide advertising for the fashion house and its licensee businesses.
The agency was awarded the account, with billings estimated to exceed $4 million, in a review that included three other shops, which were not named.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
3.23
5.58
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.11
5.30
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.19
5.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.99
5.94
7.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.31
7.31
8.06
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.34
9.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.16
6.16
7.03
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Inotek Tech Corp. reports earnings for Year to May 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; As Simple as Life Itself
The Republican Party has staked out "family values" as a principal theme this year, a way of reconnecting with voters who are no longer enamored of the Republicans' handling of the economy.
But the issue is not as simple as party strategists might have expected.
It is playing out in the political debate, and in the culture at large, in complicated and unpredictable ways.
And the Democrats, who watched Republicans run away with the politics of values in the 1980's, are determined not to let it happen again.


The Baker Move, at Last
After weeks of reports, President Bush is expected to announce today that Secretary of State Baker will direct his campaign.
Page A20.


Reality Sinks In, and Russian Economist Is Happy
Yegor T. Gaidar, the Acting Prime Minister of Russia, insists that the Government's economic program is still on track, despite mounting pressures from a powerful industrial lobby that has raised alarms among members of Parliament and the press who support the changes.
The 36-year-old economist said in an interview today that while compromises have been made with the industrial sector since the program began in January, these compromises have so far not undercut the targets on inflation and deficit spending agreed upon earlier this summer with the International Monetary Fund.


Marina L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


North American National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Meese Is Termed a Subject in Iran-Contra Inquiry
After five years of investigation into the Iran-contra affair, prosecutors have told lawyers for former Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d that he is a subject of their inquiry.
Nonetheless, a lawyer for Mr.
Meese said today that the former Attorney General faced no immediate danger of being charged with a crime.


Blackpool Journal; At British Resort, Even a Crystal Ball Is Gloomy
The harsh wind off the Irish Sea had scattered beachgoers along the shore like clumps of seawood thrown up by the tide.
Hats pressed to their temples, windbreakers zipped to the neck, they squatted low on the damp sand and stared at the snarling sea, passing another midsummer's afternoon on the northern England coast.
"It's a Blackpool day, it is," Shirley Wright of West Yorkshire said as she hunkered down beside the stone seawall that separates the foaming surf from Blackpool's noisy midway of souvenir shops, tourist arcades and amusement rides.
She has been here before and says she is used to the weather by now; the temperature is in the mid-60's, but the winds and overcast make the air feel like 50.


A Chinese Political Prisoner Is Said to Have Begun a Hunger Strike
A prominent Chinese political prisoner was believed to have begun a hunger strike today to protest the way he has been treated, his wife said.
The prisoner, Wang Juntao, a 34-year-old researcher, writer and political campaigner who is serving a 13-year term for his involvement in the Tiananmen Square demonstrations of 1989, will take only water until a Government official agrees to meet with him at Yanqing Prison and study his situation, Mr.
Wang's wife, Hou Xiaotian, said.


United Financial Banking Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Somali Warlord Agrees to Allow U.N. to Protect Its Relief Supplies
In a step that could increase food and medicine shipments to the starving people of Somalia, the senior United Nations representative here announced today that he had won an agreement from a recalcitrant warlord for the deployment of 500 armed United Nations troops to protect the delivery of relief supplies.
The United Nations representative here, Mohammed Sahnoun, has been struggling for the last two weeks to win the concurrence of Gen.
Mohammed Farrah Aidid, the leader of one of the two main clan-based factions that have been fighting for the last 10 months.


Sage Alerting Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Organogenesis Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AT HOME WITH Virginia Kelley; Bets Dark Horses. Raised One, Too.
VIRGINIA KELLEY will always remember Aug. 16, 1977, the day the King died.
And she will never forget who told her: Her firstborn son, Bill Clinton.
"I was right in the middle of an anesthetic," recalled Mrs.
Kelley, a nurse-anesthetist for 35 years.
"My children never, ever called me in the operating room. They were just cautioned it was not the place to call me ever, unless it was an emergency.


Venture Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Mangling the Language Is Bipartisan
To the Editor: Re Midge Decter's prescriptive pill
to ward off "potatoe" through drill:
Even then, in sterner times,
before the rule of drill was stilled,
true spellers took to writing rhymes
to while away the pain
as Teacher drilled in vain.
Spellers are a blueblood guild.
Born. Not drilled. CYNTHIA OZICK New Rochelle, N.Y., July 30, 1992


Sports of The Times; The Value of Just Being There
SOMEWHERE between Millington, Tenn., where Ron Fraser's long Olympic journey began in June, and Washington, where it ended on Tuesday, something happened to his point of view.
The coach of the United States baseball team started out determined to win a medal, and returned grateful just for having had the chance to compete.
Maybe Fraser's altered outlook could be traced to his room in the Olympic Village, with young people all around, or maybe from those post-game dining-hall meals at 3 o'clock in the morning.


Pitino and Kentucky Returning To Garden for Holiday Festival
RICK PITINO will return to Madison Square Garden for the first time since leaving as coach of the Knicks when his Kentucky team will play in the E.C.A.C.
Holiday Festival in December.
The Wildcats, who have a 65-24 record since Pitino became coach at the start of the 1989-90 season, will meet Rutgers in the tournament's opening game on Dec. 28.
In the other game, St.
John's, which has won a record 11 Holiday Festival titles, will face Manhattan.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
Amid an active week for municipal bond issues, New York City made yesterday's biggest deal, pricing $1.2 billion of general obligation bonds through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
The proceeds from the bonds, which are backed by the full faith and credit of the city, will be used to refund earlier issues that carry higher interest rates.
Among the new bonds that were tentatively offered, the maximum yield was 6.60 percent for a 6 1/4 percent debt security due in 2021.
The rest of the serial bond issue was priced to yield from 3 percent in 1993 to 5.3 percent in 1997, 6.2 percent in 2002, 5.9 percent in 2007 and 6.60 percent in 2010 through 2020, the underwriters said.


Health Care Market Has Failed Consumers
To the Editor:
"The Guts to Reform Health Care" (editorial, Aug. 2) again urges that the "fix" for our broken health care system is "managed competition." President Bush seems sympathetic (letter, Aug. 2) when he writes that "market-based reforms are the best way to make radical changes."
But in the health care arena, it's the market that has failed consumers.
Managed competition is a catch-all phrase to describe only tinkering with the private insurance market.
That's a fix in no way equal to the task.
The proposal does not go far enough to contain the costs charged by doctors, hospitals and other medical providers.
Nor would it eliminate the redundant and wasteful administrative expenses of private insurers and intermediaries.
Managed competition could increase such costs, depending on how much is ultimately spent for bargaining expenses.


Motion Picture Academy Names President
Robert Rehme, a film producer, is the new president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, the academy announced last week.
Mr.
Rehme is co-chairman of Neufeld/ Rehme Productions, whose films include "Patriot Games" and "Necessary Roughness." He replaces Karl Malden, who served for three years.
Mr.
Malden will hold the title of immediate past president and will remain on the board of governors for one year.
Previously, Mr.
Rehme was first vice president and vice president of the Academy, which sponsors the annual Academy Awards and film-study programs.
His term lasts one year.


Steve's Homemade Ice Cream reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Last Place Is Last Place Showalter Expected to Be
Buck Showalter has agonized over the steady stream of setbacks, piling up one after the other and turning what once looked like a promising season into a gloomy march through August.
The manager has chastised his club in meetings, he has unsuccessfully pleaded with management to release the players he felt hurt the club and he has watched more film than Siskel and Ebert.
Still, the Yankees continued losing until they kicked away 13 of 17 games and plummeted into a last-place tie with Cleveland this week.


Mets and A's Are Pitching From the Stretcher
If they had a World Series for teams that have used the disabled list most often and most prominently, the Mets would play the Oakland Athletics this season.
Interestingly, the Athletics remain serious contenders for a spot in the real World Series despite their siege of injuries.
The Mets?
They unmasked themselves as pretenders before suffering a remarkable run of serious injuries to starting players in the last two weeks.
They had some significant injuries before this stretch, but unlike the Athletics, they were not able to overcome them.


Pool Energy Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Aiming To Stop Practice of 'Me First'
It is not exactly a revelation that boxing is a "me-first" business, whose loose structure has always encouraged improvisations in greed and power by some of those who control it.
But that's what the Senate's Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations was intent on showing in two days of hearings earlier this week.


Samuel Manu-Tech reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Storage Properties Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


National Convenience Stores reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Little Commercial Interest On G.O.P. Convention Floor
LIVE from Houston, it's the "Watching Paint Dry" show!
It's the "Measuring Redwood Growth" program!
It's a special called "No Two Snowflakes Are Alike: Myth or Reality?"!
Any of that imaginary fare might prove more compelling to advertisers and agencies than what the television networks will actually broadcast next week.
Commercial time during the Republican National Convention, which will run next Monday through Thursday, is about as much in demand as the Vegetarian Party's candidate for President would be for rallies at Spam factories.


Hanson reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Music; Mozart, 12, vs. Mozart, 14: Youth Wins
In matters of child development, and especially in the case of Mozart's, one expects the opera of a 14-year-old to be more satisfying than that of a 12-year-old novice in the field.
And yet, if these early stage works continue to be revived, "La Finta Semplice" (1768) may end up more satisfying to audiences than "Mitridate, Re di Ponto" (1770).
The difference, I think, has less to do with Mozart's startling compositional skills than his subject matter.
Like most teen-agers, the composer was more a copier of life's grander themes than a player in them.
No matter the powers of description, the tragedian must comprehend before he can describe.
It is this, in the end, that makes "Mitridate," whose performance on Monday at Alice Tully Hall began two weeks of Mozart operas in concert, less penetrable than "La Finta Semplice," which followed it Wednesday evening.


C.I.A. Man Erupts in Anger At Iran-Contra Prosecutor
Clair E. George, the former top Central Intelligence Agency official charged with lying to Congress and investigators about the Iran-contra affair, erupted in anger at his accusers on the witness stand today.
In a voice brimming with resentment, Mr.
George shouted at a Federal prosecutor, maintaining that he had not lied but rather had been set up by members of Congress who did not like the agency.
He also said he had been persecuted by the office of the independent counsel, whose members were desperate to indict someone in the Iran-contra affair.


New Confidence for Capriati
Like virtually any teen-ager with a gold medal on her kitchen table, a million dollars in the bank and call waiting on her telephone line, 16-year-old JENNIFER CAPRIATI was on the phone at her home in Saddlebrook, Fla., yesterday, reminiscing about the highlights of her summer (winning the Olympic singles title), discussing her dreams for the future (winning the United States Open) and giggling about her social life (meeting "a few Italians" at the Olympics).
During a conference call arranged by the Kraft tour, Capriati discussed the importance of her Olympic victory over STEFFI GRAF, the last of the top-five ranked women to fall to her.
"It really proved a lot to me," she said.
"It built up my confidence. Steffi was always the one I couldn't beat. Now I feel I've passed a certain level."


Lands' End reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


QE2 Was Slightly Off Course At Grounding, Captain Says
The Queen Elizabeth 2 was about two-thirds of a mile north of her intended course and moving to distance herself from shoals off Cuttyhunk Island when she was jarred by an uncharted obstacle that left long gashes in her hull, the vessel's captain testified today.
But the captain, Robin A. Woodall, gave no indication why the luxury liner had abandoned the more southerly course that would have taken her through deeper waters.


Pricor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rabin Hailed by Jewish Officials, Relieved Over Improved Relations
Fresh from securing President Bush's support for $10 billion in United States loan guarantees, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel received a warm reception in Manhattan yesterday from officials of American Jewish groups, many of whom expressed relief that several years of cool relations between the Bush Administration and Israel had come to an end.
Mr.
Rabin, in his first major meeting with officials of American Jewish groups since he led the Labor Party to an election victory in June, pledged a "new order of national security policies" in Israel that focused on jobs and education.
He outlined his Government's program to the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations, an umbrella group of 50 national Jewish organizations.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Lester Archambeau, defensive end, to a two-year contract.
Agreed to terms with Perry Kemp, wide receiver.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Traded Stan Humphries, quarterback, to the San Diego Chargers for a conditional draft pick.


Truce for Chrysler and Kerkorian
Two top executives and an outside director of the Chrysler Corporation held a peace conference today with Kirk Kerkorian, the owner of 9.9 percent of the company's stock, and managed to quell his apprehensions about the auto maker's management.
Following an hourlong meeting in Mr.
Kerkorian's office in Beverly Hills, Calif., the billionaire investor issued a statement saying he was "convinced that the interests of the Chrysler's shareholders were being well represented by the current board."


Illinois Raising $600 Million
Illinois is offering $600 million of tax-exempt general obligation notes through Lehman Brothers, which successfully bid for the issue.
The borrowing consists of $300 million of 3 1/4 percent notes due March 15, 1993, that are priced to yield 2.50 percent, and $300 million of similar 3 1/4 percent notes due May 15, 1993, priced to yield 2.60 percent.


3 Exchanges Agree to Stay, and New York City to Pay Half
At least three of the city's five commodities exchanges will stay in New York under an agreement announced yesterday to build a new trading headquarters in lower Manhattan.
The agreement, announced by the exchanges, the city and the state, is intended to preserve 9,000 jobs and $50 million in tax revenues and calls on the city and state to finance half the cost of the new center.
The three exchanges -- the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange; the New York Cotton Exchange and the Commodity Exchange -- said the new trading center would cost about $150 million and would be considerably smaller than the center that was initially planned to house all five commodities exchanges, which had threatened last year to move to New Jersey.


Vest (H.D.) Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are to close soon.
Closing This Weekend
"FIRES IN THE MIRROR: CROWN HEIGHTS, BROOKLYN AND OTHER IDENTITIES," Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, Greenwich Village.
A one-woman show featuring Anna Deavere Smith; directed by Christopher Ashley.
Through Sunday.
Remaining performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M., and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 598-7150.
"ETUDES, 1935-48," Yoshii, 20 West 57th Street, midtown Manhattan.
Eighteen study-drawings by Alberto Giacometti.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today, 9:30 A.M. to 6:30 P.M.; Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 265-8876.
BILL FRISELL BAND, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street, Greenwich Village.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight and tomorrow at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; Sunday at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.
Tonight and tomorrow there is a $15 cover charge and a $7.50 minimum today; on Sunday there is $12 cover charge and a $7.50 minimum.
Information: (212) 255-4037.


Corrections
An entry in the News Summary on Wednesday about an agreement on American loan guarantees for Israel misidentified the Israeli Prime Minister.
He is Yitzhak Rabin, not Yitzhak Shamir.


Latest Economic Data Show More Listlessness
In a flurry of mixed but essentially uninspiring economic statistics, the Government reported today that retail sales climbed five-tenths of 1 percent in July while workers' buying power fell, even though consumer inflation was very modest.
Another report showed that first-time claims for unemployment insurance dropped 66,000 in the week that ended on Aug. 1, reversing an increase in the preceding week related to a temporary companywide shutdown by the General Motors Corporation.


LTV in Agreement to Sell Missile and Aircraft Units
The LTV Corporation agreed yesterday to sell its missile and aircraft divisions for $475 million, removing the largest remaining obstacle to its emergence from six years of bankruptcy protection.
The Loral Corporation plans to pay $261 million for the missile unit, while the Northrop Corporation joins with the Carlyle Group, an investment firm, to buy the aircraft unit for $214 million.


Review/Art; A Day in the Country, Without Leaving Manhattan
Anyone longing for a midsummer day in the country might well consider a visit to two shows of 19th-century American art on view in Manhattan, both presenting material seldom seen by local museumgoers.
The Paine Webber Art Gallery's "Up River: Selections From the Hudson River Museum of Westchester" offers paintings and drawings from a collection whose home is a Victorian mansion 20 miles north of New York City, and "The Century Association: American Masters and Masterworks" at the New-York Historical Society is the first-ever public exhibition of paintings and sculptures from one of the city's venerable private collections.
The Century Association's show is by far the more interesting of the two because of the high percentage of exceptional works as well as the historical cachet of the club (the renovation of its 1891 landmark premises on 43d Street in mid-Manhattan was the pretext for the loan of these works).
Founded in 1847 as a private club, the Century's early members included a who's who of Hudson River School painters, such as Jasper Cropsey, John Frederick Kensett, Sanford Gifford and Asher B. Durand.
The price of membership was often paid in the form of a painting, as in the case of Albert Bierstadt's remarkable scene of Union soldiers firing on Confederate forces, and the collection expanded through bequests, commissions and purchases made to bail out financially distressed members.
Among the first-rate pieces here are two very different landscapes by Durand.
Perhaps the chief esthetician of mid-19th-century American art, he spoke of painting as a way of arriving at the essential "reality" of nature.
In the gray, claustrophobic "Bash-Bish Falls," he seems to be trying to simulate physically the textures of rock and water through a subtle use of stippling.
"Kaaterskill Clove," a view of the Catskills, is by contrast one of those wide-open, dreamy American panoramas that seem, without ever losing a sense of place, to be spun entirely of light and mist.
The underlying reality here is spiritual: nature, as Durand put it in an essay, "fraught with high and holy meaning."
This quasi-religious approach is somewhat toned down in Kensett's "Mount Chocorua," whose sun-warmed, inhabited New Hampshire valley radiates a secular domestic peace.
And while Worthington Whittredge's "Crossing the Ford, Platte River, Colorado" is similarly tranquil, it also introduces reality of another kind.
The figures living along the river are American Indians whose depiction in 19th-century art, no matter how sympathetic, cannot help but strike a disturbing note for the modern viewer.
Even in Whittredge's lovely, reflective work, their presence is a reminder of the human histories, rich and often troubled, that American painting tended to pass over in its single-minded reach for the sublime.
Some of those histories do turn up in portraiture, and the Century collection holds some memorable images: an inscrutable, dogelike William Cullen Bryant by Durand (now dim and in need of cleaning, like several other paintings in the collection), John Singer Sargent's disarming and ill-fated Frank O'Meara, and John La Farge's profile likeness of a pensive 19-year-old Henry James.
It is worth noting that Durand's portraits of American Presidents are on view in the Historical Society's own Lumen Reed collection upstairs, as are superb genre paintings by William Sidney Mount, an artist whose populist subjects tend to obscure the fact that his touch and his compositional brilliance were unsurpassed among his peers.
His scene of two farmers bargaining for a horse is a marvel of interlocking geometry in which every vertical -- in the figures, the landscape and the architecture -- is just a hair off plumb, giving the whole picture a barely perceptible sway. (It was Mount's great "Power of Music" that was sold by the Century to the Cleveland Museum of Art last year.)
Finally, though the Century collection has its share of routine practitioners, it is refreshing to find painters who are seldom seen but repay attention.
Among them may be counted Homer Martin, John Bunyon Bristol and Jervis McEntee, whose charming, closely worked autumn landscapes are a cross between Corot and Cropsey.
As it happens, McEntee and Cropsey are among the high points of the "Up River" show.
The first is represented by an exquisite little pencil drawing of bare, attenuated trees; the second by "The Narrows at Lake George," a landscape whose apparently unfinished state permits a firsthand glimpse at this artist's virtuosic technique.
The show itself, however, is often disappointing.
The paintings look to be in the bloom of conservatorial health and are cleanly presented in alcoves that line either side of Paine Webber's lobby, but they are, on the whole, minor in stature, and in the absence of any overarching theme that might give them point, make for a sleepy exhibition.
An exception to this is the show's earliest work, a set of six large, hand-colored engravings with pictures and texts of scenic locations in the Hudson Valley like the New Jersey Palisades and West Point.
Engraved by the English-born John Hill, the "Hudson River Portfolio" was issued between 1821 and 1825, predating the Hudson River School.
The topographical images are of mild documentary interest, but it is the texts that fascinate.
An image of the bucolic riverside village of Fishkill is accompanied by a real-estate agent's hard sell: "There is the spirit of enterprise traversing this great state . . . a wide field for industry." One could almost hear the ax felling the wilderness, the ghostly sound of which haunted Thomas Cole two decades later.
"Up River" makes a vague gesture toward exploring this theme of human intervention in nature, but doesn't carry it through.
The title of the second half of the show, "Man's Influence," is really only a pretext for including marine paintings and urban scenes.
It is of some interest to see the hand of the folk artist emerge in a surreal-looking view of Yonkers by George Burnham in 1858, but this influence is quickly submerged when the European Barbizon and Impressionist styles make their appearance, culminating in a version of an image the show began with, the Palisades, now painted in winter as a fabric of slashed white and blue pigment.
Throughout the show there are outstanding individual moments -- Samuel Colman's lovely "Looking North From Ossining," James Renwick Brevoort's "Harvest Scene With Storm Coming Up," which seems saturated in a rich grass green, and Frederick W. Kost's near abstract sunset landscape of dark trees against a yellow sky -- but the story of American painting over the hundred-year span encompassed by "Up River" is a great deal more dynamic and less predictable than this exhibition suggests.
"The Century Association: American Masters and Masterworks" remains at the New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, near 77th Street, through Oct. 11.
"Up River:
Selections From the Hudson River Museum of Westchester" is at the Paine Webber Art Gallery, 1285 Avenue of the Americas, at 51st Street, through Oct. 2.


Corrections
The Weather Report on Tuesday and Wednesday carried erroneous figures for Monday's New York City and Westchester reservoir levels.
The level on Monday was 82.6 percent of capacity; estimated normal was 87.5 percent.
The level on Tuesday was 82.4 percent; estimated normal was 87.2 percent.


At the Bar
In the matter of its own institutional politics, the American Bar Association has always been a citadel of civility.
Like patrons at a bakery, lawyers line up politely for the presidency, working their way up through the elective ranks before facing off in genteel personality contests conducted several years in advance, lest any unseemly rancor persist by the time the winner takes office.
But the hot race at the moment, for the 1994 bar presidency, has taken on some of the negative flavor of the national Presidential campaign.
Indeed, this contest has lawyers talking about a different kind of corpus, or, to put it another way, lent a new and nasty meaning to the term "body politic."


Restaurants
To describe the River Cafe as one of New York City's most celebrated waterfront restaurants would be like calling the Metropolitan Museum of Art one of many interesting galleries along Fifth Avenue.
Other shoreline establishments around town have captivating settings, ambitious food and well-intentioned service, but no place pulls it all together like this 15-year-old creation of Michael (Buzzy) O'Keeffe.
This achievement is all the more impressive when you consider that the River Cafe has been somewhat of a culinary Harvard Business School over the years, sending graduates out into the world to make their marks.
Among the noted alumni are Larry Forgione of An American Place, Charles Palmer of Aureole and David Burke, who left the River Cafe last fall to open the Park Avenue Cafe in Manhattan.


Police Say Their Gunfire Killed Hostage
Preliminary ballistics test results show that police bullets killed a hostage who died in a shootout between gunmen and officers after a botched robbery in Corona, Queens, Tuesday night, a police official said.
The findings were discussed last night by Deputy Chief Raymond J. Abruzzi, commander of the Queens detectives.
Whether the officers' actions were proper will be decided by the Police Department's Firearms Discharge Review Board and the Queens District Attorney's office, he said.


Bombay Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


U.S. Indicts Colombians In '89 Deaths
Pablo Escobar, who is said to run the Medellin cocaine cartel, and the man described as the cartel's top assassin, Dandeny Munoz-Mosquera, were indicted in Brooklyn yesterday on Federal charges of blowing up an Avianca airliner in 1989, killing all 110 people on the plane.
When Mr.
Munoz-Mosquera was spotted and arrested in Queens last year, Federal agents were unable to charge him with anything more serious than making false statements about his identity although they said they believed that he had murdered many people in Colombia.


2 Laborers Slain In a Queens Park
Two construction workers shaping up for work yesterday in Queens were shot to death by an unidentified man who fled, the police said.
The men were among about 15 construction workers who have gathered at Baisley Pond Park in South Jamaica to talk about the day's job openings, said Jean Dorsainvil, a park employee.
He said they usually met about 7 A.M. near the tennis courts, where there are four or five benches.


Four Who Will Help Baker Run the White House and a Campaign
Janet Mullins
Assistant to the President for Political Affairs
Was Assistant Secretary of State for Legislative Affairs . . .
Known for her political insights with a strong desire to keep her life as private as possible . . . 43 years old . . .
Popular on Capitol Hill . . .
Was director of Congressional affairs for the Bush Presidential transition team . . .
Executive Director of Fund for America's Future, Vice President Bush's political action committee . . .
National Field Director for Mr.
Bush's 1988 primary campaign . . .
Chief of staff for Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, from 1985 to 1987 . . .
Legislative Director and Chief of Staff for Senator Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon, from 1979 to 1982 . . .
Was Special Assistant to the Kentucky Deputy Secretary of Commerce.
Margaret Tutwiler
Assistant to the President for Communications
Was Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs and the department's spokeswoman . . .
Known for her political savvy and ability to deal with the press . . .
Instant access to Mr.
Baker, who relies on her political judgment . . .
Was top deputy to Mr.
Baker when he led the 1988 Bush-Quayle campaign . . .
Was Mr.
Baker's Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs at the Treasury Department . . . 42 years old . . .
Served in the Reagan White House as Deputy Assistant to the President for political affairs . . .
Was public affairs representative for National Association of Manufacturers in Alabama and Mississippi before joining George Bush's 1980 campaign . . .
Hobbies include gardening and collecting Persian carpets.
Dennis B. Ross
Assistant to the President for Policy Planning
Was Director of policy planning at the State Department . . . specialist in Middle Eastern affairs, but also played major role in setting policy toward the former Soviet Union . . .
Coordinated with Moscow policies toward Iraq leading up to the Persian Gulf war . . .
Regarded as hard-working, private, nonpartisan and moderate . . .
A major architect of the Middle East peace talks since then . . .
National security adviser on the 1988 Bush-Quayle campaign and transition team . . . 43 years old . . .
Handled Middle Eastern affairs as staff member on the National Security Council from 1986 to 1988 . . .
Former deputy director of the Pentagon office that compared Soviet and American military abilities . . .
Hobbies include golf and basketball.
Robert B. Zoellick
Assistant to the President and Deputy Chief of Staff
Was Under Secretary of State for Economic and Agricultural Affairs . . .
Specialist in economics, trade and international environmental policy . . .
Known as a humorless technocrat with a talent for organization . . .
Along with Dennis B. Ross, a member of James A. Baker 3d's policy-making advisers . . .
Counselor and executive secretary in Treasury Department in 1988 . . .
In 1985, special assistant to Deputy Secretary of Treasury Richard G. Darman, who said "he can do more first-class work in 24 hours than 12 ordinary people could do in 24 hours" . . . 39 years old . . .
Staff assistant in the Justice Department's Criminal Division in early 80's . . .
Hobbies include military history and long-distance running.


Isomet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cholestech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Bystander Shot to Death By 2 Cyclists
It was just the cool summer night that brought Brian Caravello out for some lazy conversation with friends, the police said.
Too young for the local clubs, too restless to stay at home, he was sitting on the curb idly talking the hours away, when first he became a witness to a crime and then a murder victim.
A few minutes after 1 A.M. yesterday, two men on a motorcycle pulled up to a Lincoln Town Car parked only yards from where the young man and two friends were sitting behind John Adams High School in Ozone Park, Queens, the police said.
The men fired at people in the car, wounding two of them.
Then, realizing that they were being watched, they wheeled around.
Mr.
Caravello's friends were able to dash into some bushes at the corner of Centerville Street and 133d Avenue and get away, but Mr.
Caravello, 19 years old, could not.
He was struck by a single bullet to the head, the police said, shot down in the middle of the street.
He died a few hours later at Jamaica Hospital, and the police were seeking two murder suspects.
A Recent Graduate
While the suspects' motive for shooting into the car was not immediately clear, Mr.
Caravello, who lived at 104-26 109th Street in Richmond, Queens, was apparently an uninvolved bystander, said Detective Kim Royster, a police spokeswoman.
Wounded in the car were Edward Hurlman, 19, who was shot in the chest and was in critical condition at Jamaica Hospital.
Danielle Cornand, 17, was shot in the arm , and was in stable condition.
Detective Royster said that at least two other people were in the car but were not hit by the gunfire.
The shooting jolted the neighborhood where Mr.
Caravello, one of eight children, lived with his parents.
His family said he had just graduated from John Adams High School and after a period of indecision, had begun to talk of going to college.
He was nicknamed Bear, an older sister, Lorietta Caravello said, because he lifted weights, but she described him as a gentle young man, still figuring out a direction for his life.
Mr.
Caravello and his friends were sitting near the high school playground, where teen-agers typically gather, residents said.
"He was just at the wrong place at the wrong time," Ms.
Caravello said.
"They're not old enough to get into clubs yet. It's just a place to be for kids. If they wanted to be loud, they can be loud there and not worry about what neighbors say."
When the motorcycle pulled up to the car, the two suspects talked for a few minutes with the people in the car, Detective Royster said.
Suddenly, they fired six to eight shots into the car, striking Mr.
Hurlman and Ms.
Cornand, who were sitting in the rear seat.
At this point, detectives said, Mr.
Caravello and his friends, trying to avoid detection and the bullets, lay on the street.
But the suspects saw them and began firing their way.


Increased Water Use in Nassau Spurs Fears of Contamination
Despite conservation measures, water use in Nassau County is on the rise, raising new concerns about contamination of the county's underground water supply in the future, an official said today.
State Assemblyman Thomas P. DiNapoli of Great Neck said that despite restrictions, including limits in some places on watering lawns and washing cars, water use rose 9 percent between 1990 and 1991.


I.C.H. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/TV Weekend; Unforeseen Results Of Fighting in the Gulf
Tonight's edition of "20/20" calls attention to veterans of the Persian Gulf war who say they have been afflicted with strange symptoms since their return home.
The complaints include aching joints, chronic fatigue, bleeding gums, rashes and loss of hair and memory.
The Pentagon assigned a medical team at Walter Reed Army Hospital to study 79 cases in Indiana, where a disproportionate number have appeared.
The head of the team, Maj.
Robert Defraites, attributes 80 percent of the symptoms to the stress of readjustment to society, a diagnosis that brings sarcastic laughs from the unhappy group of soldiers Lynn Sherr interviews back home in Indiana.


Hormel &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


A Hiring By Sears Angers Rival
Monday's announcement that Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company had hired away Arthur C. Martinez from Saks Fifth Avenue brought cheers at the troubled retailer, sent its stock up -- and brought outrage at P. A. Bergner &amp; Company, an even more troubled chain that thought it had a deal with Mr.
Martinez.
Only hours before the Sears announcement, Bergner, which operates the Carson Pirie Scott department stores in Chicago and Minneapolis, was also preparing to announce that Mr.
Martinez would become its chief executive.


COMPANY NEWS: Under Foot; It's Warm, It's Fuzzy And It Sounds Great
This might not qualify as a true magic carpet, but it is getting pretty close.
Japan's largest consumer electronics company has introduced a carpet that has both a heater and stereo speakers built in.
That allows a person sitting on the carpet to be bathed in both warmth and sound at the same time.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  U.N. ACTS ON FORCE IN BOSNIA
The United Nations Security Council voted 12 to 0 to allow the use of military force to insure that food and medicine reach civilians in war-torn Bosnia and Herzegovina.
China, India and Zimbabwe abstained.
A1  ALLIES RELUCTANT TO SEND TROOPS
NATO is caught between the recommendations of its military leaders that a large troop deployment is needed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the recognition that few allies are prepared to commit troops, Western officials say.
A6
President Mitterrand is firm in limiting the role of French troops.
A6  SNIPERS FIRE AT YUGOSLAV PREMIER
Snipers opened fire on a convoy taking Prime Minister Milan Panic of Yugoslavia into the Bosnian capital for peace talks, and an ABC television producer was killed.
A6
The first American journalist reported killed in Sarajevo.
A6  TOMB OF JESUS'S PROSECUTOR
Israeli archeologists have discovered the family tomb of Caiaphas, the Jewish High Priest who presided at the trial of Jesus, in a cave on the outskirts of Jerusalem.
They say no comparable evidence exists for the remains of any other such major figure of the New Testament.
A1  FRANTIC SPENDING IN BRAZIL
Struggling to avoid impeachment, President Collor has begun a political spending campaign that bankers fear could unhinge an accord on Brazil's foreign debt.
A3  BOMB ATTACK KILLS 100 IN KABUL
Fighters of a Muslim fundamentalist faction attacked the Afghan capital with rocket-propelled bombs, killing at least 100 people and wounding hundreds more.
Hospitals are overflowing with the wounded.
A7  SOUTH AFRICA SUGGESTS AMNESTY
The South African Government called for a general amnesty to "bury the past" by forgiving crimes committed in the country's political hostilities.
The African National Congress rejected the idea of the white-minority Government pardoning public officials.
A2  TRACING POLICY ON MISSING G.I.'S
On the evening of March 29, 1973, President Richard M. Nixon told a national television and radio audience that all American P.O.W.'s were "on their way home." It was neither the beginning nor the end of the bitter P.O.W-M.I.A. story.
A11  Israel's new Prime Minister gets a warm reception in Manhattan.
A10  Beijing Journal: A Government obsessed with making money.
A4  National A12-17  BAKER TAKES OVER BUSH CAMPAIGN
President Bush appointed Secretary of State Baker to run the White House and his campaign, and both men vowed to revive the re-election campaign by putting domestic issues at the top of their agenda.
A1  WHAT BAKER CAN AND CAN'T DO
News analysis: James Baker should have no trouble imposing order upon the disarray of the Bush campaign.
But he has limits: he cannot do the candidate's job, nor can he often change the direction the political winds blow.
A1
James Baker plans to keep playing an active role in foreign policy.
A8  CLINTON TACKLES FOREIGN POLICY
Gov.
Bill Clinton issued a challenge in the area President Bush touts as his strength, the conduct of foreign policy.
With excerpts from the Governor's speech.
A15  BARBARA BUSH SPEAKS HER MIND
Two days after a Republican Party committee approved an uncompromising stance against abortion, Barbara Bush said she did not believe the issue had any place in the party platform.
Mrs.
Bush also peppered an interview with criticism of the G.O.P. chairman and her husband's opponent.
A1
The G.O.P. adopted a platform more conservative than Mr. Bush.  A16
The networks are sending full contingents to the G.O.P. convention.
A15  BUSH'S DOCTOR DISPUTES RUMORS
The President's doctor says Mr.
Bush is in excellent health, despite rumors that he is not.
The rumors, the doctor said, are probably the result of dirty political tricks.
A16  OUT OF THE CORPORATE FOLD
As fewer people work full time for big companies, more join the growing ranks of American workers outside the corporate fold that had been the ideal of work life throughout the postwar years.
Some are thriving; some are struggling.
A1  VANDALISM CAUSED DERAILMENT
Federal investigators found evidence that a derailment that injured 74 of the 127 passengers on an Amtrak train on Wednesday night had been caused by vandalism to a rail switch.
A1  DOOM OF THE DINOSAURS
Scientists said they had precisely dated a cataclysmic impact 65 million years ago that may have helped kill off the dinosaurs.
A12  C.I.A.
OFFICIAL LASHES OUT
Clair George, the former top Central Intelligence Agency official charged with lying to Congress and investigators about the Iran-contra affair, erupted in anger on the witness stand, accusing Congress of trying to set him up.
A12  OREGON FIGHTS FOR HEALTH PLAN
Oregon officials are trying to get the Bush Administration to reverse its rejection of the state's far-reaching plan to ration health care.
A17  The QE2 was off course when she grounded, her captain said.
A12  Law Page B8  Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-26  The faces of immigrants.
C1  For Children C5  Theater: Two by Stoppard.
C2  Film: "Diggstown." C1  "Johnny Suede." C5  "Single White Female." C8  Music: "La Finta Semplice." C3  Restaurants C20  Art: Hudson River School.
C17  American Impressionists.
C19  Obituaries D16  Samuel A. Hausman, an industrialist and a philanthropist.
James E. Noland, U.S. judge in stolen art case.
Sports B9-14  Auto Racing: Clifford Allison is killed in a crash.
B14  Baseball: Big names on A's and Mets' disabled lists.
B9  Boxing: Reflecting on a Senate hearing.
B14  Columns: Claire Smith on the Blue Jays.
B9  Lipsyte on an afternoon at Shea.
B11  Football: Giants' Brown arrives in camp.
B13  Jets' Mitchell passes tests.
B13  Golf: Stadler and Sauers tied in P.G.A.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  The First Friend.
Who else's choice could it be?
The U.N.'s duty in Bosnia.
New York democracy on trial.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: Change in Israel.
Garry Trudeau: Home free.
Michael Boskin: We gain.
Mexico gains.
Canada gains.
Carolyn See: Don't cry for California.


Sequa Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Friend in a Time of Need
James A. Baker 3d is a formidable political operator, and he should have no trouble in imposing order upon the disarray that he inherits as impresario of President Bush's re-election campaign.
He has Mr.
Bush's ear, and he tells him what he thinks in an uninhibited, fraternal way.
His new role will do wonders for Republican morale in the days ahead.
But Mr.
Baker is subject to the same limitations as all campaign managers.
A shrewd tactician can give an edge to a candidate, but at the Presidential level he cannot do the candidate's job, nor can he often change the direction the political winds blow.


London Bomb Cache Suspected as I.R.A.'s
Scotland Yard said today that it had seized a "very large quantity" of explosives and had arrested several people as part of an anti-terrorist operation against the Irish Republican Army in England.
The disclosure came after unconfirmed reports in British newspapers that the police had thwarted a major terrorist operation in central London, including the seizure of a truck containing a 300-pound bomb.


Baker Plans Active Foreign Policy Role From the White House
Although he is resigning as Secretary of State and moving to the White House, James A. Baker 3d and his aides plan to continue playing an active role in shaping American foreign policy from their new perch, particularly on the Middle East.
A senior official, briefing reporters immediately after Mr.
Baker's farewell speech to State Department employees, said, "The fact that we are going to the White House does not mean that we are in any way precluded from being actively involved to the extent that we have time to be or want to be."


Lowe's Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Platform; Party Takes More Conservative Stance Than Bush
Republicans today adopted a party platform embracing a degree of social and religious conservatism that at times goes beyond the stands taken by President Bush.
The most obvious example is support for a Constitutional amendment that would outlaw abortion.
Although Mr.
Bush would permit legal abortions when pregnancies were the result of rape or incest, the platform calls for prohibiting such exceptions.


Abortion Rights Law Wouldn't Work Anyway
To the Editor:
Although I take a pro-choice position, I regard the freedom of choice bill championed by Laurence H. Tribe in "Write Roe Into Law" (Op-Ed, July 27) as a dangerous folly, and I am relieved that Congress has deferred action on the bill for this session (news article, Aug. 7).
The pure pro-choice position is that no legislative body has authority over abortion, which should be strictly an individual decision.
Until recently, the debate was over whether and to what extent state legislatures have authority, and no one ever suggested Congress had authority in the matter.


Cuomo Sets Day of Decision for Court Nomination
With the names of seven people to choose from, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he planned to announce his nominee to fill a vacancy on the state's highest court, the Court of Appeals, on Aug. 24.
The vacancy was created when Judge Fritz W. Alexander 2d left the court this spring to serve as New York City's Deputy Mayor for Public Safety.


Review/Art; French Impressionism's American Cousins
American Impressionism doesn't hold a candle to the French variety, whose emphasis on form-dissolving light, high color and robust paint-handling set Western modernism in motion.
Still, it is hard to believe that the exhibition at the National Academy of Design does the American offshoot justice.
"Masterworks of American Impressionism from the Pfeil Collection" consists of paintings from the collection of Richard and Mary Jo Pfeil of Chicago.
The Pfeils have assembled their holdings over the last eight years -- a relatively brief time, during which the market for such works has become fairly competitive.
The show comes with a thick, lavishly illustrated catalogue that includes an introductory essay by William H. Gerdts, professor of art history at City University of New York, and entries by David B. Dearinger of the Fashion Institute of Technology.


N.B.A. Charity Game Set
Two United States Olympic basketball players, Chris Mullin and Scottie Pippen, will join other top National Basketball Association players in a benefit game at Madison Square Garden, Sept. 9 at 7 P.M.
Proceeds from the New York All-Star Basketball Classic will benefit Wheelchair Charities Inc., a nonprofit organization that serves quadriplegic and paraplegic patients at Goldwater Memorial Hospital on Roosevelt Island.


Footloose In a Land Of Wonders
"I AM very confident," Danny D declared, as he loped in his trademark hop-skip style to meet me.
I was walking up the ramp from the ferry.
The time was 6:50 A.M.
My confidence was less than Danny's, at least equaled by my apprehension about this strange new land.
Staten Island.
Our goal was to walk around the perimeter, peeling the plum, as it were.
We calculated our chosen route at 47 miles.


Badger Paper Mills Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film; Using Death As a Means Of Rebellion
"The Living End" was shown as part of the 1992 New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on April 3.
The film opens today at the Angelika Film Center,
18 West Houston
Street
, in Manhattan.
Black humor doesn't get much darker than "The Living End," the story of two H.I.V.-positive young men who manage to turn potential tragedy into a desperate, uproarious celebration of their new-found nihilistic freedom.
Doing himself a great disservice, the writer and director Gregg Araki labels his work "an irresponsible movie" when in fact it has the power of honesty and originality, as well as the weight of legitimate frustration.
Miraculously, it also has a buoyant, mischievous spirit that transcends any hint of gloom.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Courier and Agassi Fall
Top-seeded Jim Courier and No. 6 Andre Agassi were both eliminated in the third round of the Thriftway ATP Championships in Mason, Ohio.
David Wheaton defeated Courier, 7-5, 7-6 (7-0), and Jaime Yzaga was a 6-3, 4-6, 7-5 winner over Agassi, who was suffering from tonsillitis.
In other matches, second-seeded Stefan Edberg defeated Amos Mansdorf, 6-4, 6-3; No. 3 Pete Sampras struggled to a 2-6, 7-6 (10-8), 6-3 victory over Mark Woodforde; No. 4 Michael Chang defeated Brad Gilbert, 6-2, 6-2, and Ivan Lendl advanced by beating Cedric Pioline, 6-1, 6-2.
Fifth-seeded Petr Korda advanced when Richard Krajicek retired because of tendinitis in his right elbow. (AP) Qualifier Advances: Qualifier Kimberly Po advanced to the quarterfinals of the Virginia Slims of Los Angeles when Ros Fairbank-Nideffer retired because of an elbow injury.
In other second-round matches, No. 5 Helena Sukova defeated Jo Durie, 6-4, 1-6, 6-3, and No. 6 Zina Garrison ralllied from 2-5 down in the first set to beat Pam Shriver, 7-5, 6-2.
In a quarterfinal match last night, top-seeded Monica Seles defeated seventh-seeded Amy Frazier, 6-2, 6-0. (AP) GOLF


Change at Morgan
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company said yesterday that it had revised its accounting for investment securities to carry those securities at the lower of cost or market value.
The change, which affects $23 billion of securities, the most of any American bank, will not affect earnings for the second quarter or any prior period, the company said.
The Securities and Exchange Commission has been pushing large banks to change their accounting for securities to reflect changes in their value.
The accounting industry is moving toward similar rules.


Gains for Chinese Women Are Illusory
To the Editor:
I read "Women Face Increasing Bias as China Focuses on Profits" (front page, July 28) with great interest as a woman and as an official of a labor organization whose members are 80 percent women.
While I found the article a good one on the very complicated subject of women's position in a changing China, one point about women in manufacturing jobs needs to be clarified.
You state that women now number more than 50 million in the Chinese industrial labor force.
While it is true that any kind of employment, as opposed to none, is some progress, and that all things are relative, it is nonetheless misleading to characterize the hiring of these women in too positive a light.


James E. Noland, 72, U.S. Judge in Stolen Art Case
James E. Noland, senior judge of the Federal District Court in Indianapolis whose landmark ruling on stolen works of art drew international notice three years ago, died on Wednesday at Methodist Hospital in Indianapolis.
He was 72 years old.
His family said he died after a brief respiratory illness.


Comtrex Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Chrysler asked Alan Greenspan for help on its $6.8 billion loan package.
The company asked the Fed chairman to intercede with Germany's central bank on its behalf, because a few banks in the 152-member worldwide consortium, including a German institution, are refusing to renew their loans.
The company and analysts view the loan package as vital to its revitalization.  [ Page D1. ]
Kirk Kerkorian's apprehensions about Chrylser management were quelled.
Two top executives and an outside director of the anto maker held a peace conference with the investor, who owns 9.9 percent of the company's stock.  [ D4. ]


Tourist Shot in Midtown
A 20-year-old tourist from Rome, Italy, was shot in the leg last night as he walked near the Port Authority Bus Terminal in midtown Manhattan, the police said.
The tourist, Fabrizio Conti, was grazed in the left leg at 8:15 P.M. near the corner of 42d Street and Eighth Avenue, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.
"He felt a sharp pain, saw that he was bleeding and went up to a cop," Sergeant Mohrmann said.
Mr.
Conti was treated at Roosevelt Hospital and released.
Mr.
Conti did not hear a gunshot, Sergeant Mohrmann said, and no bullet was recovered.


Zonic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ecogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jones Plumbing Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Killing Unexpectedly Returns to Haunt Salisbury
IN the bright, crisp ambiance of the still-new Town Hall, with Samantha happily thumping her big black Labrador tail on the floor under the desk, Bud Trotta talks about fire and murder, but mostly fear.
"A lot of people are nervous about Richie getting out," said Mr.
Trotta, Salisbury's First Selectman, the top elected official.
"Is revenge going to be a factor? Who knows?"


Euro-Nevada Mining reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A front-page chart on Wednesday with an article about the North American free trade accord was based on incorrect figures for United States trade with Canada.
The Commerce Department reports that imports from Canada were $88 billion in 1989, $91.4 billion in 1990 and $91.1 billion in 1991; exports to Canada were $78.8 billion, $83.7 billion and $85.1 billion for those years.


Market Place; Mortgage Banks Scrape For Profits
WITH interest rates at their lowest level in 20 years, the opportunity for millions of homeowners to refinance their houses has created a boom for the mortgage banking companies that serve as middlemen between borrowers and lenders.
Recognizing that the surge in refinancing cannot last forever, and could end quickly if Treasury bond yields turned upward, many mortgage companies and their Wall Street advisers are taking this opportunity to sell new stock.
Much of the selling has been by large corporate parents that are not willing to say the market for mortgage banking companies is overvalued, but which probably would not have sold shares if they expected prices of those companies to continue rising rapidly.


New York Prices Thruway Bonds
Dillon, Read &amp; Company said it had tentatively priced a $350 million revenue bond issue by the New York Thruway Authority yesterday with a maximum yield of 6.022 percent for a 5.5 percent bond due in 2023.
Shorter-maturity serial bonds were priced to yield from 3.75 percent for an issue due in 1994 to 4.7 percent in 1997, 5.5 percent in 2002, and 6 percent in 2007.
Other longer-term bonds included a yield of 6.08 percent for an issue due in 2012 and 6.13 percent for another due in 2019.


Viatech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New York Democracy on Trial
"It's crazy," says Andrew Crosby, a campaign worker for Larry Rockefeller, the lawyer and neophyte politician who was disqualified this week from challenging Senator Alfonse D'Amato in New York's Republican primary.
The courts may yet rescue his candidacy; as of now, however, Mr.
Rockefeller is just another victim of New York's nitpicking election law.
States like New Jersey and Ohio sensibly require Senate candidates to file only 1,000 petition signatures.
That won't do in New York, the election litigation capital of the world.
To qualify for the ballot, Mr.
Rockefeller, a nephew of former Gov.
Nelson Rockefeller, needed to collect 10,000 valid signatures.
That's a daunting task for any insurgent given the labyrinthine rules that govern petitions -- a task made even tougher by this year's brief, 18-day collection period.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Health; Bush's Doctor Terms President Strong and Fit
The President's personal physician says Mr.
Bush is in excellent health and has shown the effects of age less than many other Presidents during their first terms.
A year ago President Bush said that only a change in his health would deter him from running for a second term.
At the time, he was recovering from treatment for an overactive thyroid brought on by Graves' disease, and he seemed politically invincible.


Baker's Role, Clinton's Vision
Even with his new duties, James Baker plans to keep playing an active role in international affairs.
Page A8.
Gov.
Bill Clinton issued a challenge in the area President Bush touts as his strength, foreign policy.
Page A15.


Adams Resources &amp; Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Says Bush Failed Leaderships Tests Abroad
Gov.
Bill Clinton challenged George Bush today in the area the President boasts as his greatest strength, the conduct of foreign policy, and pronounced the White House approach "flawed" because it ignored domestic economic problems.
Mr.
Clinton, who has more often stressed his agreement with the President on the handling of policy matters in the Middle East and Eastern Europe, abandoned that approach today to try to prove that the Governor of a small state can handle international concerns.


Starrett Housing Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
MARVIN MITCHELSON, the California lawyer who introduced the concept of "palimony," was indicted on Wednesday by a Federal grand jury in Los Angeles on charges of filing false tax returns from 1983 to 1986.
The four-count indictment said that Mr.
Mitchelson, 64 years old, reported gross income of $1 million to $1.5 million for each of those years and net income ranging from $179,000 to more than $266,000.
His actual net was "substantially higher," the indictment said, though it did not say how much.


D'Amato Camp Criticizes Ferraro on '78 Fund Aide
Drawing a bead on its leading Democratic rival, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's re-election campaign yesterday unleashed a blistering attack on former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro, asserting that a convicted labor racketeer was the chief fund-raiser for her first Congressional campaign.
In a sarcastic news release headlined "How to Understand Ferraro in Five Easy Minutes" and sent to reporters with the Senator's approval, the D'Amato camp offered an unmistakable sign of its willingness to use tough tactics and made clear that his campaign was now in full swing, even before the Democratic nominee has been chosen.


City Opera 'Turandot'
The New York City Opera production of Puccini's "Turandot" is to be presented for the first time this season tomorrow evening at 8, in the New York State Theater.
Catherine Kelly, in her City Opera debut, is to sing the title role; others in the cast are Eva Zseller (Liu), Vincenzo Scuderi (Calaf), Harry Dworchak (Timur), and Ron Baker, Robert Brubaker and Gregory Hopkins as Ping, Pang and Pong.
Steven Sloane is to conduct.
Other performances are on Aug. 19, 23 and 29.
Tickets are $10 to $68.
Information: (212) 875-5400.


Mitterrand Will Send Troops Only to Protect Bosnia Relief
Amid mounting calls in Europe for direct military intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina, President Francois Mitterrand said today that France would go no further than offering troops to protect relief missions in the former Yugoslav republic.
"A purely military campaign would be a forbidding ordeal," the French President said in an interview with the daily Sud-Ouest.
"While diplomats talk, the blood flows, the emergency is extreme. So let's act quickly. But to add war to war will resolve nothing."


Global Natural Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stadler And Sauers Lead P.G.A. With 67
Craig Stadler and Gene Sauers, two golfers who have spent much of the year on the mend, found what they hope is more than a temporary tonic today to share the lead at the 74th P.G.A.
Championship.
Stadler, whose shoulder was damaged when he was run over by a small girl on a Colorado ski slope in December, and Sauers, whose psyche was bruised when he was beaten by John Cook in a playoff last January, both shot four-under-par 67's on a long and damp Bellerive Country Club course.


The Spoken Word
LECTURES AND WALKS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
"Peddler's Pack," a walking tour of the Lower East Side, led by a costumed actor, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "House of Heritage," a slide show documenting the history of the museum building, and at 2 P.M. by "How We Lived: Life in a New York City Tenement," a discussion of the lives of the many immigrant groups in the area at the turn of the century, based on a scale model of a tenement building.
Separate admission is required for each event.
Lecture tickets: $4.
Walking tours: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street, Manhattan.
All free with museum admission: $6; $3 for children.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


American Vanguard reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Beijing Journal; Chinese Officials Hurry Down the Capitalist Road
If anyone in China still believes in Communism, it should be Bo Yibo.
That was why the editors of an unorthodox political book turned to Mr.
Bo, a crusty 84-year-old who is one of the most powerful leaders in China, to write an inscription on the nameplate.
They thought his calligraphy would save the book from being banned.


WPP Group Posts $9.8 Million Loss
WPP Group P.L.C. in London said yesterday that it lost $:5.1 million ($9.8 million), or 8.9 pence (17.2 cents) a share, in the first half of this year, as a result of costs tied to the restructuring of its huge debt.
The restructuring was completed last week.
WPP, which owns such agencies as J. Walter Thompson and Ogilvy &amp; Mather, spent $:13.5 million ($26 million) on the restructuring.
That helped to wipe out pretax operating profits of $:14.5 million ($26 million), which were slightly better than analysts had forecast.
In the first half of last year, WPP reported a profit of $:8.8 million.


Addington Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Berkshire Hathaway reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Photography; Ansel Adams, Before He Homed In on Nature
By the end of his long life, Ansel Adams (1902-1984) had become an American icon, renowned as much for his passionate support of environmental causes as for his spectacular black-and-white photographs of the American West.
But as "Ansel Adams: The Early Years," now at the New-York Historical Society, demonstrates, Adams pursued a surprising variety of themes and styles early in his career, before producing the sharp-focus dramatic images that became his trademark.
Always, though, the landscapes were at the heart of Adams's photography.
"Wind" (1919), the earliest work in this exhibition, shows a wind-bent juniper tree clinging to a bare mountain top, and is presented with the soft focus and rich printing that characterized Pictorialism, the prevailing style of artistic photography at the time.


Sky Beauty Becomes Belle of Her Class
If the old Saratoga Race Course indeed makes some champions and breaks others, it may have done a little of both today.
Sky Beauty, a daughter of Blushing Groom and granddaughter of Nijinsky II, stayed undefeated and shot toward the head of the class of 2-year-old fillies by winning the 77th running of the Adirondack Stakes.
She now has a three-race winning streak and a strong tactical position in the yearlong race for the championship of the juvenile division.
And along the way today, she ran past a pair of contenders, Missed the Storm and Distinct Habit, also both undefeated until they tangled with Sky Beauty.


Man, 23, Convicted In Attempted Fraud Using Beeper Calls
A Manhattan man has been convicted of leaving messages on thousands of beepers for a telephone number that cost $55 to call.
While the 23-year-old defendant, Michael Brown, never made a dime, prosecutors said he stood to make millions before he was caught last year.
They said he tried to defraud thousands of potential victims.


Now Banish Pigeons From Your Balcony; That's No Purple Finch
To the Editor:
Kenneth Gangemi suggests placing an ashtray with sunflower seeds on a windowsill to attract purple finches and repel pigeons and house sparrows (letter, July 29).
The birds he sees are probably not purple finches.
More likely, they are house finches, a similar but distinct species, introduced into New York in the 1940's.
The house finch is native to western North America and, in its almost 50 years in our midst, has crowded out the native purple finch in many East Coast cities, including New York.


Sceptre Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Abortion Rights Law Wouldn't Work Anyway; Parties and Justices
To the Editor:
Edward S. Hochman's praise of "Republican" appointees to the Supreme Court (letter, July 24) is not accurate in describing the party affiliations of the Justices who decided Roe v.
Wade and of the Presidents who appointed them.
Three of them -- not two -- were appointed by Democratic Presidents: William O. Douglas (who retired in 1975) by Franklin D. Roosevelt, Byron R. White by John F. Kennedy and Thurgood Marshall by Lyndon B. Johnson.
In addition to these Democrats, two Democrats were appointed by Republican Presidents: William J. Brennan Jr. by Dwight D. Eisenhower and Lewis F. Powell Jr. by Richard M. Nixon.


THT Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Autocam Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Federal Realty Investment Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Day at Shea Keeps Franchise Shift Away
Bobby Bonilla says, "Making it to the big leagues is tough . . . unless you take the subway to Shea." I usually don't take advice from right fielders hitting .260 -- they should be driving the subway -- but I always listen to guys making more than $5 million a year.
Something could trickle down.
There was more.
I am very upset about the Giants' leaving San Francisco for St.
Pete merely because their ball-park conditions were uncomfortable and people didn't come to watch them play.
Conditions at Shea are sometimes uncomfortable and the Mets' average attendance this season is the lowest in eight years.
If we don't go out to Shea, especially on a sunny day, they might go away.
Some farmer in Iowa could build a Dome of Dreams.


Synergistics Indus reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; BAKER LEAVING STATE DEPT. TO HEAD WHITE HOUSE STAFF AND GUIDE BUSH'S CAMPAIGN
President Bush today appointed Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to run the White House and direct his campaign, and both men vowed to salvage the President's re-election by putting domestic issues at the top of their agenda.
In a surprisingly direct admission that the Administration had dwelled on foreign affairs at the expense of economic and social concerns, Mr.
Baker declared that from now on, "President Bush targets America."


Tomb May Hold the Bones Of Priest Who Judged Jesus
Israeli archeologists have discovered the family tomb of Caiaphas, the Jewish High Priest who presided at the trial of Jesus and delivered Him to the Romans to be crucified.
Buried in an ancient cave on the outskirts of Jerusalem, the family's bones were sealed in ornate and elaborately carved ossuaries, ceremonial boxes used widely by the Jews of the late first century.


Japan Reacts Cautiously to North American Trade Accord
Japan reacted cautiously and nervously today to the new agreement to spur free trade in North America, fearing that the accord could hurt its export-driven economy and leave it the only major economic power not part of a trading bloc.
Some Japanese officials said the North American Free Trade Agreement, if it turns out to be exclusionary, could cause Japan to reconsider the idea of an Asian trading region, something the nation has opposed.
"There will be more intense discussion about the idea of Asian integration," said a Foreign Ministry official involved in economic matters.


Patent Scofflaws
To the Editor:
Re "Biologist's Speedy Gene Method Scares Peers but Gains Backers" (Science Times, July 28), on Dr.
J.
Craig Venter, whose laboratory intends to identify thousands of human genes a month and patent some: How can you patent a human component?
The minute this happens, everybody alive or in vitro will be in violation of the patent.
ELINOR GABRIEL Woods Hole, Mass., Aug. 3, 1992


It's the 90's, Counselor: 'Superfluous' Fees Denied
"Even a Michelangelo should not charge Sistine Chapel rates for painting a farmer's barn," Judge Joseph Weis of the United States Court of Appeals for the 3rd Circuit in Philadelphia wrote a decade ago.
Now, another Federal Judge, Gene Carter of Portland, Me., has gone one step further: when 47 lawyers from 16 law firms apply a bit of superfluous trim to barn freshly painted by others, they should not receive a dime.
Judge Carter's decision flowed from one of the last great hostile takeovers of the 1980's, the Georgia-Pacific Corporation's 1989 acquisition of a smaller pulp and paper manufacturer, the Great Northern Nekoosa Corporation.
And his blistering 61-page ruling, with Judge Weis's Michelangelo remark on the cover, signaled the end, for these plaintiffs' lawyers at least, of an era in which money flowed freely and giant fees were forked over with few questions asked.


COMPANY NEWS
AMR CORP., Dallas, said its American Airlines cargo division would institute a 4.4 percent fuel surcharge on domestic airport-to-airport and priority parcel service rates, effective Sept. 1.
BSN CORP., Dallas, a sporting goods maker, signed a letter of intent to acquire Micro-C Corp., San Diego, for undisclosed terms.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.37
3.22
5.77
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.10
5.29
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.16
3.19
5.33
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.08
5.99
7.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.41
7.31
8.08
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.39
8.35
9.08
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.18
6.16
7.03
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


United-Guardian Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thomson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Information Display Tech reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film: Diggstown; A Duel of Cynics, With Wits and Fists
NOT since "Smile" and "Semi-Tough," both released in the mid-1970's, has Michael Ritchie directed anything quite as entertaining as "Diggstown," a funny and vulgar fable about con artists so cynical that signs of simple skepticism can be taken for religious epiphanies.
Adapted by Steven McKay from a novel by Leonard Wise, "Diggstown" is rough and improbable, its plotting sometimes opaque; yet it moves with such speed and cheerful nerviness that it's almost as irresistible as its fast-talking hero is reputed to be.
He is Gabriel Kane (James Woods) who, when first seen, is preparing for his release from Winfield Prison, somewhere in Georgia, where he has spent three years for selling Old Masters painted with acrylics.
Gabe hasn't been wasting his time inside.
He has accumulated a $50,000 nest egg by arranging bare-knuckle fights and taking bets, and, as a profitable antiestablishment sideline, custom-designing escape routes for other cons.


Ronson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


IRT Property reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sounds Around Town
Australian Melancholia
Archie Roach, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, SoHo, (212) 219-3055.
Archie Roach describes hardships, but his delivery is steeped in softness.
On "Charcoal Lane" (Hightone), his debut album, this Australian aboriginal singer and songwriter looks at the long, slow aftermath of cultural and ethnic war: the destruction and depression that occur after a traditional society has been displaced.
The title song tells of alcoholism, while "Took the Children Away" documents familial separation.
Yet throughout, Mr.
Roach's voice has a gentle restraint, and his drumless acoustic arrangements are without the angry extremes of emotion; the fact that his musical touchstone is western folk rather than indigenous aboriginal melodies and rhythms speaks most hauntingly about what has been lost.
Tonight at 8; tickets are $8.
Honky-tonk Rockabilly
Sleepy LaBeef, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Every song Sleepy LaBeef sings is a hard-living, beer-drinking, truck-driving, pot-bellied honky-tonk song.
A first-generation rockabilly king who was as obscure in the 1950's as he is today, Mr.
LaBeef owes much of his continued cult celebrity to the sheer magnitude of his repertory: from Elvis Presley to George Jones and back again, he can call forth literally thousands of tunes with the ease of the ultimate jukebox.
And he plays every single one with irrepressible and contagious joy.
Tonight with Robert Gordon and Chris Spedding.
Shows are at 8:30 and 11:30; tickets are $12.50.
Earth-Conscious Mix
Rise Robots Rise, Wetlands, 161 Hudson Street, TriBeCa, (212) 966-4225.
Industrial music, by definition, is heavy: machinery rhythms, menacing vocals, emotions like cold steel.
Rise Robots Rise does industrial lite, a solid but earth-conscious meltdown of funk, dance music, hip-hop and metal.
Like the rappers Me Phi Me or P.M.
Dawn, Rise Robots Rise revamps technology with a new warmth: its recent eponymous album (TVT) boasts a trippy positivism in songs like "Flowers and Birds," and a drop-out ecstasy in "Buffalo Wack Child." Music starts tonight at 10; admission is $10.


Dow Eases 7.56, Reacting to Drop in Bonds
The stock market closed lower yesterday, responding to a drop in bond prices that was prompted by concerns about the Federal budget deficit.
The Dow Jones industrial average, up 10 points early in the session, succumbed to late afternoon selling and closed down 7.56 at 3,313.27.
Declining issues outnumbered advancers about 8 to 7 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Big Board volume rose to 185.8 million shares from 177 million in the previous session.


For Children
'Botanica'  Repertorio Espanol Gramercy Arts Theater 138 East 27th Street Mid-Manhattan (212) 889-2850 Recommended ages: 8 and up Sunday
A botanica is a storefront where Hispanic people go to spill their problems and leave with remedies, a magical-realist dispenser of herbal concoctions and psychiatric services.
The play "Botanica," by Dolores Prida, a Cuban playwright, was always intended for a broad audience.
Its main character is Milagros, or Millie, a recent college graduate who has returned to Spanish Harlem, albeit temporarily.
Her grandmother, Dona Geno, and her mother, Anamu, want Millie to run the botanica, but Millie is planning to live in the "real world." Little does she know, despite a summa cum laude degree, that best-laid plans don't often work out.
Dona Geno becomes ill, leaving Millie in charge of the botanica.
Instead of dispensing aloe vera and a prayer to St.
Lazarus, the patron saint of the sick, Millie suggests to customers that they learn English, get better jobs, change their beehive hairdos.
She also installs a computer and becomes sick herself: lovesick over Ruben, who is content to live simultaneously in the Hispanic and Anglo worlds.
In the end, Millie learns that the real world is anyplace she wants it to be.


Hope Hanes, 86, Dies; Breeder of Race Horses
Hope Yandell Hanes, who bred and raced champion horses, died yesterday at her home in Millbrook, N.Y.
She was 86 years old.
She died of multiple ailments, her family said.


Moody's Cuts Italian Ratings
In a blow to the struggling Italian Government, Moody's Investor Service yesterday downgraded the credit rating of the country's foreign-currency obligations to an Aa3 rating from Aa1.
In addition, Moody's downgraded the bonds of the state-owned electric company, ENEL, to Aa1 from Aaa.
The issues were expected to be downgraded, but the reduction by two notches instead of one was a surprise.


Slow Growth Foreseen By Congressional Office
The Congressional Budget Office said today that the United States economy was on "the verge of a sustained recovery," but would not grow enough to reduce unemployment significantly before Election Day in November.
The agency's forecast for economic growth over the next 18 months was summed up in three adjectives: tepid, torpid and anemic.


Abortion Rights Law Wouldn't Work Anyway; Only the Poor Suffer
To the Editor:
Is it only people active in the protection of poor women's access to contraception who see through the Governmentspeak of Bush Administration officials?
In "What Abortion Isn't" (letter, July 28), Dr.
William R. Archer thrusts the abortion issue where it has no place and distorts facts about the program he administers, Title X of the Public Health Service Act, which provides family planning services to poor women.
Dr.
Archer maintains that Title X funds have increased for 20 years.
In reality, the program was funded at $162 million in 1981 and is now at $150 million, a significant cut, without allowing for inflation.


Review/Film; A Devoted (and Deadly) Roommate
Allison Jones (Bridget Fonda) has everything needed to live the good life in Manhattan.
She's smart, pretty and aggressive.
She has her own computer programming business and a great Upper West Side apartment, which not only has two bedrooms, parquet floors and high ceilings, but also is rent controlled.
When Alli breaks up with her boyfriend, Sam Rawson (Steven Weber), because he has been two-timing her with his ex-wife, Alli never thinks of moving into a smaller place.
Like many Manhattanites, she can't afford to move.
Instead, she advertises for a roommate and finds Hedra Carlson (Jennifer Jason Leigh), who appears to be as perfect as everything else in Alli's life, with the notable exception of Sam.


Federal Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Art Market
A Shakeup in Prospect
Staff changes are reported to be in the works at the Whitney Museum of American Art.
Benjamin H. D. Buchloh, the art historian brought in by David A. Ross, the museum's director, to be the director of curatorial and critical studies for the museum's independent study program, as well as a consultant on its catalogues and exhibitions, is renegotiating the terms of his contract.
"I'm not willing to continue with things the way they are," Mr.
Buchloh said.
He declined to specify the terms of negotiation or the reasons for his dissatisfaction.
But word in and around the museum is that, among other things, Mr.
Buchloh has been unhappy with the development of the "American Century Project," a large-scale, long-term series of exhibitions that Mr.
Ross initiated and that Mr.
Buchloh has served as a consultant.


Review/Theater; Assassinating Characters of One's Own Devising
Before Tom Stoppard became a playwright, he did a stint as a theater critic.
In "The Real Inspector Hound," he gets even with his former colleagues and with the hazards of the profession.
With this devious theatrical comedy, nimbly revived by the Roundabout Theater Company, he kills two critical birds, or in Stoppard parlance, one Birdboot and one Moon.
For a playwright, this is a case of character assassination.
Clearly Mr.
Stoppard had fun writing the play, a pleasure that is shared by his audience.
In its time, 1971 Off Broadway, it seemed an amusing trifle.
It has ripened into an amusing truffle.
At its root, it is a play on criticism.
Moon is a second-string drama critic, an eternal stand-in, always a backup and never a lead singer, a role that he describes in an irate stream of resentment that identifies with all the understudies in life.
Whenever Moon goes to the theater, he is affronted by the question, "Where's Higgs?" The absent Higgs is his newspaper's first-stringer, and the object of Moon's wrath.
Birdboot, in contrast, represents critical complacency.
A smug sybarite, he is a blurbster, reveling in the fact that one of his reviews has been reproduced in its entirety in neon at the Theater Royal.
For him, no favoritism is strong enough to be labeled a conflict of interest.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Barbara Bush; First Lady on Abortion: Not a Platform Issue
Days after Republicans finished work on a platform that takes an uncompromising anti-abortion stance, Barbara Bush has told interviewers that she does not believe that the issue has any place in the party's platform.
"I'm not being outspoken or pro or con abortion," Mrs.
Bush said in an interview with news magazine reporters on Wednesday that was made public today.
"I'm saying abortion should not be in there, either pro or con."


Annual Harvest Fair At Floyd Bennett Field
It all began when a group of gardeners who plowed the land at Floyd Bennett Field in the Gateway National Recreational Area in southeast Brooklyn decided to share their bounty by making a big pot of soup and having a party.
In the years that followed, the get-together included a bit of entertainment here, some 4-H contests there, until it grew to be the City Gardeners' Harvest Fair, which celebrates its 16th year this weekend.
Tomorrow and Sunday, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., Floyd Bennett Field will be filled with gardeners, farm animals, food, dancing, games, rides and entertainment, all part of the free harvest fair sponsored by Operation Greenthumb of the City Department of General Services, Gateway National Recreational Area, the State Department of Agriculture and Markets and Cornell University Cooperative Extension.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 588 money market mutual funds increased $3.19 billion, to $507.65 billion, in the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 216 institutional funds increased $2.61 billion, to $198.41 billion.
Those of the 282 general-purpose funds rose $259.7 million, to $170.86 billion.
The 90 broker-dealer funds increased $325.4 million, to $138.37 billion.


Sea Containers Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. COUNCIL VOTES TO SUPPORT FORCE IN ASSISTING BOSNIA
The United Nations Security Council voted overwhelmingly today to allow the use of military force if necessary to insure that supplies of food and medicine reach civilians in Sarajevo and other parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The resolution, supported by 12 of the Council's 15 members, with China, India and Zimbabwe abstaining, says countries may now take "all necessary measures" to assure that relief supplies get through -- a phrase similar to that used to authorize the Persian Gulf war and which is understood to include military action.


Bolt Beranek/Newman reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


N.F.L. Training Camp Report
San Diego Chargers
For a conditioning regimen designed to insulate players against injuries during the season, training camp can sure be a hazard.
Just ask Coach Bobby Ross, who has been watching his roster shrink before his eyes.
Rookie strong safety James Fuller, for example, an eighth-round draft choice from Portland State who had impressed Ross and other coaches with his aggressive play and his four tackles in Saturday's loss to the Cardinals, hurt his knee in the first joint practice with the Patriots in Smithfield, R.I., this week and has been sent back to San Diego for treatment.
Among the other ailing Chargers are Delton Hall, who is expected to start in Saturday's game against the Patriots despite a slight injury because another defensive back, Anthony Shelton is out with a shoulder injury.
New England Patriots
Coach Dick MacPherson was doing some moaning of his own this week after watching as injuries threatened to sabotage his efforts to beef up the National Football League's most porous offensive line (a league-leading 63 sacks allowed last season).
Among the down linemen out with one ailment or another as the Patriots prepared for the Chargers were tackle Pat Harlow, rookie guard Eugene Chung and guard Calvin Stephens.
Green Bay Packers
Coach Mike Holmgren, who has been trying to train a team depleted by injuries and beset by absences, received another blow.
Offensive lineman Tony Mandarich, who suffered a concussion in Saturday's game against the Chiefs, was hospitalized after complaining of headaches.
Holmgren also got a glimmer of hope.
Defensive end Lester Archambeau signed a contract and reported to camp.
Now all Holmgren needs is for the front office to sign nine other absentees, including quarterback Mike Tomczak and defensive back Terrell Buckley, the team's first-round choice from Florida State.
That may not be easy.
Buckley, complaining that the Packers had not offered him enough money, told The Florida Times-Union in Jacksonville that he wanted to be traded, and to make things easy for the front office, gave a list of prospective teams.
"I'll go to Atlanta, Tampa Bay, New Orleans, the Raiders, somewhere where somebody wants to pay me what I'm worth," he said.
And if the Packers won't pay him or trade him, Buckley, who played two seasons with his college baseball team and was picked by the Braves in the 38th round of the baseball draft, said he would sign with the Braves.
The Packers said they had no intention of trading Buckley, whose contract goals are clearly ambitious, even for the No. 5 player taken in the April draft.
He has rejected an offer of a four-year, $5.4 million deal and has sought a package more lucrative than the five-year, $7.5 million contract signed by the draft's No. 3 choice, defensive lineman Sean Gilbert of the Rams.
Chicago Bears
One sure way to tell that the midpoint of training camp is getting close is that the coaches begin jumping into the contract negotiations with unsigned veterans.
Or as Mike Ditka put it in discussing his unsigned center, Jay Hilgenberg: "When you've been in the league 9, 10 or 11 years, you need training camp more than ever." Tampa Bay Buccaneers
With four ailing defensive backs, including rookie cornerback Rogerick Green, who dislocated an elbow during Saturday's game against Denver, the Bucs imported some help for the secondary.
They signed Chris Barber, a former Bengals player who played Arena football this spring, and Patrick Allen, a former Oilers starter who tried out for the Chiefs last year.
Pittsburgh Steelers
With one free safety still unsigned (Thomas Everett) and another hobbled by a sprained knee (Gary Jones), rookie Darren Perry may start against the Saints in New Orleans Monday night.
Denver Broncos
Send a herd of mammoth casually dressed N.F.L. linemen of a variety of hues out onto the streets of Berlin and the city's life seems to come to a halt as everybody stops to stare and youngsters descend on the visiting celebrities to ask for autographs.
Amid this scene as the Broncos prepare to play the Dolphins tomorrow, one Bronco gets by without a gawk and without a squawk.
"It's great not to be stared at," said Denver's quarterback, John Elway, as Berliners seem to take him for just another German out for a stroll.
Not that the name of Elway is totally unknown in Germany.
The quarterback's father, Jack Elway, is the coach of the Frankfurt Galaxy of the World League.


No Headline
"I can hardly imagine a more signficant discovery from that period. The type of writing, the method of burial, the names used, their location -- all those things will bring to light important historical information about the era in which Jesus lived." -- BRUCE CHILTON of Bard College, on the finding of the tomb that archeologists have traced to Caiaphas.  [ A1:6. ]


Syms Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Gold Drops to a 6-Year Low
Gold prices plunged yesterday to their lowest level in six years, provoked by a spiral of selling by investors and speculators worried that this month's low inflation figures spell the end of a recent rally in gold.
The price of gold for delivery this month dropped $4.50 an ounce yesterday, to $334.10 on the Commodity Exchange in New York.
In the last three days, August gold on the exchange has dropped $16.30 an ounce, or 5 percent.
In London, gold slumped $9.50 an ounce yesterday, to $337.30.


Liposome Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vincent Suggests Giants' Move Is No Sure Thing
Commissioner Fay Vincent came to watch a baseball game today but wound up acknowledging for the first time some doubt about the Giants' proposed move to St.
Petersburg, Fla., and his own continuance in office.
Vincent admitted that he has a problem with his job.
He cited in particular the challenge to his authority by the Chicago Cubs, a Federal court order and a midsummer attempt by some owners to ask him to waive some of his authority in areas of labor.
"There's no question that the commissionership is under pressure and people want to change it," he said.
"I feel very much under siege and that's a problem for all of baseball."


Rymac Mortgage Investment Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brazil Chief's Free Spending Imperils Debt Accord
Trying to avoid impeachment, President Fernando Collor de Mello has begun a political spending campaign that bankers fear could unhinge an accord on Brazil's foreign debt.
A congressional panel that is investigating corruption charges is expected to issue a report in two weeks recommending Mr.
Collor's impeachment.
With the Chamber of Deputies likely to vote on impeachment in September, members of the President's Cabinet quoted Mr.
Collor as vowing in closed meetings last week to spend billions of dollars on projects intended to guarantee the loyalty of 168 legislators needed to defeat the motion.


Wishing Isn't Enough To Make a Ricky Nelson
Tom DiCillo, who photographed Jim Jarmusch's classic "Stranger Than Paradise," now makes his own debut as a writer and a director with "Johnny Suede," a comedy so lazily hip and so laid back that it often seems to be asleep.
When it stirs, which is now and then, it exhibits a sweetly embarrassed charm, as if apologizing for causing a commotion, no matter how unobtrusive.
The movie, which opens today at the Angelika Film Center, is set in a large city that has no visible center and where time seems to have stopped in 1961.
Johnny Suede (Brad Pitt) longs to be a teen-age idol like Ricky Nelson.
He has a pair of black suede shoes, an impressive pompadour, a guitar and some pals who will play backup for him.
Yet he doesn't have much talent or drive.


Hughes Supply reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Mayor Offers 12-Point Proposal To Reduce Car Thefts in Newark
Frustrated by the persistence of the car theft problem here, Mayor Sharpe James announced 12 proposals today to discourage thieves, particularly juveniles.
A crucial element of the plan involves having the Essex County judicial system get tougher on young people who steal cars.
As the system functions now, Mayor James said: "The message is clear. You can steal a car and still go home."


For Children
'Botanica'  Repertorio Espanol Gramercy Arts Theater 138 East 27th Street Mid-Manhattan (212) 889-2850 Recommended ages: 8 and up Sunday
A botanica is a storefront where Hispanic people go to spill their problems and leave with remedies, a magical-realist dispenser of herbal concoctions and psychiatric services.
The play "Botanica," by Dolores Prida, a Cuban playwright, was always intended for a broad audience.
Its main character is Milagros, or Millie, a recent college graduate who has returned to Spanish Harlem, albeit temporarily.
Her grandmother, Dona Geno, and her mother, Anamu, want Millie to run the botanica, but Millie is planning to live in the "real world." Little does she know, despite a summa cum laude degree, that best-laid plans don't often work out.
Dona Geno becomes ill, leaving Millie in charge of the botanica.
Instead of dispensing aloe vera and a prayer to St.
Lazarus, the patron saint of the sick, Millie suggests to customers that they learn English, get better jobs, change their beehive hairdos.
She also installs a computer and becomes sick herself: lovesick over Ruben, who is content to live simultaneously in the Hispanic and Anglo worlds.
In the end, Millie learns that the real world is anyplace she wants it to be.


Coors Files Suit Over Ads by Anheuser-Busch
Coors adds Virginia water to its beer.
Some people think this is a big deal.
The Anheuser-Busch Companies for one, which recently attacked Coors in an advertising campaign for mixing "local water" from Virginia with its vaunted Rocky Mountain spring water -- on which Coors built its reputation -- to make beer for East Coast guzzlers.
Coors responded by suing Anheuser-Busch.


Train Derailment With 74 Injuries Is Traced to a Vandalized Switch
Federal investigators said today that the derailment that injured 74 of the 127 passengers aboard an Amtrak train here on Wednesday night appeared to have been caused by a criminal sabotage to a rail switch.
The investigators for the National Transportation Safety Board said they had asked the Federal Bureau of Investigation for assistance after finding evidence suggesting that someone had broken into a switch box at the site and had changed the setting, causing the train to careen onto a siding and jump off the tracks.


Calm Waters Replace Normal Political Currents


CRATER SUPPORTS EXTINCTION THEORY
A theory about the mass extinction of the dinosaurs that has been debated by scientists for a dozen years is getting a major boost today as researchers report pinning down the precise date when a huge object from outer space slammed into Earth.
Its arrival 64.98 million years ago, forming a crater about 110 miles wide on the northern edge of the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico, strengthens its status as the leading candidate for a cataclysmic impact thought to have contributed to the mass extinction of life at the end of the age of dinosaurs.


Central Capital reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Crowd Control at Festivals Is Criticized
While a special state commission examines the disturbance that erupted along the boardwalk here on June 14 and the police response to it, the man leading the investigation said he is surprised similar problems have not occurred elsewhere.
Frederick P. DeVesa, the first assistant attorney general, said that many of the state's 527 municipalities gamble by relying on their own small police departments to control crowds at major festivals and fairs like the one that drew 75,000 people to Belmar.
State law allows municipalities to join in mutual-aid systems, but towns rarely ask for help because they have to pay the overtime of the assisting officers out of often-tight local budgets.


Recoton Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Zytec Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30





Queens College Law School Is Granted Full Accreditation
New York City's only public law school, the City University of New York's School of Law at Queens College, has won full accreditation.
The American Bar Association granted the accreditation on Wednesday at the group's annual convention in San Francisco.


Reality Sets In for Giants' Brown
On Wednesday night, when Dave Brown, the Giants' anointed quarterback of the future, finally reported to training camp, he was assigned a dormitory room.
His roommates were three ballboys.
This morning, at his first practice, teammates rubbed thumb and index finger together, the universal sign for money and a fitting gesture for a new millionaire.


Winston Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quixote Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


GQ's Clothing Drive For the Homeless
GQ, the men's fashion magazine, will expand a clothing drive for the homeless in sponsoring the event for a second year.
The Conde Nast monthly will add Miami to the list of cities for the drive, which will continue in Chicago, Detroit, Los Angeles, New York and San Francisco.
The magazine will also invite companies outside the agency business to participate.


Virginia First Savings Bank reports earnings for Year to June 30


Sharpton Again Denies Connection To Mobsters
In his current bid for the Democratic nomination for United States Senate, the Rev.
Al Sharpton had every reason to expect questioning about his involvement nine years ago in an effort by two mobsters to promote a professional prizefight.
That effort, heavily reported over the years, has long been cited as evidence that Mr.
Sharpton was involved with organized crime, and law-enforcement sources have said it led to his becoming an informer.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ESCOBAR INDICTED IN BROOKLYN
Pablo Escobar, who is said to run the Medellin cocaine cartel, and the man described as the cartel's top assassin, Dandeny Munoz-Mosquera, were indicted in Brooklyn on Federal charges of blowing up an Avianca airliner in 1989, killing all 110 people on the plane.
When Mr.
Munoz-Mosquera was arrested in Queens last year, Federal agents were unable to charge him with anything more serious than making false statements about his identity although they said they believed that he had murdered many people in Colombia.
B3.
A DEADLINE LOOMS FOR DAILY NEWS
With a deadline looming from the bankruptcy court, the issue of which prospective buyer will be able to acquire The Daily News will probably be settled soon.
Then again, maybe not.
B3.


Jean Philippe Fragrances reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Networks Plan to Use Top Teams In Houston
Earlier this summer, executives of major television networks figured that the Republican National Convention would be such a yawner that they were thinking of keeping their anchors stationed in New York.
But with President Bush fighting for his political life, the networks have reassessed and are sending full reporting contingents to Houston.
In a reminder of the glory days of network convention coverage, CBS, NBC, ABC and CNN have set up three-story anchor booths in the Astrodome.
Such booths were too big for Madison Square Garden in New York, where the Democratic convention was held last month.


CHRONICLE
There was news from the magazine world yesterday, too.
TINA BROWN, the new editor of The New Yorker, announced that ELIZABETH DREW would give up "Letter From Washington," the column she has written for 19 years, after the November elections.
Though a number of announcements have been issued in recent weeks about people Ms.
Brown has recruited to The New Yorker, this is the first departure.


The U.N.'s Duty in Bosnia
Serbia's war crimes continue to mount in Bosnia.
Paramilitary forces entered the village of Zaklopaca on May 16 and massacred at least 83 Muslim Slavs, 11 of them children.
Military policemen of the Yugoslav Army disarmed, tortured and executed 15 Muslim Slavs and Croats who were defending the community of Vlasic Plateau.
Witnesses told of torture and murder in Serb-run concentration camps.
The Bush Administration belatedly backed a resolution approved yesterday by the United Nations Security Council authorizing the use of force, but only to assure that food and medicine reach beleaguered Bosnia.
A strong bipartisan coalition in the Senate understandably wants to do more.
It has voted in favor of using force for an equally compelling purpose -- to secure immediate access to the death camps.


2 BIG CAR RENTERS AGREE TO PRICING DISCLOSURES
Two major car rental companies have agreed to disclose their mandatory charges to consumers making reservations through "800" numbers or travel agents, the Federal Trade Commission announced yesterday.
The commission had charged that Dollar Rent-A-Car Systems, based in Los Angeles, and Value Rent-A-Car Inc. of Boca Raton, Fla., had failed to tell customers about airport surcharges, extra charges for drivers under 25 years old, and geographic limits on where renters could take cars.


Arrhythmia Research Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sotheby's Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sounds Around Town
Nigerian Funk
King Sunnny Ade and his African Beats/Poi Dog Pondering, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
King Sunny Ade leads one of the world's great bands, playing Nigerian juju music.
It is a prismatic, rippling funk, with crosscurrents at every level, from the interlocking patterns of drums and percussion to the latticework of rhythm guitars to the call-and-response vocals; even the lyrics, in the Yoruba language, are answered by talking drums.
The music is intricate but somehow informal, as if more than a dozen people were discovering groove after groove.
Sharing the bill is Poi Dog Pondering, a post-hippie band that's a college-circuit favorite.
Tomorrow at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.; tickets are $17.50.
All-Star Quintet
Richard Davis and Friends, Sweet Basil, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
Richard Davis's springy bass lines and vamps are the propellant for good-natured jam sessions by an all-star quintet, including Ricky Ford on tenor saxophone, Cecil Bridgewater on trumpet, Sir Roland Hanna on piano, and Ronnie Burrage on drums.
Sets begin at 10 and 11:45 P.M. and 1:30 A.M. tonight and tomorrow, 10 and 11:45 P.M.
Sunday; there is a $15 cover at tables, with a $6 minimum and a $12 cover at the bar, which includes one drink.


Samuel A. Hausman, Industrialist And Governors' Friend, Dies at 95
Samuel A. Hausman, a textile industrialist, philanthropist and friend of four New York governors, died yesterday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 95 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


Harken Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The First Friend
It's neither surprising nor unsettling that President Bush has prevailed on James Baker to come back to the White House and direct his re-election campaign.
Jim Baker has starred in one Washington role after another, including campaign politics, and given Mr.
Bush's dismal present standing, his return seemed inevitable.
Meanwhile, with the appointment of Lawrence Eagleburger as Acting Secretary of State, the President well serves his own political interests while assuring continuity for foreign policy.


Appian Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Orion Capital reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Says It Sent U.N. New Evidence Against Iraq
A senior official in the Bush Administration said today that the United States had sent new evidence to the United Nations that Iraq is hiding military documents in "one or more" Government ministries in violation of the cease-fire accord that ended the Persian Gulf war.
The official, a policy maker who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the United Nations was likely to demand access to the ministries "within the proximate future," and expressed hope that President Saddam Hussein would not resist an inspection.


Oceaneeering International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sahara Resorts reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film; Choosing A Surrogate For Revenge
Antoine (Fabrice Luchini), the narrator and protagonist of "La Discrete," is a far less appealing character than either he or Christian Vincent, the film's director and co-author, might imagine.
Skinny and nervous, with blazing, buggy eyes and a penchant for rattling on excitedly about historical trivia, Antoine is presented as a sophisticated ladies' man who can usually have his pick of women.
The film takes its title from a piece of that trivia.
Upper-class women of the 17th century, he says, adorned themselves with artificial beauty marks to attract male attention.
The marks had names that were based on where they were placed.
On the chin, it was called La Discrete.
When Antoine meets Catherine (Judith Henry), who has a mole on her chin, it becomes his nickname for her.


Hey, Kid! Ready or Not, You're Up.
He was not the one called up to plug the gaps caused by injuries, although it worked out that way.
The Mets brought Chris Donnels to the big leagues on July 31, two days before Bobby Bonilla and Howard Johnson went down with injuries, nine days before Dave Magadan broke his wrist.
The Mets mainly wanted to see Donnels hit -- not field -- although they knew he had great reflexes and well expected him to be an everyday infielder someday.


The Catskills Come of 'New Age'; New Life for the Old Hotels, Though Not for Tax Rolls
The Catskill resort hotels, once known for ribald comedians, rubicund borscht and marathon games of Simon Says, are fast becoming centers for meditation, yoga and brown rice.
And the nightclub singers and tummlers who once occupied their stages are giving way to gurus, swamis and other modern-day prophets.
The New Age has arrived with a vengeance in this mountain region a two-hour drive northwest of Manhattan, and with it have come controversies over what local residents call "outsiders and weirdos," and lawsuits, especially over the tax-exempt status of the new religious groups.


Pop/Jazz; Getting Back to the Blues: A Reunion
When George Coleman appears as a special guest with Rosco Gordon's quartet on Sunday afternoon at the Brooklyn Museum's sculpture garden, the two men will be sharing a bandstand for the first time since Mr.
Coleman played saxophone in Mr.
Gordon's band 40 years ago.
They were both teen-agers then, and Mr.
Gordon is looking forward to the reunion for more than just musical reasons.
"One night when George was on the road with me," he recalled in a recent interview, "he went to sleep in the car with his head back and his mouth open, and I put a cigarette in his mouth. Not a lighted one; I wasn't that crazy! But I used to play pranks on everybody in those days. I didn't mean any harm. You know how teen-agers are.


Port Agency Votes to Hold Its Meetings In Public
Amid widespread allegations of excessive spending, and under pressure from lawmakers in Trenton and Albany, the commissioners of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey voted yesterday to end a decades-old procedure of using executive sessions to conduct business outside the public eye.
The agency, which owns the New York region's three major airports, most of its major bridges, the New Jersey PATH train system and the World Trade Center, acknowledged that the methods used by its commissioners were at the very least out of step with normal rules of agencies supported by the public.


Cenit Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
American Brands Inc., Old Greenwich, Conn., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $946.5 million of debt securities and warrants. *
Georgia Power Co., a unit of the Southern Company, Atlanta, has filed for up to $800 million of first mortgage bonds and up to 4.4 million preferred shares. *
Hillsborough County Aviation Authority, Fla., is offering $93.2 million of Tampa International Airport revenue refunding bonds with a maximum yield of 6.10 percent for an issue due in 2015 through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Serial bonds are priced to yield from 2.75 percent in 1993 to 5.95 percent in 2007, with another long bond due in 2011 priced to yield 6.05 percent.
All the bonds are insured by the Financial Guaranty Insurance Company and rated triple-A by both Moody's and S.&amp; P. *
Kroger Co., Cincinnati, is offering $125 million of 9 percent senior subordinated notes due 1999 at 99.488 to yield 9.10 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Noncallable for four years, the notes are rated B-1 by Moody's and B by S.&amp; P. *
PHH Corp., Hunt Valley, Md., is offering $100 million of 3.45 percent medium-term notes due 1993 at 100 through J. P. Morgan Securities.
The notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P. *
United Gas Pipe Line Co., Houston, has filed for up to $250 million of senior notes through Salomon Brothers.
Common  *
J.
B.
Hunt Transport Services Inc., Lowell, Ark., has filed for a public offering of three million common shares through Merrill Lynch.
Ratings  *
Hoechst-Celanese Corp.'s senior debt rating has been upgraded to AA-, from A+, by S.&amp; P. The company is a unit of Hoechst A.G. of Germany.


Riddell Sports reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Velcro Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Unitil Cotp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Texaco Suit Ruling
A Federal district judge yesterday found that a Texaco Inc. refinery on the Delaware River had dumped toxic pollutants in violation of the Clean Water Act and ordered the company to pay a $1.68 million fine, according to one of the plaintiffs, the Natural Resources Defense Council.
Judge Jane Roth also enjoined Texaco from further violations, the council said.
Texaco issued no comment.


Tibetans, Seeking Haven For Culture, Go to Camp
While religious summer communities usually keep to themselves, an unusual sharing of ideas has been unfolding this summer in the Catskills, the Berkshires and here in Dutchess County as two representatives of the Dalai Lama have been visiting Jewish summer camps.
The Dalai Lama, the winner of the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize, has been living in India with thousands of followers after fleeing Tibet in 1959 in the wake of a Chinese invasion.


Independence Holding reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Woody Allen Files Child-Custody Lawsuit
Woody Allen, the prolific film maker who once confessed that "I like to spend my time with work and only a limited time with kids," filed suit yesterday against his longtime companion, Mia Farrow, for custody of their three children.
Mr.
Allen and Ms.
Farrow, who have been a couple since 1980 but who never married or lived together, have long been objects of curiosity around New York City, for their celebrity status, their general shunning of publicity and their unusual relationship.
Their separate apartments face each other across Central Park -- his on the east side, hers on the west -- and Ms.
Farrow, who has been married twice (to Frank Sinatra and Andre Previn) has a total of 11 children, seven of whom are adopted.


We Gain. Mexico Gains. Canada Gains.
The United States, Mexico and Canada, by completing the groundwork for the North American Free Trade Agreement, have taken a significant step toward defining a new world order of expanded trade and brisk competition.
The pact, eliminating all tariffs on North American goods over 15 years, would create the world's largest free-trade area, with 360 million consumers and total annual output exceeding $6 trillion.
Critics say the pact would inspire U.S. companies to relocate plants in Mexico and encourage polluters to slip into Mexico and establish operations.
Neither assertion holds up.


Bob Bowyer; Choreographer, 45
Bob Bowyer, a choreographer and dancer, died on Monday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 45 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, said Walter Maas, his companion.
Mr.
Bowyer was best known for his humorous parodies of conventional dance.
He was the founder of the American Ballet Comedy, whose shows include such numbers as "The Black Cockroach Pas de Deux" and "Faux Pas de Trois."


Sports of The Times; A 50-Pound Monkey Isn't A Burden
DOUG LINTON is young, impressionable, new to all this.
So perhaps he did not know any better yesterday when he took the mound for his first start as a Toronto Blue Jay.
Linton did not know that he should have been burdened by a 50-pound monkey that seems to burden all Toronto Blue Jays in each increasingly melodramatic pennant chase.
He didn't seem to know that since this is August and another tight race has developed in the American League East, it must be time for Toronto to ruin another opportunity to reach the World Series for the first time.


Magainin Pharmaceuticals Inc.  reports earnings for Year to June 30


Gap Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Oregon Seeks to Revive Health Care 'Rationing' Plan
Stung by the Bush Administration's rejection of a far-reaching health care plan that Oregon spent nearly five years developing, state officials here are refusing to give up their proposal despite the odds.
In a letter to President Bush this week, Gov.
Barbara Roberts, a Democrat, said the Federal Government had not given the plan a fair hearing.
She also asked the President to overturn the rejection, a move that White House officials said was unlikely.


Biosys reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Blackman Rates Knicks From Perimeter
The Knicks traded for Rolando Blackman because they thought he could help them win a championship, if not this season, then soon.
Expectations that high can weigh heavily on a player.
But Blackman said the situation has motivated, not intimidated him.


Fiber Evidence Links Defendant To 3 Victims at a Bronx Trial
Prosecutors in the case against Alejandro Henriquez presented their strongest evidence to a Bronx jury yesterday: hair and fiber samples they say physically link the defendant to all three victims he is accused of strangling.
In a case that has been largely circumstantial, a police expert, Francis X. Callery, testified that three strands of hair found on the clothing of one victim, 14-year-old Shamira Bello, matched that of Mr.
Henriquez.
Using charts and slides that dramatically showed the similarities, he also said that fibers found on three victims matched those in a vacuum cleaner in Mr.
Henriquez's apartment or on a spool of red thread that according to other testimony had been in his apartment.


Au Bon Pain reports earnings for Qtr to July 11


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Vice President Quayle
TODAY: 7-7:30 A.M., "CBS This Morning," interview. (Channel 2 in New York.)  President Bush
SUNDAY: 11:30 A.M., ABC, "This Week," interview with David Brinkley. (Channel 7 in New York.)


Fewer Ties Are Bonding Workers to Corporations
Robert Hempstead and Lawrence Gundrum represent two sides of the new economy, where fewer and fewer people work full time for big companies.
They are part of the growing ranks of American workers who operate outside the corporate fold that had been the ideal of work life throughout the postwar years.
Some are thriving; some are struggling.
The 48-year-old Mr.
Hempstead of Los Gatos, Calif., is an expert in the intricacies of disk drives, the storage boxes in computers that hold vast amounts of data.
After 11 years at I.B.M., he worked for a few Silicon Valley start-up ventures before setting himself up in 1989 as a one-man contractor available to companies for special projects.


Dianon Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Indochina's Missing: An Issue That Refuses to Die
On the evening of March 29, 1973, President Richard M. Nixon, eager to put the Vietnam War behind him, told a national television and radio audience that the time had come to bring down the curtain on the Vietnam experience.
"Tonight, the day we have all worked and prayed for has finally come," he said.
"For the first time in 12 years, no American military forces are in Vietnam. All our American P.O.W.'s are on their way home."


Abroad at Home; Change In Israel
In a column last March I told the story of a Palestinian professor, Dr.
Khalil Shikaki, whom Israel had forbidden to return from the United States to his home and family in the West Bank.
The story has now taken an encouraging turn.
Dr.
Shikaki, who got his Ph.D. in America, came here in 1989 because Israel had closed his university, al-Najah in Nablus.
He taught political science in Wisconsin and Florida.
When Israel allowed West Bank universities to reopen, he tried to go back.
But he was excluded at the border last January by Israeli military authorities.


Air-Noise Pledge for U.S. Open Won't Cost New York a Cent
To the Editor:
In "Public Trust Betrayed" (letter, July 30), on "subsidized" sports facilities, Benjamin Haber asks who in the New York City administration agreed to the provision in the United States Tennis Association business terms allowing limited rent reductions for significant La Guardia Airport-related airplane overflight, with its accompanying noise, during United States Open tournament play.
I did.
And the reasons are compelling.
The Tennis Association is investing in the city -- it will spend $180 million of its own money to build the National Tennis Center expansion.
Compared with other major sports facilities around the country, this is about as unsubsidized as one can get.


Now Banish Pigeons From Your Balcony
To the Editor:
Re "How to Get Rid of Pigeons, Benignly" (letter, July 29):
Having lived in Manhattan for nine years before moving to this small city along the Delaware River, I was aware of the built-in design challenge created by pigeons when I installed an ornamental balcony across the third floor of my Victorian home.
The balcony is just wide enough to permit standing to watch sunrises across distant mountains, as well as holiday fireworks.
French doors look onto it from inside the third-floor loft.
I had heard somewhere that snakes strike more terror into the hearts of birds than even into my own, due to an instinctive knowledge that snakes eat birds' eggs.
I bought several realistic rubber snakes from a toyshop.
Until then, the balcony was a favorite stopping point for all birds snacking on a nearby mulberry tree.
With these faux reptiles slithering on the balcony floor, no bird of any feather has alighted within 20 feet.


Amstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
New York Exchanges to Stay
At least three of the city's five commodities exchanges will stay in New York under an agreement to build a new trading headquarters in lower Manhattan.
Page B1.
Support for Extinction Idea
Scientists say they have precisely dated a cataclysmic impact 65 million years ago that may have helped kill off the dinosaurs.
Page A12.
Chrysler Plea to Greenspan
Some banks are refusing to renew loans to Chrysler -- which, calling the loans vital, asked Alan Greenspan to intervene on its behalf.
Page D1.
Brazil's Debt Pact Imperiled
President Fernando Collor de Mello has begun a political spending campaign that could unhinge Brazil's foreign debt accord.
Page A3.


Slain Journalist Was With ABC 20 Years
David Kaplan, the ABC News producer who was killed in Sarajevo yesterday, had spent 20 of his 45 years with the network, and he was the 10th person killed on assignment for ABC News since it began broadcasting in 1948.
Mr.
Kaplan, a Washington-based senior producer for the news program "Prime Time Live," lived in Arlington, Va.


Hondo Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quebecor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chrysler Loan Pact Threatened
A few banks from a 152-member worldwide consortium that lend to the Chrysler Corporation are refusing to renew their loans, threatening a new $6.8 billion loan package that the auto maker says is crucial to its revitalization -- so crucial that it has asked Alan Greenspan to intervene on its behalf.
The importance of the loan package to Chrysler's future and the danger posed by the reluctance of the banks were underscored last week when the auto maker asked Mr.
Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, to intercede with officials of the Bundesbank, Germany's central bank.
A spokesman for the Fed, however, declined to confirm whether Mr.
Greenspan had done so, or even whether anyone from Chrysler had asked the chairman to do so.
He cited policy reasons for not commenting.


CREDIT MARKETS;
The volume of new corporate debt issues, which was expected yesterday to drop below the $800 million sold on Wednesday, did not.
And investors who were supposed to be concentrating on yesterday's auction of 30-year Treasury bonds were also looking at a $1.43 billion asset-backed deal by the General Motors Acceptance Corporation, the financing arm of the General Motors Corporation.
Underwriters led by Merrill Lynch said the securities were being sold through a G.M.A.C. 1992-E Grantor Trust, with the securities backed by automobile and light-truck receivables, or auto loans.


Critic's Choice; The Work And Life Of Strauss
The Bard Music Festival Rediscoveries series, at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., has offered in the last two summers immersions in the music of Brahms and Mendelssohn, with chamber and orchestral concerts augmented by lectures and panel discussions.
This year's festival, which opens tonight and includes events all this weekend and next, is called "Richard Strauss and His World," and includes 11 concerts (each prefaced by a talk), two panels and an exhibition.
Strauss is a complex subject, for reasons both musical (he straddled Romanticism and modernism) and extra-musical (he remained in Germany and Austria during World War II, and accepted an official cultural position under the Nazis, but he had an uneasy relationship with the regime).
As in past festivals, the series promises to explore the gray areas as well as the black and white.


North Canadian Oils reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pretoria Offers an Amnesty Plan, But Mandela's Group Refuses It
The South African Government called today for a general amnesty to "bury the past" by forgiving crimes committed in the country's political hostilities, whether by anti-apartheid militants or Government officials.
Within hours the African National Congress rejected the idea in strong terms, declaring that for the white Government to pardon public officials "would be equivalent to a criminal pardoning himself for the crimes he has committed."


Washington Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Touch With a Break From August


Medco Containment Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mitchell Passes Test In Talking Trash 101
Johnny Mitchell had his most significant playing time of the preseason last week against the Redskins.
And it probably was one of his most valuable indoctrinations into the National Football League.
Mitchell, the Jets' rookie tight end, traded verbal jabs with Redskins linebacker Wilber Marshall, one of the league's top trash talkers.


Who Else's Choice Could It Be?
Three weeks ago it was Vice President Dan Quayle who gave what was for him a politically incorrect answer.
What would he do if his daughter, once grown up, chose to have an abortion?
"I would counsel her and talk to her, and support her on whatever decision she made." To people who believe in a woman's right to choose, that sounded a lot like a humane personal response, contrary to the harsh opposition to choice that Mr.
Quayle expresses in public.
This week President Bush was asked the same hypothetical question, about a granddaughter.
He said quite clearly he would try to "talk her out of it." But "Of course, I'd stand by my child." His questioner, NBC's Stone Phillips, persisted.
"So in the end the decision would be hers?" Mr.
Bush replied "Well, who else's could it be?"


CHRONICLE
DEBORAH NORVILLE, whose face has not been seen on television since she left the "Today" show on NBC to take maternity leave in April 1991, will return to the small screen in October.
She is to become a correspondent on "Street Stories," a CBS news magazine anchored by Ed Bradley.
ERIC OBER, the president of CBS News, made the announcement yesterday.


Corrections
A headline and a picture caption in Business Day yesterday about Government lawyers who raised questions about the recovery of money from savings and loan officials misstated the sequence of events.
The lawyers were demoted before their Senate testimony, not after it.


Books of The Times; A Poet's Accounts of His Comrades in Arms
Their Ancient Glittering Eyes  Remembering Poets and More Poets  By Donald Hall  348 pages.
Ticknor &amp; Fields. $22.95.
"Their Ancient Glittering Eyes," Donald Hall's memoir, starts from a very simple premise.
"It goes without saying -- or it ought to," he writes, "that we love some poems and call them great," and that if "we admire the poem, it is natural to be curious about the poet." It's an observation at odds with the tenets of the New Criticism, which suggests that it's rude to examine a work of art in light of biographical and social concerns, and deconstruction, which goes so far as to argue that the very idea of the author is dead.


Holnam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Daily News, the Suspense May Go On a Bit Longer
With a deadline looming from the bankruptcy court, the issue of which prospective buyer will be able to acquire The Daily News will probably be settled this weekend.
Or then again, maybe not.
The key lies with the unions that effectively have the power to decide who will take over the paper.
Should the unions reach agreement on a buyer by the court's Monday deadline, the issue would be resolved because union support is considered the essential element of any reorganization.


Accounts
*
Bridgestone Tire, Nashville, to TBWA Advertising Inc., New York, for image advertising.
TBWA was awarded the account, with estimated billings in the first year of $7 million to $8 million, in a review that also included Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, and Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis.
The first ads, promoting Bridgestone's new "run flat" tire, will appear next month. *
Reckitt &amp; Colman, Wayne, N.J., to Partners &amp; Shevack, New York, for its Easy-Off, Mr.
Bubble, Binaca and Wizard brands, previously at Campbell-Mithun-Esty, New York.
The agency, which already handles other Reckitt products, was awarded the accounts, with combined billings estimated at $6 million, without a review.


Second-Quarter Loss Narrowed by Equitable
The Equitable Companies yesterday reported a $17.6 million second-quarter loss from continuing operations, considerably lower than the $212.6 million loss posted by the insurance and investment company in the comparable period of 1991.
The earnings statement was the first since Equitable, formerly the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, went public in a stock offering on July 16.


Dallas Gold &amp; Silver Exchange reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Advanced Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Diner's Journal
Lipstick Cafe
Lipstick Cafe, named for the "lipstick building," the oval office tower on Third Avenue at 53d Street in Manhattan in which it is situated, is the latest creation of Jean-Georges Vongerichten, the chef and owner of Jo Jo on East 64th Street.
The breakfast-and-lunch concept is modest, particularly since the cafe does not have its own kitchen.
The food is prepared in the kitchen of the adjacent Vong, Mr.
Vongerichten's Thai restaurant, soon to open in the former Toscana.
Cafe tables, asymmetrical chairs and tall trans lucent umbrellas are clustered on one side of the airy marble lobby.
A counter in the back serves pastries, coffees, juices and the like.
At the suggestion of a healthy-looking waitress, I sampled a combination of apple and beet juices flavored with ginger ($2.50).
You have to be a serious beet aficionado to finish it.
A beer and wine license is pending.


NATO Seeks Options to Big Troop Deployment for Insuring Delivery of Aid to Bosnia
A week after President Bush asked NATO to determine how it could help insure the delivery of aid to Bosnia and Herzegovina, the alliance is caught between the recommendations of its military authorities that a large troop deployment is needed and the recognition that few allies are prepared to commit troops, Western officials said today.
In a confidential paper that was submitted to member nations today, the NATO military authorities concluded that a deployment of about 100,000 troops was the best way to insure the delivery of food and medicine by land and by air, Western officials said.


Bond and Gold Markets Jolted
Word of James A. Baker's imminent return to the White House to help President Bush's flagging re-election campaign played an unexpected role yesterday in a sharp selloff of the bond market.
Traders said remarks by Mr.
Baker, as reported by a news agency early in the afternoon, helped send the market reeling, just as it was digesting the auction of $10 billion in new 30-year bonds, the third tier of the Treasury's big quarterly sale this week.
Some traders interpreted the remarks to mean that a new Bush Administration would be more interested in stimulating the economy than in reducing the Federal deficit.


Texas Bank Tries to Raise Money to Avoid Closing
After months of unsuccessful efforts to find a merger partner, the First City Bancorporation of Texas said yesterday that it would try to avoid collapse by selling major subsidiaries and persuading investors to supply the company with $100 million in fresh capital.
The announcement comes as time is running out on First City's efforts to strengthen itself financially.
The banking law passed by Congress last year requires that on Dec. 19 Federal regulators must start closing banks, like First City, that were not insolvent at their last examination but are woefully weak, having shareholders' capital equal to 2 percent of their assets, or less.


Review/Rock; High-Tech and Nostalgia in U2 Show
"Never trust a rock-and-roll star," Bono, U2's lead singer, told a sold-out crowd at Giants Stadium tonight.
"They'll tell you anything you want to hear." Of course he was greeted by rapturous applause.
U2's two nights at Giants Stadium begin a tour of American stadiums, an enlarged version of U2's "Zoo TV" show, which has already been once around the arena circuit; it will play Yankee Stadium on Aug. 29 and 30.
The production flaunts technology, with giant video screens, dozens of video monitors and, for the stadiums, blinking towers and red-lettered computer signboards that offer local and national news bulletins before U2 appears.


Onex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Travellers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary on Thursday about the composer John Cage characterized his music incorrectly.
Though some of his works could be described as Minimalist and though Mr.
Cage influenced the Minimalist movement in music and art, his works defied formal classification and were often intentionally chaotic.


Bloomberg to Pay $13 Million for WNEW-AM
WNEW-AM, the legendary radio station that once carried classics like "Make Believe Ballroom" and "Milkman's Serenade" and more recently tktktt, may soon begin broadcasting financial and investment news.
Yesterday, the owners of WNEW-AM, Westwood One and Robert Sillerman, said they had agreed to sell the troubled New York station to Michael Bloomberg L.P., which provides data on stock, bonds, and other financial instruments for securities traders.


INSIDE
Citicorp Must Restate Profit
Citicorp said regulators had forced it to reduce its previously reported earnings and then moved quickly to make light of its problems.
Page 31.
Ex-C.I.A.
Official Upbraided
The former head of covert operations at the C.I.A. was scolded by the judge hearing his trial for repeatedly interrupting the prosecutor.
Page 5.
Victims of California Crisis
The California budget impasse has begun to hit the most vulnerable: the sick, the old and the disabled.
Page 5.
No Progress on News Buyer
Unions stayed deadlocked on who should buy The Daily News, making eventual consensus doubtful.
Page 21.


Ampal-American Israel reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
This is like a war room, because managing traffic and transportation for this convention is going to be a war.
PAUL KLEPPER, head of transportation control for the Republicans in Houston.  [ 1:4. ]


Tony Williams, 64; Platters' Lead Singer
Tony Williams, a former parking-lot attendant who crooned the 1950's hit songs "Only You" and "The Great Pretender" as the lead singer of the Platters, died yesterday at his Manhattan apartment.
He was 64 years old.
He had been suffering from diabetes and emphysema and died in his sleep, said his wife, Helen.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Albers Takes du Maurier Lead With a 68  Kristi Albers fired a four-under-par 68 yesterday to take the lead after the second round of the $700,000 Ladies Professional Golf Association du Maurier Classic tournament in Winnipeg, Manitoba.
Albers, of El Paso, Tex., had birdie putts of 50, 20, 15, 9 and 3 feet on the 6,257-yard, par-72 St.
Charles Country Club course.
Her two-day total was 138.
Kelly Robbins, an opening-round leader, and Juli Inkster were one shot back at five under, while two more first-round leaders, Meg Mallon and Sherri Steinhauer, were another shot behind.
Of the other two first-round leaders who started at five under, Michelle Mackall shot a 74 to put her three back of Albers and Betsy King shot a 77. (AP)
Kiefer Shoots 63 to Lead Seniors: Jack Kiefer, never a winner on the Senior PGA Tour, took the first-round lead in the Bruno's Classic with a sizzling 63 yesterday at Greystone Golf Club south of Birmingham, Ala.
Kiefer, who qualified for the 78-player field with a 66 Monday, had nine birdies and nine pars.
Kiefer, owner of a driving range in Andover, N.J., missed only one green and one fairway in shooting 33 on the front nine and 30 coming in. (AP) TENNIS  Edberg and Sampras to Face in Semifinals  Stefan Edberg and Pete Sampras advanced to a semifinal matchup in the ATP Championship with straight-set victories yesterday in Mason, Ohio.
Edberg beat Jim Grabb, 6-3, 7-6 (7-5), and No. 3 Sampras eliminated fifth-seeded Petr Korda, 6-3, 6-3.
Ivan Lendl easily advanced to the semifinals with a 6-1, 6-2 victory over David Wheaton.
Fourth-seeded Michael Chang was leading Jaime Yzaga, 4-1, in the first set when rain forced a postponement until today.
The winner will plan Lendl tonight. (AP)
Navratilova Routs Garrison: Second-seeded Martina Navratilova overpowered sixth-seeded Zina Garrison, 6-3, 6-0, yesterday in a quarterfinal match of the Virginia Slims of Los Angeles in Manhattan Beach, Calif.
Fourth-seeded Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere eliminated qualifier Kimberly Po, 6-1, 7-6 (7-2), and will play Navratilova in one of today's semifinals at the Manhattan Country Club.
Third-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario defeated Helena Sukova in a night match, 2-6, 6-3,6-2, and will play top-seeded Monica Seles in the other semifinal. (AP)


Review/Pop; When Affection Turns Into Fury
Calm and clear-eyed, serene as the Mona Lisa, dressed in black with her black hair pulled back, Polly J. Harvey gazed from the stage of CBGB on Wednesday night.
She ticked off quiet, steady guitar chords, in unison with a simple drumbeat from Robert Ellis, and began to sing without raising her voice.
"Tie yourself to me," she intoned.
"You're not rid of me."
Her tone grew tremulous -- "I beg you . . . Don't leave me" -- and then, suddenly, the band was slamming out power chords and Ms.
Harvey, her voice adamantine with pain and rage, warned, "I'll make you lick my injuries," and, "Don't do me so." Moments later, the music was quiet again, but Ms.
Harvey had shown that affection can turn to fury in an instant.


Primark Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Texas Bank Tries to Raise Money to Avoid Closing
After months of unsuccessful efforts to find a merger partner, the First City Bancorporation of Texas said yesterday that it would try to avoid collapse by selling major subsidiaries and persuading investors to supply the company with $100 million in fresh capital.
The announcement comes as time is running out on First City's efforts to strengthen itself financially.
The banking law passed by Congress last year requires that on Dec. 19 Federal regulators must start closing banks, like First City, that were not insolvent at their last examination but are woefully weak, having shareholders' capital equal to 2 percent of their assets, or less.


Biocraft Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Police Defend Officers in Accidental Death of a Hostage
The police officers who killed a hostage and a gunman after a botched robbery in Corona, Queens, Tuesday night were following department procedures "by the numbers," a police official said yesterday.
But they were hindered, the official said, because the gunman had the hostage out on the street where he could not be easily cordoned off.
Deputy Chief Raymond J. Abruzzi, head of the Queens detectives and a former commander of the department's emergency services and special operations units, said that procedures call for officers to try to contain gunmen holding hostages.


California Crisis Poses a Threat To Poor Patients
A day after a court ruling that prevents California from paying hospitals, doctors, nursing homes, hospices and other heath-care providers while the state has no budget, despair overcame the Rev.
Chauncey Staten today at the Metropolitan Hospice he founded for terminal AIDS and cancer patients here.
"I went into this business to make them more comfortable in the last stages of their lives," he said today.
"And the government is so nonchalant about it. Our leaders have lost touch with people."


Black Women's Hair Care: Market's There, and Now So Are the Appliances
Antoinette Williams, a 22-year-old fashion designer in Silver Spring, Md., likes to use an electric curling iron, and now, finally, she has found a model made specifically for black women.
"It generates more heat and is more productive in making the curls," she said.
"I use it for myself, my mom and my friends."


Don't Forget the Abandoned Spouses of Gays
To the Editor:
Dudley Clendinen's account of his journey toward gay identity in "The Gay Vote: Music to My Ears" (Op-Ed, Aug. 1) contains a curious omission.
He makes no mention of how his wife reacted.
Was his coming out music to her ears -- or to the children's?
Does it matter?


Speak Your Phone-Card Number Softly
Public telephones at Pennsylvania Station in New York have a new look: stickers reminding users to guard their telephone credit-card numbers.
The warning is well founded.
"You have people we call 'shoulder surfers' who hang out near public phones in places like railroad stations and airports," said James Snyder, a lawyer for MCI Communications Corporation.
"And they are there to steal credit-card numbers."


Biogen Seeks Profits to Call Its Own
In the early 1980's, when Wall Street fell head over heels for biotechnology, Genentech, Cetus, Genex and Biogen were the start-up companies that came to be known as the Big Four.
Each had ambitious goals, heaps of venture capital, impressive links to blue-chip multinationals, advisory boards packed with renowned scientists and top executives with a flair for pitching their visions.
But only Biogen N.V. has remained independent.


The Third World Secret of Nike's Success
To the Editor:
After reading the rhapsodic article about the new Nike Town building in Chicago (Styles of The Times, July 19), I believe it is time to disclose the secret of Nike's success.


Trade Accord Resolves Fight on Hondas
In the course of concluding their free trade pact with Mexico, negotiators for Canada and the United States quietly resolved one of their most explosive bilateral disputes, the fight over duties that the United States imposed on Canadian-made Honda Civics.
Canadian trade officials said today that under proposed new North American rules governing duty-free trade, Honda would not have to pay the duties.
United States Customs had found that the Canadian Hondas had failed to meet a current requirement that at least 50 percent of the automobile be made in either country for it to be duty free.


Jillian's reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


James R. Allen; Led Airlift Unit And Academy
James R. Allen, a retired Air Force general who headed the Military Airlift Command and served as superintendent of the United States Air Force Academy in the late 1970's, died on Tuesday of cancer in the hospital at Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland.
He was 66 years old and lived in Alexandria, Va.
A native of Louisville, Ky., General Allen was a 1948 graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y.
He flew combat missions in both the Korean and Vietnamese wars.


Kiddie Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Acme Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Beliefs
Even at a glance they are disquieting: row upon row of identical small statues bordering the walks or climbing up hillsides near Buddhist temples and Shinto shrines throughout Japan.
These figures look like ranks of standing Buddhist monks, but many are incongruously dressed with a child's sweater, a baby's bright bonnet or a bib.
Some gaze down at little mounds of toys, shoes or bottles of baby food.
These figurines are memorials to the aborted, miscarried and stillborn young, part of a recent, and criticized, religious practice in Japan known as "mizuko kuyo," literally "water-child offering." They came to mind after John Cardinal O'Connor of New York proposed that every Roman Catholic diocese maintain a "Tomb of the Unborn Child" to commemorate aborted fetuses.


Devcon International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; Rats! We Certainly Didn't Expect That
As it winds its way from state to state, the campaign of Al Gore, the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee, marches along at a slightly different pace and with a different texture from that of his running mate, Gov.
Bill Clinton.
With Mr.
Clinton, it is frenetic activity that often puts the candidate hours behind schedule.
The entourage often arrives at its final destination long past midnight.


A Wild Pitch and Even Wilder Squawk
For all the games Scott Kamieniecki lost and deserved to lose in this trying season, this was one game he probably could have won.
But he did not because the Yankees stumbled offensively for most of the night and then Kamieniecki tripped on his own.
After the Yankees finally rallied from a 2-0 deficit to tie the score in the eighth inning against the White Sox, Kamieniecki tossed a wild pitch in the bottom of the inning that scored Steve Sax with the decisive third run and propelled Chicago to a 6-2 victory at Comiskey Park.


Israel Says Syria Is Testing Advanced Scud Missiles
As the Israeli Government prepares for a scheduled new round of Middle East peace talks, its leaders have complained that neighboring Syria has test launched two advanced Scud missiles capable of hitting targets anywhere in Israel.
The missiles, reportedly tested about 10 days ago, were bought from North Korea, but senior officials here say the Syrians are working with Iran to produce Scuds on their own, including those with chemical warheads.


Chancellor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Researchers Report More Riddles Than Clues in AIDS-Like Illness
A national meeting on a mysterious AIDS-like illness ended here today with scientists saying they were no closer to determining its cause and that all possibilities remained open.
Although footprints of viruses were found in some such cases by three groups of scientists, they and other participants said there was no solid evidence that the illness was caused by a virus or any other microbe.


FOOTBALL: Giants Notebook; Elbow Forces Hostetler To Sit Out
Jeff Hostetler, the Giants' starting quarterback, woke up today with a slightly hyperextended right elbow.
As a result, he will not play Saturday night in his team's preseason game against the Cleveland Browns at Giants Stadium.
Through a spokesman, Coach Ray Handley said the quarterback's condition did not appear to be serious.
He said Hostetler apparently aggravated the elbow in practice Thursday.
The Giants held a walk-through practice today, as they usually do on the day before a game.
Quarterbacks do not throw the ball in walk-through practices, so Hostetler did not miss any throwing time today.
Instead, like the other quarterbacks, Hostetler did conditioning runs.


Qual-Med Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


McClain Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


HORSE RACING: Notebook; Saratoga Sale Prices Take a Sharp Tumble
Prices dropped 20 percent from last year during this week's Saratoga horse sale, and D. G. Van Clief, chairman of the Fasig-Tipton auction company, put it this way: "We've all been looking for the bottom for two years."
But it was clear the bottom had not yet been reached.
And one of the chief reasons for the continuing drop in the horse market was the slackening of interest and of cash from abroad, especially from the Arabian and Japanese investors who have energized the market for the last decade.
Van Clief put that factor this way:


Unitrode Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.30
5.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.06
5.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.16
5.29
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.01
6.08
7.62
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.31
7.41
8.08
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.39
9.08
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.20
6.18
6.98
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Underdog America's Pastime Wins Wilson in Record Time
America's Pastime, an 18-1 underdog, came from the extreme outside with a burst to pass Presidential Ball, the favorite, and overtake Broadway Blue, a 30-1 shot, at the wire to capture the $778,800 Woodrow Wilson Pace tonight at the Meadowlands.
Driven for the first time by Walter Hennessey, America's Pastime paced the mile in 1:514/5, shattering the previous track, seasonal and stakes record of 1:521/5 by two past winners: Die Laughing (1990) and Sportsmaster (1991).


Wiland Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Laser-Pacific Media reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Your Money; Investing Women: A Call to Action
IN contrast to the strides that women have made in the business and professional worlds in the last two decades, relatively few have taken charge of family financial planning and investing, according to a recent study commissioned by the Oppenheimer Management Corporation.
That finding troubles Bridget A. Macaskill, president and chief operating officer of Oppenheimer, which manages more than 50 mutual funds with assets of $19 billion.
"One of the things that concerns me," she said, "is that I have conversations with very successful women and they say: 'I am useless at financial matters. I leave everything to my accountant.' "


Doubts and Rivalries on the Road to the White House
With the exception of George Washington, who assumed the Presidency unopposed and was the only unanimous choice of the electoral college, the road to the White House has often been paved with political potholes.
Campaigns seem rougher now because they are more visible, with Presidential and Vice Presidential candidates playing good cop-bad cop roles, but accusations of corruption and mudslinging have been around for nearly two centuries.
That is one of the impressions left by an exhibition of historic manuscripts and campaign memorabilia on view at the Forbes Magazine Galleries, 62 Fifth Avenue, at 12th Street, Manhattan, titled " . . . And If Elected: Presidential Politics and Personalities on Paper." The exhibition, which is free, is to run through November; gallery hours are Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays (except holidays) from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.


Accessible Playgrounds
To the Editor:
As a playground designer for disabled children, I was recently drawn to a small boy in a wheelchair "playing" in Central Park.
His wheelchair was facing a tree along the drive, and the boy was trying in vain to reach the tree.
The care giver explained that the boy loved the park but there was no place for him to play, and thus the game at the tree was devised.


John D. Thompson Is Dead at 75; Evaluated Health Care Practices
John D. Thompson, an educator whose ideas revolutionized the financing and evaluation of health care and shortened hospital stays, died on Thursday at Yale-New Haven Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 75 years old and lived in New Haven.
He died of cardiopulmonary arrest, his family said.


Hadco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Koger Equity reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Observer; In the Mode Mood
President Bush says he is about to enter "campaign mode." Does this mean America will then have President
a la mode
? Absolutely not. Do you think the President is a slice of pie?
This is the same answer I had from Mr.
Bush's mode handler when he was asked if President
a la mode
wasn't a dangerously high-calorie finish to a four-year bout of governance.


Central Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Line by Line, Rockefeller Tries to Save His Campaign
The rest of the world may believe Larry Rockefeller's quixotic quest to unseat Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato is over, but inside Mr.
Rockefeller's campaign headquarters such an attitude is not tolerated.
There, the campaign is not yet dead, only bleeding.
With furious concentration, Mr.
Rockefeller's aides have been trying to beat Mr.
D'Amato's supporters at their own game.


A Bosnia Cafe Where Enemies Put Aside War to Do Business
In style, the Pension Delminium lacks the raffishness of Rick's Cafe, the conspiratorial hangout in "Casablanca." For one thing, there is no piano player, only recorded music that lacks the melancholy of "As Time Goes By."
But in substance, the Delminium is the Rick's Cafe of the Sarajevo siege.
It is a place created by war, where arms are put aside for deal-making, where fighters from opposing sides mingle, where the man at the next table may be trading in false documents, in safe passage out of the siege, in valuable information -- or, more prosaically but probably still more profitably, in eggs and potatoes and cabbages for transport to the favored few in Sarajevo who have the dollars or marks to buy.
An Island of Neutrality
The Delminium, a four-story chalet, sits modestly beside the potholed main street in Stup, a village about six miles from the center of Sarajevo on a plateau that opens out to the west of the steep mountains that hold the city like a vise.
The geography puts Stup astride one of only two routes out of the city that are still open.
Still more important, it lies on the only route not controlled by either of the warring sides, the Serbian nationalists or the Bosnian Government.


Cellular Technical Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brooke Group Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rivesaltes Journal; Unnamed and Tottering, A War Specter Lingers
Shaded by plane trees and surrounded by vineyards, this small town in southwestern France seems an image of rural tranquillity.
But like the country as a whole, it is suddenly troubled by the long suppressed memory of the Vichy Government's persecution of Jews during World War II.
On the outskirts of town, just a couple of miles from a central square where old men play boules and the wind carries the waft of fermenting grapes, stands a former prison camp.
Several thousand people, many of them Jews, were held there by the French authorities for more than a year during the war before being herded into trucks for the journey to Nazi concentration camps and death.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Recalled Mike Gardiner, pitcher, from Pawtucket from the International League.
Optioned Daryl Irvine, pitcher, to Pawtucket.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Activated Rob Deer, outfielder, from the disabled list.
Placed Kevin Ritz, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.


Review/Theater; Taking an Unromantic View of the Shipwrecked Viola
Productions of Shakespeare's "Twelfth Night" tend to tilt in one of two directions.
Some directors use this fable of androgyny and headstrong passions to explore the mysteries of erotic enchantment.
Others treat the story of the shipwrecked Viola, who disguises herself as a boy, then falls secretly in love with her titled boss, Orsino, as a dry comic farce.
Bram Lewis, who directed the Phoenix Theater's new production of the play, at the Performing Arts Center of the State University College here through Aug. 23, takes the unromantic view.
In his disenchanted interpretation, the characters in the play's central triangle behave like petulant junior high school students passing notes and trying to sort out who gets to go steady with whom.
Everyone is a buffoon.


Publicker Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jubilation Greets Released Prisoners of War in Croatia


Asset Investors Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4  AIRLIFT TO SOMALIA PLANNED
Washington is planning an airlift of food to Somalia, which has been ravaged by drought and fighting.
A third of the population is said to be in danger of starvation.  1  JAPAN'S ECONOMY IN TROUBLE
Japan is struggling with a deepening economic downturn that may prove to be the harshest in two decades, but what most troubles some economists is that Tokyo vowed that this type of decline would not happen.  1  NO QUICK ACTION SEEN FOR BOSNIA
While allies predicted no immediate action on sending troops to Bosnia, its delegation reacted with dissatisfaction to the Security Council resolution authorizing force to protect shipments of relief supplies.  4  FRANCE HEEDS U.N.
CALL
France responded to U.N. action with an offer to send 1,100 more soldiers to help protect relief missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina, even though no plan exists for deploying them.  4  A RESTORATIVE SIP OF PLUM BRANDY
The usual suspects are there for the drinks and the deals, if not for the glamour.
In Bosnia, the Pension Delminium is the place where beautiful friendships begin and end, and the war is left at the door.  4  ECHOES OF A MASSACRE?
Gunmen swept through a black squatters camp at Ivory Park, leaving at least four people dead and bringing accusations by witnesses that the attackers had an armored police escort.  3  POLICE DETAIN RETURNED HAITIANS
Fleeing Haitians intercepted by the Coast Guard and returned home were rounded up by police as the U.S. and other countries prepared for the latest attempt to get talks started in the Caribbean nation.  3  INDIAN ECONOMIC PLAN STUMBLES
A year after it was introduced, India's grand plan for economic restructuring is not progressing as quickly as many had hoped and is being erected on a foundation that is less than secure.  2  ISRAEL SAYS SYRIA TESTED MISSILES
Israel reports that Damascus is testing advanced Scud missiles that are capable of striking Israeli targets and working with Iran to develop its own Scuds, some equipped with chemical warheads.  3  National 5-8  TRADE: IMPACT ON SHOPPERS
For the American consumer, the biggest effect of the new North American Free Trade Agreement will take place in the neighborhood supermarket, where fresh fruits and vegetables will become more plentiful, more readily available in winter and will almost certainly become cheaper.  1  DUAL PATHS TAKEN ON ABORTION
President Bush and his strategists have helped push through platform language that goes beyond the President's own strong anti-abortion stand in an effort to insure the support of conservatives, while at the same time they try to make abortion-rights supporters feel comfortable voting for Mr.
Bush.  1  BUILDING THE G.O.P.
PLATFORM
The platform the Republicans will adopt at their convention next week illustrates the degree to which diehard conservatives are in control of party affairs.
But for President Bush, the platform must generate enthusiasm among people who will raise money, knock on doors, run phone banks and otherwise round up votes for him in November.  6  THE FREEWAY CONVENTION
Many delegates to the Republican convention will travel as far as 30 miles through Houston's notorious rush-hour traffic on freeways with nicknames like "The Beast" to get from their hotels to the Astrodome.
And even partying will require long treks to the vast prairie that stretches west of the city, and to Galveston Bay 40 miles to the southeast.  1  GORE MEETS THE UNEXPECTED
Reporter's Notebook: For Senator Al Gore the pace is much more languid than that of his running mate.
There is a near-slavish devotion to punctuality and to Mr.
Gore's desire to retire early so he can be up for his beloved early-morning jogs.
But for all its striving for predictability, the Gore campaign also gets struck by the unexpected.  7  THE TRIAL NO ONE WANTS
For government officials and community leaders across Florida, the retrial of a Miami police officer in the shooting death of a black motorcyclist contains too many disturbing echoes of the Rodney King beating case and offers the same potential for racial violence.  1  BUDGET CRISIS BEGINS TO HURT
As California politicians squabble over the budget and seek political cover, the state's fiscal crisis, until now mainly an inconvenience, has begun to hit hardest at the most vulnerable: the sick, the old, the blind and disabled.  5  ILLNESS CONTINUES TO BAFFLE
A national meeting on a mysterious AIDS-like illness ended with scientists saying that they were no closer to determining its cause and that all possibilities remained open.  8  EX-C.I.A.
OFFICIAL UPBRAIDED
The Federal judge in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George sent the jury out of the courtroom and threatened Mr.
George with contempt proceedings if he continued to interrupt the prosecutor during his trial.
Mr.
George apologized.  5  Obituaries 9  WATERGATE JUDGE DIES
John Joseph Sirica, the Federal judge whose relentless search for the facts of the Watergate burglary ultimately brought down the Presidency of Richard M. Nixon, died yesterday at Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington, D.C.
He was 88 years old.  1  Metro Digest 21  Business Digest 31  Consumer's World 46  Arts/Entertainment 11-14, 44  Sports 26-30  Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Why zero nukes is too few.
Mr.
Barr misjudges himself.
Haitians, delivered to danger.
Letters  Russell Baker: In the mode mood.
Ken Ruberg: Guess who is not coming to Houston.
Douglas Coupland: Zap votes and runtbites.
Barbara Mosbacher: From Salem to Houston.
Robert F. Kennedy Jr. and Dennis Rivera: Pollution's chief victims.


Filene's Basement reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


New Jersey Still Beckons To Exchange In New York
Despite an agreement by three of the city's five commodities exchanges to remain in New York, the city could still lose thousands of jobs and tens of millions of dollars in tax revenue if the New York Mercantile Exchange, the largest of the five, makes good on its threat to leave.
Officials of the Mercantile Exchange said yesterday that they have not yet decided whether to stay or to move to Jersey City, where office space is less expensive.
The officials said they would make a decision by fall.


Corrections
An obituary on Aug. 6 about the abstract artist Jon Schueler omitted the gallery that has represented him since 1985.
It is the Katharina Rich Perlow Gallery in SoHo, which held one-man exhibitions of his work in 1986, 1987, 1989 and 1991.


Company Briefs
ADOLPH COORS CO., Golden, Colo, was awarded an extension of the temporary restraining order barring Anheuser-Busch Companies Inc., St.
Louis, from broadcasting a commercial for its Natural Light beer.
The extension was granted by a Federal judge in Manhattan.
BRITISH PETROLEUM CO., London, signed a letter of intent for the sale of the assets and business of BP Performance Polymers Inc.
In an associated deal, BP Chemicals also signed a letter of intent for the sale of its Antwerp LDPE business.
The purchaser is Neste Chemicals, Espoo, Finland, a petrochemicals company.
Terms were not disclosed.


FREE TRADE ACCORD EXPECTED TO TRIM NATION'S FOOD BILL
For the American consumer, the biggest effect of the new North American Free Trade Agreement will take place in the neighborhood supermarket, where fresh fruits and vegetables will become more plentiful, more readily available in winter and will almost certainly become cheaper.
The free trade pact that the United States, Canada and Mexico reached this week will, if ratified, eliminate the taxes now imposed on tomatoes, cantaloupes, cucumbers and many other foods imported from Mexico.
The taxes, or tariffs, are intended to protect American farmers from imports, and they add significantly to the price of these foods.
The accord will also reduce transportation costs by opening long-haul cross-border truck routes to low-wage Mexican carriers.
Cheaper Roses
The agreement may even lower the cost of romance -- cutting out the 8 percent tax on cut roses from Mexico.
"You will find a greater availability of fruits and vegetables in your store, and the prices will be lower," said Colin A. Carter, a professor of agricultural economics at the University of California at Davis.
"There is a saving for consumers -- there's no question -- because many of these products have been protected right now from import competition."


Jubilation Greets Released Prisoners of War in Croatia


GEO International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


PLM Equipment Growth Fund L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


School Renovation Goes On Despite the Hazard to Children
To the Editor:
Re "Allegation of Lead Hazard in a Public School Is Outrageous" (letter, Aug. 1) by Amy Linden, chief executive for school facilities, New York City Public Schools: Levels of lead found by Lawrence B. Molloy, a licensed contractor and lead abatement specialist, are not a fabrication and should not be treated lightly.
Lead is the No. 1 health threat to children in this country today.


States' School Spending: Rich Pay Less Per Capita
The three states in the New York metropolitan area all spend substantial amounts to educate their children, but a new study concludes that two of them, New Jersey and Connecticut, could spend a lot more.
The study, an analysis of census data by the Center for Government Services at Rutgers University, found that on the basis of ability to pay, Connecticut ranks 45th and New Jersey 39th in spending in education, far behind such poorer states as Mississippi and Maine.


ICO Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Viceroy Homes reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Patents; Protein Protects Body From Itself
Udec Pharmaceuticals Inc., a start-up company in New Haven, has obtained a patent covering a protein that it said can protect blood vessels and clot-forming blood platelets from attacks by a person's own immune system.
These "auto immune" responses sometimes occur when a person has a heart attack, undergoes an organ transplant or suffers from certain illnesses.
A cluster of proteins called the membrane attack complex, which normally attack only foreign particles, suddenly attacks cells that line the inside of vessels.


Banyan Strategic Land Fund II reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Critic's Notebook; Should TV Be Carrying Reports of Carryings-On?
When President Bush appears with David Brinkley on ABC tomorrow morning, will he be further provoked by questions about a reported extramarital affair while he was Vice President?
Since a network spokesman offers assurances that no deal has been struck, will Mr.
Brinkley voluntarily lay off?
And if a rude word is uttered, will Mr.
Bush douse this pooh-bah of ABC in the sort of indignation that he has already squirted on mere reporters like Mary Tillotson of CNN and Stone Phillips of NBC?
Mr.
Bush's angry rebuffs, echoed by Vice President Dan Quayle and Barbara Bush, should bring a hearty amen from all the commentators who have been predicting that the 1992 campaign would come to this, and worse, even though no member of the President's official or personal family took umbrage when Bill Clinton was subjected to a more strenuous going-over during the primaries.


Terrano Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Banyan Strategic Land Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jets' Punter Pressured From Every Direction
Louis Aguiar never knew that a punt could weigh so much.
But a 16-yarder on his first attempt against the Redskins last week made it feel as if an elephant had climbed onto his back and wouldn't get off.
Aguiar can unburden himself, and possibly save his job, with a solid performance when the Jets play the Packers in an exhibition game at Madison, Wis., this Sunday.


Elcotel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rogers Cantel Mobile Communications Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


DELTA PILOTS REFUSE TO DELAY PAY INCREASE
Delta Air Lines' unionized pilots refused yesterday to defer a group of pay increases scheduled to go into effect Sept. 1.
Delta had asked the pilots to defer the pay increases after the airline reported a loss of $506.3 million for the fiscal year that ended on June 30.
John Culp, a spokesman for the Delta members of the Air Line Pilots Association, said the union plans to make a detailed study of Delta's books and may agree later to some concessions.
"We have decided to accept management's offer to study the financial condition of the company, but we have declined their request to postpone the September pay package," Mr.
Culp said.
The review will probably take several weeks.


Imagine Films reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Preparing a Neighborhood For a Grand Jury Decision
While a grand jury hears testimony to determine whether to indict a police officer in the killing of a Dominican immigrant in Washington Heights, Mayor David N. Dinkins's office and human rights officials are taking steps that they hope will prevent another outbreak of the disturbances that followed the shooting.
Human rights officials are hoping to keep the peace by explaining the workings of the grand jury process in a series of neighborhood workshops and appearances on Spanish-language broadcasts.
They have been joined by volunteer lawyers in trying to dispel misgivings and to allay fears of a cover-up by discussing the intricacies of the American judicial system and contrasting it with that of the Dominican Republic.


Wish You Were Here, In Artful Black and White
Summertime is postcard time, and for almost two decades now some of the most interesting cards around have been published by Fotofolio.
This small New York company has carved a niche for itself, turning classic art photographs into postcards, note cards and posters.
Founded in 1975 by Julie Galant and Martin Bontell, Fotofolio uses pictures by masters like Man Ray, Robert Doisneau, Barbara Morgan and Edward Weston, as well as a host of younger artists like Laurie Simmons, Barbara Kruger, Joel Sternfeld and Philip-Lorca diCorcia.


Crackdown Announced on Groups Using Violence in Construction
The Dinkins administration announced plans yesterday to crack down on the rising number of groups using violence and extortion to get jobs at construction sites for black and Hispanic workers.
The announcement came a day after two men who the police said belonged to the Queens Community Construction Coalition, a group that tries to get jobs for minorities, were fatally shot in a Queens park where they had gathered with about a dozen other men to discuss the day's job openings.
The police said last night that they did not know whether the Queens coalition had ever resorted to violence.


Opponents Start to Plan But Lack Unified Theme
President Bush has hailed a trade agreement between North American countries as the beginning of a new era, but opponents of the measure are gearing up to prevent its enactment or significantly change it.
The opponents, who represent different groups with widely different interests, have yet to coalesce, however, and form any unified plan of attack.


Owners Committee Confers on Giants' Move
Baseball's executive council discussed the proposed move of the San Francisco Giants to St.
Petersburg, Fla., yesterday but emerged with no view pro or con.
Commissioner Fay Vincent, speaking from Montreal after his telephone conference call with the council, said that taking a position at this time would be premature.


Mr. Barr Misjudges Himself
Angrily dismissing the demands of Democrats in Congress, Attorney General William Barr has refused to seek a special prosecutor to investigate the Bush Administration's aid to Iraq before the Persian Gulf war.
His response, full of fury, tries to show that he, the Administration's chief legal officer, can credibly carry out his own investigation.
It fails.
Congressional critics are roasting President Bush for his fruitless prewar appeasement of Saddam Hussein, and they will surely continue to do so throughout the campaign.
But some of those critics press a different question, not whether that policy was foolish but whether there was criminality or corruption in its execution.


Abex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Decision From Unions At Daily News
Newspaper unions remained deadlocked yesterday over who should buy The Daily News.
Exactly when -- or if -- a consensus can be reached was very much in doubt, despite a Monday deadline from a bankruptcy judge.
Union support is viewed as the essential element of a sale of the bankrupt paper, and after months of unresolved negotiations, the frustration of prospective buyers is apparent.


Mets Drop Another, and to the Cellar-Dwellers, No Less
In a slump?
Losses piling upon losses?
Record falling so fast it feels like the cellar's rushing up toward your feet?
Well, then, what better cure than a visit by the National League's worst team?
What could be nicer than a series against the Philadelphia Phillies, whose record for futility is surpassed only by the hapless Seattle Mariners, who reside in that other league and on that other coast?
Of course, the Phillies might see this in a different light.
After last night, the Mets certainly must.
It's one thing to lose to the Pirates in extra innings, as the Mets did twice this week, quite another to watch a rookie pitcher from a cellar team roll through your lineup, as patched up as it may be.


For Nassau, More Budget Gridlock and Less Time
After months of budgetary turmoil and on-again, off-again layoffs, Nassau County officials said today that many county agencies had all but spent their budgets for the entire year and would run out of spending authority in a matter of days.
The announcement came as the county's Board of Supervisors, deadlocked on partisan lines as it has been for months, voted down a measure that would have allowed $16 million in borrowing to keep money flowing for county paychecks for several weeks longer.
The board's three Democrats opposed the measure; the three Republicans supported it.
County officials said they hoped to negotiate a compromise that would pass within the next week or so.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; FOR BUSH, SOME PROGRESS IN THE POLLS
President Bush has narrowed the gap with Gov.
Bill Clinton, but the Democratic nominee still holds a major lead as Mr.
Bush prepares for next week's Republican National Convention, two new polls show.


Acton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Memo on Rio Summit Focused on U.S. Gains
To the Editor:
The distortion of the intent and content of my memorandum on the Earth Summit in Rio to Environmental Protection Agency employees is symptomatic of the problem the Bush Administration has experienced in getting fair news coverage for an environmental record that is substantive, significant and impressive (front page, Aug. 1).


Gerrity Oil &amp; Gas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
Among living authors of bridge books, the most productive Americans are two Californians, Eddie Kantar and Mike Lawrence.
In total titles they are led by Hugh Kelsey of Scotland, and on this side of the Atlantic they may eventually be overtaken by Frank Stewart of Fayette, Ala., author of 16 books in the past decade.
Stewart's most recent contributions to the literature of the game are "Two-Minute Bridge Tips" and "My Bridge and Yours," available from the author (Box 962, Fayette, Ala. 35555) for $11.95 each including postage.
The deals in "Two-Minute Bridge Tips" are based on newspaper columns he writes in collaboration with the veteran, Alfred Sheinwold.
They are in single-dummy format, giving the reader a problem to solve before he inspects the full layout.


Guidepost; Septic Safeguards
Septic systems, used by one in four households in the United States for waste disposal, should last indefinitely if properly maintained.
But neglect and abuse can cause breakdowns leading to repairs costing tens of thousands of dollars.
Here is some advice for avoiding such problems.
WHAT IT IS: A septic system is made up of a watertight tank buried in the ground and leaching lines leading into the surrounding soil.
Together, the tank and the leaching fields purify and decompose much of the waste, though some remains temporarily in the tank.


Book on Race Used Scientific Findings
To the Editor:
In "Black Demagogues and Pseudo-Scholars" (Op-Ed, July 20), Henry Louis Gates Jr. writes that my book "The Iceman Inheritance" "argues that white people are so vicious because they, unlike the rest of mankind, are descended from the brutish Neanderthals." He continues: "More to the point, it speculates that the Jews may have been the 'purest and oldest Neanderthal-Caucasoids,' the iciest of the ice people; hence (he explains) the singularly odious character of ancient Jewish culture."


Review/Theater; The Humor in Love and Possession
In Alan Minieri's "Who Could That Be?" -- the sharpest and funniest of four pieces in Series B of "In Plain View," the Turnip Festival Company's third annual collection of one-acts -- a man and woman discover just how small a self-sufficient world of love and possession can be.
At least one is certain the woman (Erin Kelly) has learned her lesson; the man (Richard Henning) may need a little more time before he realizes how important distraction is for the preservation of high passion.
Mr.
Minieri pays close attention to his lean words and, under the direction of Alejandra Lopez, so do Ms.
Kelly and Mr.
Henning.


Atek Metals Center reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NFL TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Dallas Cowboys
If there was ever a yawn in the making, it would have to be tonight's Cowboys-Oilers game in Dallas.
The two teams have scrimmaged against each other twice, held two joint practices and already played each other in one exhibition game, in Tokyo two weeks ago.
"I think we're as tired of the Oilers as the Oilers are tired of the Cowboys," said the Dallas coach, Jimmy Johnson, echoing a common sentiment.


Rogers Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Southwest Gas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


De Tomaso Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Police Officer Wounded in Drug Gunfire
A suspected crack dealer wearing a bulletproof vest shot and wounded an undercover narcotics officer yesterday in an exchange of gunfire during a buy-and-bust operation in a Bronx building, the police said.
After wounding the officer, the suspect clambered up a fire-escape while trading shots with backup officers on the street, scampered across the roof, shimmied down the drain pipe of an adjacent building and ducked into an apartment where he was arrested without a struggle, said Detective Chief Edward Cappello, commander of Bronx detectives.


CHRONICLE
HARRIET KLINE, a painter and sculptor whose works will be seen in Tiffany's windows this month, is having a hard time making a dent in her money.
There it is, tied up in a bale in her garage in Scarsdale -- $20 million worth, she estimates -- shredded up and sold to her by the Federal Reserve Bank in Manhattan.
The bank shreds currency that is worn out or otherwise unfit for circulation.
The artist decided she wanted some after she saw a jar of shredded money in her dentist's office.
"I make paper," she said, "and I thought I could put it in the paper. It is in my favorite color scheme, green and black."


Continental Mortgage &amp; Equity Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cisco Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 26


METRO DIGEST
PUTTING MONEY INTO SCHOOLS
The three states in the New York metropolitan area all spend substantial amounts to educate their children, but a new study concludes that two of them, New Jersey and Connecticut, could spend a lot more.
The study, an analysis of Census data by the Center for Government Services at Rutgers University, found that, on the basis of ability to pay, Connecticut ranks 45th and New Jersey 39th in spending in education, far behind such poorer states as Mississippi and Maine.
New York does far better, ranking 10th.
Page 25.
NEW YORK CITY
TRYING TO KEEP THE PEACE
While a grand jury hears testimony to determine whether to indict a police officer in the killing of a Dominican immigrant in Washington Heights, Mayor Dinkins's office and human rights officials are trying to prevent another outbreak of violence.
Page 23.
SHOOTOUT CALLED WITHIN BOUNDS
The police officers who killed a hostage and a gunman after a botched robbery in Corona, Queens, Tuesday night were within the boundaries of standard department procedures, a police official said.
Page 22.
CRACKDOWN ON CONSTRUCTION GROUPS
Mayor Dinkins is planning to crack down on the rising number of groups using violence and extortion to get jobs at construction sites for black and Hispanic workers.
Page 22.
WHITHER THE MERC?
Despite an agreement by three of the city's five commodities exchanges to remain in New York, the city could lose thousands of jobs and tens of millions of dollars in tax revenue if the New York Mercantile Exchange leaves.
Page 23.
SCRAMBLING TO SAVE A CAMPAIGN
The rest of the world may believe Larry Rockefeller's quixotic quest to unseat Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato is over, but Mr.
Rockefeller's workers have not conceded defeat.
Page 23.
OFFICER SHOT IN THE BRONX
A suspected crack dealer wearing a bulletproof vest shot and wounded an undercover narcotics officer yesterday in an exchange of gunfire during a buy-and-bust operation in a Bronx building, the police said.
Page 23.
REGION  RELIEF  FOR MOTORISTS
Across New Jersey, offices of the Department of Motor Vehicles are going to resume weekend and evening hours, officials say, because the Legislature is expected to restore $5 million cut from the agency's budget.
Page 25.  $10 MILLION FISHING BOAT SINKS
Six men were rescued after their boat, perhaps the world's largest private sport fishing vessel, sank about 100 miles southeast of Cape May, N.J., in bad weather.
The $10 million Lady Anna, which has gold-plated fixtures, is owned by a major New Jersey developer, Hirair Hovnanian, who was on board at the time.
Page 25.
BETTER TIMES FOR BRIDGEPORT
Standard &amp; Poor's upgraded Bridgeport's credit rating, citing the city's decision to abandon its bid for bankruptcy protection and its efforts to balance its budget.
Page 24.
About New York by Douglas Martin 22


All American Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Haiti Detains 150 Returned by the U.S.
More than 150 Haitians who tried to escape their homeland by boat were taken into custody today by Haitian policemen after a United States Coast Guard cutter intercepted their vessel at sea and returned them to Port-au-Prince.
The State Department said that an American consular official was at the dock when the Haitians were detained and that he had followed them to police headquarters to monitor their treatment.


U.S. Tells Citicorp: Restate Net
Citicorp said yesterday that regulators had forced it to reduce its previously reported second-quarter earnings by $28 million, to $143 million, and to sign a memorandum of understanding, a formal acknowledgement that the company's problems are great enough to require extra attention.
After spending 18 months pulling itself partly out of the financial hole it dug with losses on bad loans and receiving favorable reviews on Wall Street, Citicorp responded to the regulators in a way that showed it was still insecure about its image.


International Mobile Machines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Air Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Haitians, Delivered to Danger
Yesterday the U.S.
Government literally delivered 154 would-be refugees into the hands of the Haitian dictatorship's police.
That seems a stark violation of the prohibitions in international and U.S. law against returning refugees to the face of danger, a practice known by the French legal term
refoulement
.
Whatever the Supreme Court finally decides about the legality of President Bush's Executive Order on Haitian refugees, it shames American values and traditions to push people into the hands of thugs like those now running Haiti.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; Behind Bush's Mixed Abortion Signals
Richard M. Nixon's Attorney General, John N. Mitchell, had a pat answer for people bewildered by the Nixon Administration's policies: "Watch what we do, not what we say."
President Bush and his strategists seem to want it both ways: they want some people to watch what they say and others to watch what they do.
Becalmed in the polls, under attack for having shifted ground on taxes, they have helped push through platform language that goes well beyond even the President's own strong anti-abortion position in an effort to insure the support of conservatives, while at the same time they have sent signals to abortion-rights supporters intended to make them feel comfortable voting for Mr.
Bush.


Gunmen Raid South African Camp, Killing at Least 4
Attackers armed with machine guns assaulted a black squatter camp northeast of here early this morning, leaving at least four people dead and many residents insisting that they had witnessed a new police atrocity.
In an eerie echo of the stories following the massacre two months ago in Boipatong township, residents of Ivory Park said they watched as armored police vehicles escorted the killers and stood by during the attack.


Patents; A Magnetic Therapy for Arthritis Pain
IT looks like something from the sick bay of the Starship Enterprise, but it's not fiction.
In Melville, L.I., arthritis patients are seeking relief not from drugs or gold shots but by placing their sore joints inside rings that produce magnetic fields.
The machines were invented by Dr.
Richard Markoll, a medical doctor and entrepreneur, and they have been used on an experimental basis to treat some 1,700 people in the last two years.
For reasons that are still open to conjecture, he said, the magnetic fields appear to stimulate the growth and repair of cartilage and reverse the effects of arthritis.


First, Learn to Walk. Then Chase the Dream.
"IF we didn't laugh about it, we would have given up a long time ago," says Paddy Rossbach.
"I love to hear her cackle," says Thecla Mitchel.
It is 7:45 A.M. and these extraordinary women are hard at work.
Ms.
Mitchel has strapped on her artificial legs and is ever so slowly walking.
Mrs.
Rossbach cajoles, cheerleads and criticizes with a directness one doesn't expect to be shown to a person with only one limb, an arm.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; G.O.P.'s Platform Reveals Conservatives' Dominance
The platform the Republicans will adopt at their convention here next week and the drafting sessions this week illustrate the degree to which diehard conservatives are in control of party affairs.
In many respects this makes no practical difference.
Unlike the situation in some parliamentary democracies, party platforms in the United States bind no one, least of all Presidential candidates.
Once they are nominated, Republican and Democratic candidates alike tend to turn their backs on the parts of the ideological field near the goal lines and fight over the turf between the 30-yard lines.


Pollution's Chief Victims: The Poor
It is a popular perception that environmental protection is the exclusive concern of the privileged.
In fact, it is the poor and disfranchised who are at greatest risk from environmental abuse.
Inexorably, society's wastes flow toward communities debilitated by social unrest, high illiteracy and unemployment, and low voter registration.
They have become toxic dumping grounds while receiving few of the safeguards that prudence and decency demand but only political power can obtain.
Examples abound across the nation.


Marine Surveyors Find Uncharted Rock That May Have Damaged Hull of the QE2
Federal marine surveyors said today that they had discovered an uncharted rock scuffed with what appears to be paint in the area where the Queen Elizabeth 2 ran aground last Friday night.
They said the rock could be the object that the ship hit.
This latest development in the investigation into the accident came as the Cunard Line disclosed that its flagship was more damaged than first believed and that she would be under repair at least until late September.


BRT Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Consumers will find fruits and vegetables cost less as a result of the new North American Free Trade Agreement -- which is infuriating to American farmers who must compete with low-wage Mexican producers.
But farmers growing corn in the Midwest cheer the pact for the new markets it opens to them.
Agriculture is the most protected of industries, and consequently the changes to be wrought by the accord are the greatest.  [ Page 1. ]
A troubling aspect of Japan's deepening economic malaise is that the nation has not lived up to a Government promise made to the U.S. to transform itself from an export-driven economy, which has produced a yawning trade surplus with the U.S., into one led by consumer demand, which would help foreign producers.  [ 1. ]
Opponents of the trade accord are gearing up to prevent its enactment or significantly change it.
Among them are environmentalists, church and labor groups.
Some plan to campaign for Bill Clinton in the belief he would change it.  [ 34. ]
India's struggle to restructure its economy is faltering, threatening to drag South Asia's largest country deeper into poverty.  [ 2. ] Companies
Citicorp cut its previously reported second-quarter earnings by $28 million to $143 million, saying regulators had forced it to do so, and to sign a formal acknowledgement that the company's problems are great enough to require extra close attention.
Bank officials immediately went into their version of spin control to persuade the rest of the world its problems were minor.  [ 31. ]
First City Bancorporation of Texas said it would sell major subsidiaries and try to persuade investors to supply it with $100 million of fresh capital.
The effort to avoid collapse came after months of unsuccessful efforts to find a merger partner.  [ 31. ]
WNEW-AM may soon begin broadcasting financial and investment news.
Westwood One and Robert Sillerman, owners of the legendary but troubled New York radio station, agreed to sell it to Michael Bloomberg L.P., which provides data on stock, bonds and other financial instruments for securities traders.  [ 33. ]
Computervision went public at $12 a share.
That price for the former Prime Computer was lower than expected and led Shearson Lehman Brothers, the investment firm that financed a previous leveraged buyout of Prime, to say it would report an additional loss of $40 million or more.
Computervision also sold $300 million in bonds.
Proceeds of both issues will be used to pay down debt.  [ 33. ] The Economy
Production by the nation's industrial plants rose 0.4 percent in July to erase an identical drop in June, the Federal Reserve reported.
But important manufacturing areas were weak.  [ 31. ] Markets
The Dow rose 15.67 points to end at 3,328.94, but for the week, the average lost 3.24 points.
Both its ups and its downs followed those in the bond market.  [ 41. ]
Treasury bond prices rebounded.
Economists said bonds appeared to gain strength from the latest survey by the University of Michigan, which showed consumer confidence remained low.
The price of the long Treasury bond rose $7.19 per $1,000 in face amount, regaining some of its $12 drop on Thursday.  [ 41. ]
The dollar was mixed as traders waited to see if interest rates would fall in the United States and rise in Germany.  [ 42. ]
Platinum futures prices fell again on low inflation and relative calm in South Africa, but gold and silver rose slightly.  [ 42. ] Today's Columns
Few women have taken charge of family financial planning and investing, a study commissioned by Oppenheimer Management shows, and few understand financial markets.
But demographic statistics show the need to learn.
Jan M. Rosen: Your Money.  [ 32. ]
Arthritis patients are getting relief from magnetic fields produced by a machine invented by a Long Island doctor.
Cartilage grows and is repaired.
Edmund L. Andrews: Patents.  [ 32. ]


Patents; Removing a Threat From Cotton Swabs
Roscoe E. Schmerse, an inventor in Sunset Beach, Calif., has patented a cotton swab on a stick that doesn't threaten to puncture a person's ear drum.
Cotton swabs can be found in almost every medicine closet, but most are thin and pointed.
Mr.
Schmerse designed a cotton stick with a blunt end that was inspired by haircuts like that of the rap musician Hammer.


Retrial of a Miami Policeman Could Test Judiciary on Race
It is a trial that no city in Florida wants to hold, a political football that has already bounced from Miami to Orlando to Tallahassee, back to Orlando, and that's not the end of it.
For government officials and community leaders across the state, the retrial of William Lozano contains too many disturbing echoes of the Rodney G. King case and offers the same potential for racial violence.


Carlisle Plastics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sirica, 88, Dies; Persistent Judge In Fall of Nixon
John Joseph Sirica, the Federal judge whose relentless search for the facts of the Watergate break-in made him an American folk hero and ultimately brought down the Presidency of Richard M. Nixon, died today at Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington.
He was 88 years old and lived in Washington.
Although the cause of death was not immediately known, Judge Sirica had been suffering from pneumonia, said Coimbra Sirica, the wife of his son Jack.
Judge Sirica had been hospitalized earlier in the week after falling and breaking his collarbone, Mrs.
Sirica said.


Golden Memories, Yes. But the Dream Is Over.
Now that Chuck Daly has finished coaching the Dream Team, he has begun spending his waking hours concentrating on the Nets.
Daly returned from Barcelona this week with his Olympic mission accomplished and with memories galore.
Aside from the breathtaking basketball played by the United States men's team on its way to the gold medal, Daly will reminisce about his all-day golf outings with Michael Jordan, and the ever-present good feelings provided by Magic Johnson.


Miami's First Score Is on the Tout Board
On Thursday, the day before the beginning of their last two-a-day workouts at the University of Miami, the seniors stood on a practice field.
As they smiled for the cameras, rather than saying "cheese," the Hurricanes presented the challenges of their final season.
"Greatest senior class ever," said Darrin Smith, the quiet linebacker who last season became the Big East Conference co-defensive player of the year.


WITH U.N.'S HELP, U.S. WILL AIRLIFT FOOD TO SOMALIA
The Pentagon will begin a special airlift of food to Somalia as soon as possible, the White House announced tonight.
An Administration official said the step was intended to speed the shipment of food to outlying areas of the country that have received little food in the last several months because of warfare and drought.


Florida Public Utilities Co.  reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Review/Film; Bedeviled Suburbanites With a 24-Hour Deadline
"Stay Tuned" takes a nifty satiric concept -- a Hadean video world run by a devil who kidnaps couch potatoes and puts them into programs in which they die -- and reduces it to a mild-mannered suburban comedy with little bite.
The film, which opened yesterday, follows the adventures of Roy and Helen Knable (John Ritter and Pam Dawber), who are sucked into their satellite dish after Roy signs a contract with a Mr.
Spike (Jeffrey Jones), later revealed to be "the Mephistopheles of the cathode ray." From their backyard the couple find themselves plopped into a sadistic game show called "You Can't Win," in which a wrong answer to an embarrassing personal question results in ejection into a pit of vipers.


Learning to Take Pride in Their Heritage


Nationwide Cellular Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Culkin to Appear in 'Nutcracker' Film
Macaulay Culkin, the young star of the 1990 movie "Home Alone," will appear with the New York City Ballet in a film of "The Nutcracker" that re-creates George Balanchine's choreography.
The film, a joint venture of Elektra Entertainment and New Regency Productions, is directed by Emile Ardolino, who has directed for the PBS television series "Dance in America"; staging is by Peter Martins, ballet master in chief of the City Ballet.
The film is to be released next winter.


Defense Witness in Bronx Calls Evidence Deceptive
The defense in the case against Alejandro Henriquez, the Bronx livery car driver accused of killing a young woman and two girls, yesterday called its first witness, a forensics expert who said hair and fiber evidence introduced by the prosecution was "an exercise in scientific deception."
But the expert, Dr.
Richard Saferstein, a former head of the New Jersey State Police crime lab who conducted his own analysis of the evidence, conceded that one set of fibers -- red synthetic strands found on the clothing of one victim -- were similar to those in the carpet of a Mercedes-Benz once owned by Mr.
Henriquez.


Mercantile Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CHRONICLE
Never mind the cameramen, lighting and sound technicians, producers, directors, editors that seem to be part of every roving television correspondent's entourage.
ANDERSON COOPER, who leaves for Africa next Saturday on assignment for Channel 1, the Whittle Communications news service for high schools, will be a one-man band.
He will be found both on camera and behind it in reports from Somalia, Mozambique, Uganda and South Africa, among other countries, during a journey that will last from three to four months.
Working alone, he said, allows him to give Channel 1 "stories that other people are not telling, that networks are not doing because they are too dangerous, difficult or expensive."


Executive Changes
BROAD INC., Los Angeles, a financial services company, named Gary W. Krat senior vice president.
Mr.
Krat is currently chairman and chief executive of Broad's broker-dealer units: Royal Alliance Associates Inc. and SunAmerica Securities Inc.
FIRST BRANDS CORP., Danbury, Conn., a consumer products company, named William V. Stephenson president and chief operating officer.
H.
J.
RUSSELL &amp; CO., Atlanta, a group of affiliated construction and real estate operations in the Southeast, named H. Jerome Russell executive vice president.
SERAGEN INC., Hopkinton, Mass., which develops medical products known as fusion toxins, named Dr.
Jean C. Nichols senior vice president.


FRENCH OFFER UNIT OF 1,100 IN BOSNIA
France offered today to send 1,100 additional soldiers to help protect relief missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but its NATO allies failed to come up with any plan to insure that supplies of food and medicine would reach the besieged inhabitants of the former Yugoslav republic.
France, which has assigned 2,700 troops to a peacekeeping force already in Croatia, said it was responding to a measure approved on Thursday by the United Nations Security Council authorizing the use of "all measures necessary," including force, to deliver relief supplies to Bosnia and Herzegovina.


C.I.A. Man Threatened With Contempt in Trial
The Federal judge in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George today banged his gavel in anger, sent the jury out of the courtroom and threatened Mr.
George with contempt proceedings if he continued to interrupt the prosecutor during his trial.
The scolding by the judge, Royce C. Lamberth, of the man who once ran covert espionage operations for the Central Intelligence Agency, was the latest of several dramatic moments at the trial in which Mr.
George is accused of lying to Congress and investigators about the Iran-contra affair.


Sports of The Times; The Shock Of That Other World
BERNARD KING was a 17-year-old lad, a 6-foot-7-inch all-city basketball star from Fort Hamilton High School in Brooklyn, when he first paid a visit to the hospital.
That was 1974.
"I remember the shock of seeing someone about my own age," he said, "and there were others even younger -- 15 years old, 12 years old -- deformed, lying in bed fully paralyzed, unable to move anything but their eyes, a suction machine in their throats, and on respiratory systems.


Bus Tour for Votes; Holtzman Hits Road to Attack Ferraro
During a moonlit concert along the Lake Ontario shore the other evening, Fran Ashettino was shaken from her musical reverie when the candidate for United States Senate grasped her hand and offered a political flier.
"Liz Holtzman? I've never heard of her. Has she been on television?" the 68-year-old Rochester resident asked as the entourage whisked down the line of lawn chairs.
"Now Geraldine, well, of course we've heard of her."


Price Tag: Private Lessons
Estimated hourly rates for one-on-one instruction.
Unless otherwise indicated, variation in rates can be attributed to instructor experience.
Membership in a sponsoring organization and enrollment in multiple sessions may reduce fees by up to 25 percent.
Such discounts are not included in estimates.
Information was gathered from schools, organizations and instructors in the New York City area.
Rates will vary in other parts of the country.


Computervision Goes Public After Cutting Offering Price
Computervision, the former Prime Computer, went public yesterday at a price of $12 a share.
That price was lower than expected and led Shearson Lehman Brothers, the investment firm that financed a previous leveraged buyout of Prime, to say it will report an additional loss of $40 million or more.
The Computervision Corporation had hoped to sell 20 million shares at a price of $14 to $16, but investor resistance forced it to cut the price while increasing the number of shares being offered to 25 million.
It also sold $300 million in bonds, with all the proceeds of both issues earmarked to paying down debt.


American Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. Diplomats Expect No Use Of Force in Bosnia for 10 Days
Diplomats said today that no moves to use force to deliver food and medicine to Bosnian civilians under a new Security Council resolution were likely for at least 10 days or so.
Discussing plans to put into effect the resolution passed by the Council on Thursday, a Western diplomat said, "At the very least, I expect that we shall await the outcome of the London conference later this month."


Why Zero Nukes Are Too Few
How many nuclear weapons are enough?
The extraordinary arms pact now awaiting Senate approval will reduce the U.S. and Russian nuclear arsenals to the levels of the 1960's.
By 2002 or earlier, Russia will have 3,000 warheads and the U.S. 3,500.
That's down from over 20,000 strategic and tactical warheads each.
But later on could there be even deeper cuts?


Convest Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Simula Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


It's Short And to the Point For Braves
Who says that major league games last too long?
The game between the Atlanta Braves and the Pittsburgh Pirates tonight was, for all intents and purposes, over in 11 minutes.
That's how long it took the Braves to ruin Zane Smith's evening.
They drove the Pirates left-hander from the mound in the first inning, scoring four runs before he could record more than one out.
And in those 11 minutes, the Braves established that they were firmly in control of a game they would eventually win, 15-0, not only because of the explosion of offense but because the man charged with making the runs stand up was Tom Glavine, the winningest pitcher in the major leagues this season.


Federal Screw Works reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Scientific-Atlanta reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Sauers Is in Overdrive And Leads P.G.A. by 2
While most of the field seemed stuck somewhere between neutral and reverse, Gene Sauers birdied three of the last six holes today to take a two-stroke lead into the third round of the 74th P.G.A.
Championship.
On a Bellerive Country Club course that has asserted itself as a stout and unyielding test, Sauers, the first round co-leader, shot a two-under-par 69 for a 36-hole total of six-under-par 136.


Letter: On Fetal Tissue; The Myth of a Transplant Cure
To the Editor:
Unfortunately, in "Fetal Tissue Foolishness" (editorial, July 29) you once again give credence to the scientific myth that if we could only use fetal tissue, so many terminal diseases, particularly of a neurological origin, could be cured.


Graham-Field Health reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


With Adoption, a Future; With Effort, a Past; New Jersey Camp Brings History and Pride to Korean-Born Children
Four days into day camp, 6-year-old Jessica Gelber is learning about the land she came from.
She can sing the Korean alphabet, do some basic tae kwon do ("punch, kick, unh!") and make fried dumplings, for starters.


Persuading Myanmar
To the Editor:
In not taking the hard-line United States approach to problems of democratization in Myanmar, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations is not making excuses or betraying the Burmese people ("Making Excuses for Myanmar," editorial, Aug. 1).
Asean's way is persuasion, not "konfrontasi," pushing the other party to the wall.
RODOLFO A. ARIZALA Consul General of the Philippines New York, Aug. 3, 1992


Review/Music; Double Bill of Mozart Operas in Concert
A special distinction of the two-week Festival of Mozart Operas in Concert, which concludes the Mozart Bicentennial at Lincoln Center, is the presentation of the New York or United States premieres of several of the composer's early theater works.
In the double bill offered on Thursday evening at Alice Tully Hall, of "Apollo et Hyacinthus" (K.38) and "Thamos, Konig in Agypten" (K. 345), neither piece qualified.
In fact, this was not even the first time the two works were combined in a New York concert, the Mostly Mozart Festival having done so three years earlier.
There is no inherent reason to couple the pieces, though they do complement each other logistically.
They add up to a full but not excessive evening of music, and the chorus used in a lone number in "Apollo" gets a sweatier workout in "Thamos."


Banyan Mortgage Investment Fund reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


General Communication Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Traffic Alert
Madison Avenue between 23d and 45th streets will be closed from noon to 2 P.M. tomorrow for the Indian Association parade; Madison Avenue between 23d and 26th streets will remain closed until 8 P.M. for the Indian Association street fair.


M.D.C. Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A headline yesterday about a United Nations Security Council resolution to allow force to support relief operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina misstated the vote in some editions.
It was 12 members in favor, with 3 abstaining.


Gencor Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American R.E. Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


North American Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fleet Call Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Japan's Broken Pledge of Change Comes Back to Haunt Its Economy
Japan is struggling with a deepening economic downturn that may prove to be the harshest in two decades, but what most troubles some economists is that the Japanese Government vowed this type of decline would not happen.
Six years ago, the Government committed itself to transforming its export-driven economy into one led by consumer demand.
The Prime Minister at the time, Yasuhiro Nakasone, promised President Ronald Reagan a "historic change" as his Government sought to reduce the yawning trade surplus, head off protectionist pressure from the United States and let the long-suffering Japanese consumer enjoy more of Japan's growing prosperity.


Editors' Note
A brief article by The Associated Press in some copies on Sunday reported that two American prisoners had been released by Serbs in Yugoslavia.
The article described the men as mercenaries in the Croatian Army.


FFP Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Patents; Fending Off Attacks With Citric Acid
A brother-and-sister team in Pocasset, Mass., obtained a patent this week on a new weapon and a novel strategy for women to ward off physical assailants: a capsule that lets them spit citric acid in the attacker's eyes.
The capsule was invented by Paul P. and Anne E. Martineau, and it is not yet on the market.
Made with wax, it is filled with concentrated citric acid solution.
The capsule can be tucked behind a person's cheek until it is needed.
In the event of an assault, the person bites into the capsule, releases the citric acid and then spits it into the assailant's eyes.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Host City; A Houston-Style Convention: Republicans in Heavy Traffic
For the first time ever, urban sprawl may be one of the defining experiences of a national political convention, when the Republican Party gathers here beginning this weekend.
Many delegates will travel as far as 30 miles through Houston's notorious rush-hour traffic on freeways with nicknames like "The Beast" to get from their hotels to the Astrodome, where the speech-making will happen.
And even partying will require long treks to the vast prairie that stretches west of the city, and to Galveston Bay 40 miles to the southeast.


Canada Malting reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BTR Realty Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; Why Candidates Like Public's Questions
Taking his turn at a recent "Ask George Bush" question-and-answer session in Philadelphia, a high school student sounded as if he was about to put the President on the spot.
"I hate to sound like Barbara Walters, but I need to know," the teen-ager, Angelo Cruz, said at the start of a question about financing a costly education project.
"Where is the money coming from? Is it going to be taken out of taxes because, you know, we're in so much debt?"


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days: President Bush  SUNDAY: 11:30 A.M., ABC, "This Week," interview with David Brinkley. (Channel 7 in New York.) MONDAY: 2 P.M., CNN, interview with Bernard Shaw.  8 P.M., PBS, "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour," interview with Tom Brokaw.


Guess Who's Not Coming to Houston
Deafening calls for the election of a Republican Congress are certain to be a rhetorical favorite at the G.O.P. convention.
Stressing the intransigence of Democratic lawmakers, speaker after speaker will urge voters to end government deadlock, free George Bush and save the nation by electing like-minded Republicans to the House and Senate.
As a progressive Republican firmly committed to my party's traditional ideals, the need to end the Democrats' 40-year domination of Congress seems compelling.
Too many Democratic legislators, beholden to special-interest groups and political-action committee money, are incapable of setting budget priorities, restraining Federal spending or placing reasonable limits on taxation.


India Stumbles in Rush to a Free Market Economy
India's struggle to restructure its economy is faltering, threatening to drag South Asia's largest country deeper into poverty and deprivation, international aid officials, diplomats and Indian business figures say.
Begun a year ago amid widespread international praise and expectations, India's economic reforms promised a commitment to a free market system, a drastic reduction in the intrusion of the state into economic life and a sudden embrace of foreign investment.
Unlike India's previous flirtations with economic restructuring, the reforms announced over the last year created significant new liberties for private entrepreneurs, sharply devalued the rupee, and set out to attack the bureaucracy that strangled virtually every private economic initiative.


Don't Forget the Abandoned Spouses of Gays; Irony in Homophobia
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 1 news article on the discovery by researchers of a second anatomical idiosyncrasy in the brains of homosexual men: Doesn't it seem paradoxical to imagine that homosexuality is the result of nature, rather than adventitious nurture?


Service for Slain Producer
A memorial service for David Kaplan, the ABC News producer who was killed by a sniper's bullet in Sarajevo on Thursday, is to be held at 2 P.M. tomorrow in the Terrace Theater of the Kennedy Center in Washington.
A reception is to follow in the atrium.


Futuristic Touches in 'Henry IV, Part I'
CALL it revisionist, post-modern, surreal or just nontraditional.
In a Shakespearean staging, everyone expects the unexpected.
Time has come to mean any time, and place can be all over the place.
Justifications aside, the bottom line is whether it works.
The New Jersey Shakespeare Festival's production of "Henry IV, Part I" -- this one is futuristic -- does not work.


Topics of The Times; One for the Annals
A standard peril in Presidential election years, as partisans get caught up in the importance of their conventions, is loss of perspective.
Even now, as the Republicans stream into Houston they cannot resist telling the world what a big deal their convention will be: 2,100 lighting instruments, 120,000 pounds of scaffolding, 150,000 nuts, bolts and screws and 225,000 balloons.
The balloon figure comes out to 101.8 balloons per delegate.
How much weight ordinary citizens truly give the party conventions is probably better gauged by the newsletter found last week by a visitor to the Capitol Hotel in Little Rock, Ark.
It is entitled Hog Call and the first item begins with these two sentences:


LIZZIE BORDEN TOOK AN AX
Mary Cantwell's article on the Lizzie Borden case overlooks a tantalizing detail.
In an illustration containing headlines of original newspaper accounts of the double murder, a subhead reads: "No Clue to Their Assailant. But a Portuguese Who Has Been in Mr. Borden's Employ Suspected of the Crime."
Who was this original suspect?
Was this an early example of Fall River nativism, or did reasonable evidence exist of another suspect?
Was there a cover-up?
Could there have been a conspiracy?
Was there "a second ax man"?


And Dad's a Banker, Too
Every year when schools let out across the country, thousands of stage-struck girls head to New York hoping for that Big Break, the spark of whim and luck that gets them noticed at theatrical companies and modeling agencies where dreams of fame and fortune are hatched, where stars are born.
Not unexpectedly, only a few manage to succeed, but for the Daniel family of Gainesville, Fla., the jackpot was hit not once but twice, as 16-year-old twins Cynthia and Brittany Daniel have taken the city by storm.
"It's somewhat unreal," Cynthia recalled the other day.
"I arrived on June 6 and had five modeling jobs that month." Not to be outdone, Brittany had been chosen from more than 2,000 applicants for a starring role in a new syndicated television soap opera, "Swans Crossing."


Kennedy Museum Opens on Cape
The John F. Kennedy Hyannis Museum, which opened last month in Hyannis, Mass., is the first public facility in the town to illustrate the late President's life on Cape Cod.
President Kennedy used Hyannis Port as a summer White House.
Housed in the historic brick Old Town Hall, the museum exhibits some 50 photographs spanning the years from 1934 when Kennedy was 17 to his death in 1963.
The pictures, displayed gallery style and interspersed with printed quotations, show the President in candid and formal portraits with family members, his Cabinet and government officials.
Others show him playing touch football with his PT-109 comrades, sailing and golfing.
Museum organizers hope to add a video and some family memorabilia, such as the scrimshaw that the President made.


Pleasures of Homemade Ice Cream
IN the summer, there is nothing like ice cream for dessert, whether it is a few spoonfuls to go with a fruit tart, or a large bowl of the stuff to eat with cookies.
And once you have tasted the homemade kind, commercial ice creams won't seem the same again.
Ice cream is very easy to make.
Most recipes are based on an English custard (creme anglaise) that is mixed with fruit purees.
The ice cream becomes smooth and creamy when air is churned into it -- a job that used to involve hours of hand cranking in wooden pail freezers, but nowadays is done by an ice cream maker.
When I was a child we used to freeze ice cream in ice trays covered with aluminum foil, taking them out once in a while and giving them a stir to prevent crystals from forming.
We were perfectly happy with the result, but it wasn't a patch on the smooth fine-textured ice cream one gets from a machine.


Passing Customs
To the Editor: The Practical Traveler about Customs recalled my first trip outside the United States.
It was recommended before I left that I register with the Customs Service at the airport all my electronic devices such as portable radios, cameras etc.
One must be prepared with make, model and serial numbers.
The purpose of this is threefold.
First, if you do not have the original receipt from the time you bought the item, this will prove you left the country with it.
Second, upon return, the Customs agent will not be able to suggest to you that you bought the item outside the country.
Third, the form helps you get through security gates a little easier.


For Anderson, A Generous 5.0
To the Sports Editor:
I found Dave Anderson's column ("Let Those Girls Be Girls Without Gymnastics," The Times, July 31) narrow-minded and mean-spirited.
Referring to the young women gymnasts as "girls," while comparing them to kittens and puppies, i.e., "quick as kittens and supple as puppies," struck me as crudely sexist.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
TODAY: 11:30 A.M., ABC, "This Week." (Channel 7 in New York.)
MONDAY: 2 P.M., CNN, interview.
8 P.M., PBS, interview. (Channel 13 in New York.)
TUESDAY: 8 P.M., PBS, interview.
Vice President Dan Quayle
WEDNESDAY: 8 P.M., PBS interview.


Melissa Crespy, Lawrence Kaufman
Rabbi Melissa Fonya Crespy, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
H.
Victor Crespy of Freehold, N.J., was married Monday to Lawrence Jesse Kaufman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Kaufman of Summit, N.J.
Rabbi David Lincoln officiated at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York, where Rabbi Crespy is the assistant rabbi.
The bride, 33 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from McGill University and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
She studied at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York, where she was ordained.
Her father, now retired, was the Superintendent of the Freehold Regional High School District.
Her mother, Maxine F. Crespy, is a former counselor at the New York Public Library and at Brookdale Community College in Lincroft, N.J.


Stacy B. Koppelman, David P. Fritz
Stacy Beth Koppelman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Koppelman of Roslyn Harbor, L.I., was married Thursday to David Peter Fritz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Fritz of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Peter Rubinstein performed the ceremony at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Fritz, 24 years old and a Syracuse University graduate, is a law student at Hofstra University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of EMI Records Group North America in New York.


Kidnap Victims in Colombia Organize Lobby
Backed by television advertisements, glossy press packets, and a modern office here, Fundacion Pais Libre is the newest addition to Colombia's political scene: a lobby for kidnap victims.
Adopting the symbol of a shattered link of chain, the Free Country Foundation started work last April in response to a growing kidnapping rate that is now among the world's highest.


Miss Stansmore And Peter Halt
Katharine Olivia Stansmore, the daughter of S. William Stansmore of Cambridge, England, and Margaret Stansmore Mehan of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter Spelman Halt, a son of Frederick W. Halt and Donna S. Trombly, both of Buffalo.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Joseph A. Mehan of Stamford.
The Rev.
Stanley Aronson, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother and stepfather.
Mrs.
Halt, 23 years old, and Mr.
Halt, 30, are medical students at Columbia University.
Both graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.


SURFACING
AGING ICON --
David Cassidy
: The Partridge Family star has a new album, "Didn't You Used to Be . . ."


Pleasures of Homemade Ice Cream
IN the summer, there is nothing like ice cream for dessert, whether it is a few spoonfuls to go with a fruit tart, or a large bowl of the stuff to eat with cookies.
And once you have tasted the homemade kind, commercial ice creams won't seem the same again.
Ice cream is very easy to make.
Most recipes are based on an English custard (creme anglaise) that is mixed with fruit purees.
The ice cream becomes smooth and creamy when air is churned into it -- a job that used to involve hours of hand cranking in wooden pail freezers, but nowadays is done by an ice cream maker.
When I was a child we used to freeze ice cream in ice trays covered with aluminum foil, taking them out once in a while and giving them a stir to prevent crystals from forming.
We were perfectly happy with the result, but it wasn't a patch on the smooth fine-textured ice cream one gets from a machine.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; California Budget Fight May Help the Governor
Were those crocodile tears that Gov.
Pete Wilson shed when he begged off "regretfully" from the Republican National Convention in Houston because of intractable budget negotiations in the California Capitol?
And was Mr.
Wilson really as impatient for settlement with the legislative leaders as he claimed each day at terse news briefings when he reported a smidgen of progress or none at all while the nation's most populous state lumbered through its seventh week without a spending plan?


Diana Benedick, Peter Jeans
Diana Louise Benedick, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Benedick of Cortland, N.Y., was married yesterday in North Andover, Mass., to Peter William Jeans, the son of William R. Jeans of Georgetown, Mass., and the late Therese Jeans.
The Rev.
Maurice Rochefort, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Collegiate Chapel of Christ the Teacher at Merrimack College.
The Rev.
James Bresnahan, a Lutheran minister, participated in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Jeans is a corporate health account manager for Omnihealth Systems in Natick, Mass.
She graduated from Ohio State University and received a master's degree in nursing from Boston College and Harvard University.
Her father, a retired Army lieutenant colonel, is a professor emeritus of mathematics at the State University College of New York at Cortland.
Her mother, Theresa M. Benedick, founded a Cortland County program that provides recreational services to people age 65 or older.


Stephanie Childs, Robert J. Struble
Stephanie Morton Childs, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph T. Childs of Chatham, Mass., was married yesterday in Cleveland Heights, Ohio, to Robert John Struble, the son of Geraldine Wierzbicki-Roach of West Seneca, N.Y.
The Rev.
Thomas Mahoney performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Ann's Church.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Campaign to Slow Down During G.O.P. Convention
Bill Clinton's frantic pace will slow significantly next week as the Republicans take center stage for their week of self-congratulation.
But it is clear that the Republicans began stealing the march on the Democrat last week.
President Bush's campaign commandeered the airwaves and news pages with seemingly contradictory statements on abortion, attacks on Mr.
Clinton's wife, Hillary, pronouncements on "sleaze" journalism and, finally, the political reinstatement of James A. Baker 3d.


African's Search for Identity in U.S.
"AMERICA is too real," laments Ofori, an illegal alien from Ghana, who soon discovers that the American reality is "nothing but a big hoax."
Even though Ofori knows his notion of making it in this country has been a pipe dream, he won't settle for becoming "a leftover of white culture."


'I Thought of My Family Burial Ground Outside Philadelphia'
To the Editor:
As a descendant of an 18th-century African-American family in Philadelphia, I visited the Negros Burial Ground unearthed in Lower Manhattan to pay my respects.
Profoundly moved by this discovery, and pleased that a preservation agreement seems to be in the works (news article, Aug. 9), I thought again of my own family burial ground outside Philadelphia.


Legends of the Vienna Woods
DURING solitary walks across the vineyards and the forested valleys near Vienna, Beethoven found inspiration for his "Pastoral" Symphony.
Schubert wrote some of his songs on outings with his friends to some rustic tavern there.
Johann Strauss the Younger wrote his "Tales From the Vienna Woods" in waltz time.
Yet not everything that happened in the wooded hills hugging the Austrian capital was bucolic.
More than 400 years ago a Polish king joined the military forces of Christendom there to rout the Turkish infidels who were besieging Vienna.
In an imperial hunting lodge a Habsburg crown prince shot his teen-age mistress and himself in 1889.
And a bust mounted on a rough-hewn chunk of Vienna Woods sandstone in a green valley is a reminder that the quintessential writer of modern-day angst, Franz Kafka, died in a sanatorium there in 1924.


FADED GLORY
In quoting Woodrow Wilson, Arthur Schlesinger Jr. states, in his article "Faded Glory" (July 12), that in times of change "America . . . must restrict her vagaries, trust her best, not her average, members."


Charles A. Read, Lawyer, 72
Charles A. Read, the former chairman of the Reid &amp; Priest law firm in Manhattan, died on Wednesday at his home in Hosensack, Pa.
He was 72 years old.
His primary residence was in Montclair, N.J.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


POSTINGS: Small Co-ops and Condos; Capping the Assessments
Small co-ops and condominiums have long asserted that when it comes to the city's property-tax policies, they were burdened with an unfair disadvantage.
"On one hand, the law required that we be assessed as if we were rental buildings," said Lawrence H. McGaughey, an attorney and secretary of the 2-10 Units Association, a group formed two years ago to press for property-tax reform, "but at the same time we did not have the protection of the assessment cap that small rental buildings have."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 16, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
18
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Islnd/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
2
29
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A law firm is engaged in secret activities.
3
5
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
4
7
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
5
6
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
6
4
THE DUCHESS, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) An American woman, in Scotland to marry a duke, finds a mysterious man more attractive.
7
2
A WHOLE NEW LIGHT, by Sandra Brown. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman is invited to Acapulco by the business partner of her late husband.
8
29
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
9 *
9
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
10
3
THE PIRANHAS, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket, $5.99.) A young man discovers the ways of Hollywood, Wall Street and organized crime.
11
1
I'LL BE THERE, by Iris Rainer Dart. (Warner, $5.99.) A sequel to the 1985 novel "Beaches," telling of the struggles of a superstar to raise a child amid the temptations of Hollywood.
12
1
THE WILD ROSE, by Doris Mortman. (Bantam, $5.99.) The professional and romantic life of a woman pianist in Budapest and New York.
13
13
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch's life.
14
8
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $5.99.) A woman lawyer finds love.
15
1
AGAINST THE WIND, by J. F. Freedman. (Signet, $5.99.) A lawyer undertakes to defend a gang of bikers against a ruthless district attorney.
16 *
7
THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman insurance investigator probes the murder of a millionaire.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
17
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
57
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
4
65
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
5
8
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
6
458
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
7
13
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
8
13
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series.
9
19
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by a producer.
10 *
1
L.A.
SECRET POLICE, by Mike Rothmiller and Ivan G. Goldman. (Pocket, $5.99.) An account of the Los Angeles Police Department's Organized Crime Intelligence Division, by a former detective in the unit.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
53
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
101
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3 *
82
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
17
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what various people have learned about life.
5
21
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
6 *
3
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1992 edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Aniko Nakazawa, John De Laney
Norine Aniko Nakazawa, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Hiroshi Nakazawa of Valley Cottage, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Bennett De Laney, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John K. De Laney of Middlebury, Vt.
The Rev.
Robert Jewett performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal Church in Nyack, N.Y.
Mrs.
De Laney, 25 years old is known as Aniko.
A graduate of Middlebury College, she is a management trainee in Nanuet, N.Y., for the Bank of New York.
Her father, a pathologist, owns and heads Tempath Services in Congers, N.Y.
Her mother, Maria Nakazawa, is a general contractor and house restorer in Valley Cottage.


A Villager Rolls Into The City
THE opening salvos for Mercury's new Villager have landed quietly, but a serious advertising blitz is on the way.
It will shout about the minivan's "car-like" attributes -- and there will be nary a whisper about the oddity of a truck in the Lincoln-Mercury stable.
A truck it is, though, at least for licensing purposes, and that is the way customers will have to register this latest entry in the fast-growing van market.


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: IN ENEMY HANDS - A Special Report; Clearer Picture of Bosnia Camps: A Brutal Piece of a Larger Plan
The first images of emaciated men peering through barbed wire in Serbian detention centers in Bosnia and Herzegovina riveted the world's attention.
In the week since, a clearer picture has begun to emerge of the scope of the camps, their conditions and the role they play in the larger Serbian military strategy.
Interviews with officials of international relief agencies and dozens of Bosnians -- some of them still held in the camps, others living as refugees in Croatia -- establish these major points about a conflict that has created Europe's worst refugee crisis since the end of World War II:


The Victim Has a Blue Collar, But Free Trade Has an Alibi
To many, the free trade agreement with Canada and Mexico, announced last week by President Bush, carries the weight of inevitability.
With Europe being transformed into one great marketplace and Japanese middle managers spending Saturdays learning to speak Thai, the United States can hardly afford to keep a distance from its closest neighbors.
And so the President is asking Congress to go along with an accord that would, among other things, virtually eliminate customs duties while opening Mexico to America's muscular financial services industries.
But for all the reassuring econo-babble about reaping the mutual gains from global competition, Americans surely harbor suspicions that what is good for most is not necessarily good for all.
And those suspicions focus on the plight of the nation's unskilled workers.


Marian Granowitz, 78, G.O.P. Chairwoman
Marian A. Granowitz, a former vice chairwoman of the Republican State and Westchester County Committees, died on Thursday at Westchester Square Medical Center in the Bronx.
She was 78 years old and a lifelong resident of Port Chester, N.Y.
She died of complications from diabetes, her family said.


TRANSACTIONS
FRIDAY Baseball  American League


Flowery Species Take a Late Summer Bow
THOSE who believe that the flowery display from trees occurs only in the spring may want to look again.
A number of trees bloom during the summer months and gardeners are missing a good show if they don't have at least one of these handsome specimens on their landscapes.
A particularly unusual flowering tree, handsome in its form and elegant with its flowers, is the native sourwood (Oxydendrum arboreum).
From a distance, the tree puts on quite a display and can be the talk of the neighborhood.
But the unusual sourwood flowers are worth a close look.


Jennifer Coleman, Fredrick Petito
Jennifer Susan Coleman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mathew D. Coleman of New York, was married there last evening to Fredrick Thomas Petito, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fredrick A. Petito of Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi Charles Davidson performed the ceremony at the Essex House.
Mrs.
Coleman Petito, 26 years old, is an art-transport coordinator at Sotheby's, the New York auction house.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a senior managing director of Balis &amp; Zorn, a New York investment firm.


Marion Ames, Reform Advocate For New York Courts, Dead at 74
Marion P. Ames, a major force for court reform in New York State for 35 years and a leader in many other public causes, died on Friday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 74 years old and lived in Rye, N.Y.
She died after an operation for spinal bone cancer, her family said.


Margot Bodine, David Congdon
Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Bodine 3d of Sanibel, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Margot Reed Bodine to David John Congdon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George C. Congdon of Keene, N.H.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Bodine, 31 years old, is a senior counsel at the Philip Morris Management Corporation in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received a J.D. degree from Boston College.
Her father founded the Princeton Company, a financial management firm in Sanibel.


A Baseball Memory That Lingers On
I am writing about the very interesting article on July 12 entitled "Atlantic City Aim: Baseball," which says, "The new team would be the first professional minor-league team in New Jersey since 1961, when the Jersey City Giants folded."
The article overlooked the brief period in the late 1970's when the Oakland Athletics fielded a Class A Eastern League team in Jersey City.
I remember it well because in 1978 my son Steve and I attended a doubleheader at Roosevelt Stadium, in which one of the young A's stars was a 19-year-old Ricky Henderson.
Even then, we knew!


Party's Split Casts Shadow On a Dream
IN the lunar South African outback known as the Karoo, zealots of the Afrikaner tribe have bought themselves a tiny white utopia called Orania.
The other day Oranians dressed up in the kerchiefs and sunbonnets of their trekker ancestors to welcome their newest settler, Betsie Verwoerd, the 91-year-old widow of Prime Minister Hendrik Verwoerd, the apartheid visionary who was stabbed to death in 1966 by a parliamentary messenger who said Verwoerd hadn't done enough for poverty-stricken whites.
"I am proud to be here as the symbol of a big idea," the spry widow said as she took up residence in the racist Camelot.
These days Orania, population 300, seems to be about the only place where the Afrikaner faithful can indulge their "big idea" in peace.
Elsewhere the ideologists of Afrikaner nationalism are beset by division, demoralized by the flow of history, and humiliated by the comic pratfalls of one prominent folk hero.


Rialto Of Style
A new generation has articulated its style, and it can be seen each Saturday at the Union Square Greenmarket.
The Greenmarket is to the 90's fashion scene what the Bethesda Fountain in Central Park was in the 60's -- a social gathering spot that became a fashion parade that marked a generation.


As Bush Runs Again, History Nips at His Heels
LOOKING backward is the last thing President Bush wants to do at the Republican National Convention in Houston this week -- for two reasons.
Politically, the clear plan for his campaign is to emphasize the future, to nod to the past only to suggest that the next four years will have domestic success to rival the foreign policy triumphs of the last four.
As James A. Baker 3d, the Secretary of State, proclaimed as he prepared to leave his second Cabinet office for his fourth Bush Presidential campaign, "It's now time to turn to new challenges." He said that from now on "President Bush will target America."


Teaching the Clarinet To Speak With His Voice
Mrs.
Thomas Carlyle, writing to her husband in 1842, described the sound of the clarinet as "something between a squeal of agony and the highest tone of a bagpipe!" A character in a Thomas Hardy novel says, "Clar'nets, however, be bad at all times." Though attitudes have softened, the clarinet has only slowly found acceptance as a solo instrument.
No one has done more to reshape the public's perception of the instrument than Richard Stoltzman, who has just celebrated his 50th birthday and who will perform Mozart's Clarinet Concerto in the Mostly Mozart Festival at Avery Fisher Hall on Friday and Saturday evening.
During the last 15 years, Mr.
Stoltzman has substantially enlarged the clarinet repertory (close to a hundred works have been written for him), embraced both classical and popular cultures, brought his music-making into interaction with dance and visual media, and reached out to young audiences.
As a soloist and chamber player, he has given the general public and musicians alike a heightened awareness of the clarinet's potential to speak with an intensely personal voice.


Great Writers, Great Programs
To the Editor:
I read "The Borland Barbarian's New Weapon" (July 26), with some amazement.
Object-oriented programming is not a radically new approach; it's been around for years.
Modularity and reusability are very old concepts.
But merely saying they are productive tools, does not make it so.
It is very easy to reuse modular quality software.
But it is very hard to write quality software.


Miss McDonald, E. L. Wilkinson
Melody Lynn McDonald, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Clark McDonald of Fort Worth, was married there last evening to Edward LaPorte Wilkinson, a son of Mrs.
Edward L. Wilkinson of Amsterdam, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Wilkinson.
The Rev.
Kenneth Doyle performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Mrs.
Wilkinson, 28 years old, graduated summa cum laude from Angelo State University and received a law degree from Texas Tech University.
She is an associate in the Fort Worth law firm of Canty &amp; Hanger.
Her father, a former labor union business agent, is a contractor in Fort Worth.


AUGUST 9-15: Mia Has the Children; Woody Allen, Real-life Dad, Sues for Custody
After "Alice," after the soon-to-be-released "Husbands and Wives," after adopting two children and having one of their own, after 22 years, Woody Allen filed suit against Mia Farrow last week for custody of their three children.
The State Supreme Court in Manhattan, where the suit was filed, ordered the papers sealed.


Corrections
A picture with the Technology column last Sunday, showing a new hinged keyboard design developed by Anthony Hodges, carried an incorrect credit.
The photograph came from Mr.
Hodges's company, Tony!


Marcie Beth Mandelbaum and Brian Scott Zeitlin
Marcie Beth Mandelbaum, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald M. Mandelbaum of Hollywood, Fla., was married in Miami Beach last evening to Brian Scott Zeitlin, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur N. Zeitlin of Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi David Shapiro officiated at the Doral Ocean Beach Resort.
Mrs.
Zeitlin, 23 years old, and her husband, 25, are financial analysts in New York, she at Venrock Associates and he at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.
She graduated from Wellesley College, he from Cornell University.


Yankee Fans Have a Question: Where Has Militello Been Hiding?
After all the dreary pitching performances that have dominated what fast became a dreary season, Sam Militello has arrived from the minor leagues and allowed the Yankees to dream about the future.
In his second major league start tonight, the 22-year-old Militello was opposed by Charlie Hough, the 44-year-old knuckleball artist.
But it was Militello's poise and command, not Hough's knuckleballs, that dominated the action and helped the Yankees whisk to 4-2 victory over the White Sox at Comiskey Park.


When Doctors Say Yes and Insurers No
A few months ago, Dr.
Steven Nissen, a cardiologist at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation, was called in to consult in the puzzling case of a 44-year-old woman.
Her chest felt tight at times, but she did not have the pain that signals the clogged arteries of heart disease.
Hospitalized several times for the discomfort, she was discharged each time when tests showed nothing wrong.
Then Dr.
Nissen had an idea: a new, little-used test called intravascular ultrasound that would let him see inside the woman's arteries.
Like something out of the film "Fantastic Voyage," the test involves threading through the blood vessels a catheter with the equivalent of a tiny movie camera at the tip.


Bosnia Is Serbo-Croatian for Arms Bazaar; Globocop?
To the Editor:  In "Not Tough Enough With Serbia" (editorial, Aug. 7), you add your voice to the baritone chorus of those calling for military action in the Balkans.
The whooping is bipartisan from Bill Clinton to Bob Dole.


Amy D. Klein and Bruce R. Bender
Franklin Klein of New York and Wendy Klein of Mount Kisco, N.Y., have announced January wedding plans for their daughter Amy Diane Klein and Bruce Richard Bender, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Bender of Brooklyn.
Miss Klein, 26 years old, is a financial aide to the New York City Council.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Mr.
Bender, 35, is an aide to City Councilman Herbert Berman of Brooklyn.
Mr.
Bender graduated from Baruch College and received master's degrees in public administration from New York University and in urban planning from the New School.


Corrections
A report on Aug. 2 about the engagement of Betty Y. Tannin to Dr.
Paul M. Dicker misstated the prospective bride's middle name.
It is Yaffa.


Morgenthau's Second Wind
There is a new hot prosecutor in town. His name is Robert M. Morgenthau.
If the name rings a bell, it may be because he is, of course, the same reedy patrician who has been a top New York prosecutor for decades.


Repairs
To the Editor:
"Change Is Afoot in a System Under Fire," on June 21, fails to mention how the City Council sparked the reforms in the Emergency Repair Program, beginning with its own investigation of the program in the summer of 1991.
Our investigation began with a letter of complaint from a building owner who was highly critical of attempts by the Department of Housing Preservation and Development to provide badly needed emergency repairs.
We immediately sent our staff to work on not only the Bronx owner's problems, but to examine the possibility of systemwide mismanagement.


A New Wrinkle in Mortgage Insurance
The cozy world of home-mortgage insurers is about to be stirred and perhaps shaken by a familiar face, someone who thinks the business is ripe for cost cutting that could reduce homebuyers' premiums by more than 20 percent.
The would-be agent of change is Gerald L. Friedman, a 55-year-old executive who resigned as president of the leading mortgage-insurance firm 10 years ago.
He is returning with the financial backing of two of the most prestigious names in finance, J.P.
Morgan &amp; Company and Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Q and A
Job as Building Inspector Question: I would like to find out what the qualifications -- training, education, licenses, etc. -- are for anyone who wants to work as a building inspector in New York City.
Where would I go to find the information? . . .
Edgar Leonard, Brooklyn Answer: Go to the city's Department of Buildings and the Department of Housing, Preservation and Development.
Both agencies employ building inspectors.
In general, inspectors for the Buildings Department are responsible for certifying the soundness of existing, newly constructed or renovated structures.
Housing agency inspectors concern themselves mostly with compliance with the city's housing-maintenance and multiple-dwelling codes.
Both agencies have the same requirements for applicants.
They must have either five years of full-time experience in a construction trade job or a combination of academic training and full-time job experience.
An applicant must have a degree or certificate in a construction related field from an accredited college or trade or technical school as well as three years of experience.
An applicant with a degree in a field such as engineering, architecture or architectural technology or engineering would be required to have two years of experience.
According to Vahe Tiryakian, a spokesman for the Department of Buildings, the application process takes three to six months.
Applications for inspectors' positions in the Buildings Department may be sent to the agency's recruitment office, 14th floor, 60 Hudson Street.
Those wishing to apply to the housing agency may send applications to the Department of Housing Preservation and Development, Office of Management and Administration, 100 Gold Street, New York, New York 10038.
Losing a Lease in a Co-op  Question: I rent a co-op apartment owned by an investor.
The co-op's board recently informed me that the owner, who bought the apartment five years ago, has not paid his mortgage or maintenance charges to date.
They tell me a foreclosure action is pending by the bank holding his mortgage and that the co-op will probably start some sort of legal action against him as well.
I have also been told that the co-op has the right to terminate my tenancy and that I must vacate the apartment even though I have a long-term lease.
The apartment is neither rent controlled nor rent stabilized.
After foreclosure by either the bank or an action by the co-op, would my lease be still valid if I challenged the effort to evict me in court? . . .
Fred Meyrow, Manhattan  Answer: No.
According to Carl Schwartz, an lawyer who specializes in real estate matters, the rights of the co-op are superior to the terms of your lease.
"A renter's rights are derived from the rights of owner," said Mr.
Schwartz, "The tenant in this case cannot have rights that go beyond those of the owner of the apartment. If the owner loses the apartment, the tenant loses the right to occupy it."  Dirty Backyard  Question: The tenants in the apartment below mine use their 20- by 25-foot backyard as a dog run.
The problem is that they let the dog use the yard as a toilet but do not clean it up.
Calls and letters to the landlord and notes in their mailbox have produced no results.
Does the city's "pooper-scooper" law apply to this situation so that our neighbors can be forced by law to clean up after their dogs? . . .
Durer Shomer, Manhattan  Answer: No.
According to the Department of Sanitation, the "pooper-scooper" law, which requires owners to clean up after their dogs, applies only to public streets and sidewalks.
The Sanitation Department would have no jurisdiction over private yard.
However, you could contact the Department of Health and the Department of Environmental Protection to find out if your neighbors are allowing their dog to create a health hazard or are violating rules pertaining to odors and air quality.
The complaint number for the environmental agency is (718) 699-9811.
The central complaint number for the Department of Health is 693-4637.


Wall Street; A Strange Few Months for Daxor
Investors sat up and took notice of the Daxor Corporation last week, as enthusiasm about a potential bid for the company drove up the share price of the operator of sperm and blood banks.
For the week, the stock climbed $2, or 21.6 percent, to close at $11.25 a share.
Sure, uncertainty about the unidentified Middle Eastern and European investors who are said to be the bidders drove down the stock $3.50 when the potential takeover was first announced two weeks ago.
But now, with the booming earnings released by the company last week, shareholders are cozying up to the idea of tendering their shares.


Leyland, Bonds Ejected in Loss
Braves 7, Pirates 5
PITTSBURGH, Aug. 15 (AP) -- The Atlanta Braves built an early six-run lead, then held on for a 7-5 victory tonight after Orlando Merced's base-running blunder cost the Pittsburgh Pirates the tying run in the sixth inning.


What's Under Fire
To the Editor:
It's disappointing that even as observant a critic as Edward Rothstein still doesn't understand the profound impact the First Amendment has on Congressional restrictions on the arts endowment's grants.
He chastises artists for crying "censorship" when they are denied a grant.
But what artists are really complaining about are the restrictions imposed by Congress based on the political or ideological content of their art.
And that
is
censorship.


Corrections
A report on Aug. 2 about the wedding of Susan Passarella and John E. Donovan referred incorrectly to the bride's father.
He is Michael John Passarella.


Riding High, Thanks to the Fresh Air Fund
It's pretty high up there on the saddle.
Especially if you're a 12-year-old riding a big horse for the first time.
"It's scary, because it looks like the horse is going to tip over, and I got scared I'm going to fall," said Matlyn Lang, a Fresh Air Fund camper from Brooklyn, after surviving a few leisurely laps around a field at Camp Hidden Valley in the Sharpe Reservation here.


When Stairs Wobble
SQUEAKY, wobbly stairs are irritating.
If allowed to deteriorate, they can sometimes become a safety hazard.
Most stair problems are easy to repair in their early stages.
But because the construction of stairs generally is complex, major problems are often best handled by an experienced carpenter.
To fix squeaks, their sources have to be found.
Remove carpet or other covering from the stairs.
Have a helper step on each tread while listening for noise.
If there is a noise, have the helper rock back and forth on the stair while examining it closely for loose parts rubbing together.
That is what causes squeaks.


Flowery Species Take a Late Summer Bow
THOSE who believe that the flowery display from trees occurs only in the spring may want to look again.
A number of trees bloom during the summer months and gardeners are missing a good show if they don't have at least one of these handsome specimens on their landscapes.
A particularly unusual flowering tree, handsome in its form and elegant with its flowers, is the native sourwood (Oxydendrum arboreum).
From a distance, the tree puts on quite a display and can be the talk of the neighborhood.
But the unusual sourwood flowers are worth a close look.


Harry Truman's Reputation
To the Editor:
American history of the late 1940's has again been misread, this time by Alan Brinkley in his review of "Truman," by David McCullough (June 21).
Harry S. Truman was anything but "profoundly unpopular." The fact that Joe Martin called him "the worst President in history" is to Truman's credit, for Martin was among our worst Speakers of the House.
Some unnamed "liberals" might have "despaired" of Truman, but their eventual support of Henry Wallace for President in 1948 was hardly an example of good judgment.
Despite the opposition of Wallace and Strom Thurmond, Truman was elected President that year with 49.5 percent of the total vote, hardly an index of being profoundly unpopular.
We tend to forget that in their first terms Abraham Lincoln (1860) received 39.9 percent of the total vote, Rutherford B. Hayes (1876) 47.9 percent, Woodrow Wilson (1912) 41.8 percent and Richard Nixon (1968) 43.4 percent.
Grover Cleveland was elected to his second term as President in 1892 with 46 percent of the popular vote.


Technology; Windows That Know When to Let Light In
For thousands of years people have built buildings that are analogues for shells, with ceilings and walls that are impermeable and unchanging, to keep the outside out and the inside in.
Day and Roy Chahroudi have a different concept: a building with skin that, like human skin, adapts to the environment around it.
Their idea is a window-like product that will moderate temperature and light levels by turning transparent when the weather is cold, to allow in the sun, and translucent when it is warm and the sun must be blocked.
It could be used initially for skylights and greenhouses, and ultimately for roofing in new kinds of buildings, like houses with living rooms where the attic used to be.


Australia Is Striving to be Asian, but How Asian?
When Australia issued a new $5 bill a few weeks ago, Prime Minister Paul Keating immediately denounced it as a national embarrassment.
If the nation is serious about portraying itself as a dynamic economy in the Asian region rather than an economically struggling European outpost in the Pacific, he asked, what could be less appropriate than issuing a new currency dominated by a portrait of Queen Elizabeth?
Mr.
Keating said he meant "no disrespect to the Queen." But in the eight months since he ousted Prime Minister Bob Hawke, no question has dominated Mr.
Keating's foreign policy agenda more than how far Australia should go to cast itself as what Mr.
Keating calls the "odd man in" in Asia.


3 One-Acters Showcase Major Writers
THE well-to-do Mr.
Frick and Leroy Hamilton, of the working class, wait in the visiting room of a state mental hospital where their wives are being treated for depression.
They are looking for reasons.
The play is "The Last Yankee" by Arthur Miller.
In mourning, Tamara, a model, wanders through the park.
She strikes up a conversation with Leon, a poet resembling her close friend who died of AIDS.
She is looking for redemption.
Joyce Carol Oates, who wrote the two-character work, calls it "Greensleeves."


Imponderables
To the Editor:
On a recent Sunday, I settled into a summer garden with iced tea and The Book Review, and found myself described as the possessor of someone else's penis.
John Vernon's essay on the posthumous whereabouts of Napoleon Bonaparte's penis ("Exhuming a Dirty Joke," July 12) addresses, it seems to me, a subject that was trifling even when animate.
As I recall from my reading of memoirs of the period, his mistresses had greater cause than did his soldiers to describe him as "the Little Corporal."


U.N. Let the Somali Famine Get Out of Hand, Aide Says
The famine in Somalia could have been mitigated if the United Nations had dispatched relief experts months ago instead of relying on a small crew of junior staff members in the country, a senior United Nations official said.
"It's so bad because we've let things simmer without paying proper attention," said Trevor Page, the newly appointed head of the World Food Program in Somalia.
"We've had inexperienced people who don't know what they are seeing, who don't know what the implications are and didn't blow the whistle."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Needs Convention to Get Campaign Going
Republicans began assembling here today for a nominating convention of extraordinary importance to the Bush Presidency.
If the President's strategists have their way, this event will begin the redefinition of their candidate and the choice at the heart of this election.
Republican officials struck a note of determined optimism today as they readied the balloons and rituals for Monday's opening session, but the underlying anxiety was palpable.
"George Bush has said all along that his campaign began with this convention," said Craig Fuller, the chairman of the convention.
"We're going to prove it this week."


When Reality Invades Theory's Ivory Tower
THE path of theory would be a lot straighter if practice were not always making a labyrinth of it.
The latest word on an important strategy often becomes distorted by errors or second-best moves by both players.
Consequently, the books that try to reduce strategy to game statistics are unreliable.
The games are mute until they are analyzed and are made to reveal what ideal play should lead to.


When Stairs Wobble
SQUEAKY, wobbly stairs are irritating.
If allowed to deteriorate, they can sometimes become a safety hazard.
Most stair problems are easy to repair in their early stages.
But because the construction of stairs generally is complex, major problems are often best handled by an experienced carpenter.
To fix squeaks, their sources have to be found.
Remove carpet or other covering from the stairs.
Have a helper step on each tread while listening for noise.
If there is a noise, have the helper rock back and forth on the stair while examining it closely for loose parts rubbing together.
That is what causes squeaks.


Making a Difference; The Phone Union Gets Its Way by Putting Strikes on Hold
What if you staged a strike and nobody noticed?
That was the central problem facing Morton Bahr, president of the Communications Workers of America as he entered contract talks this year with A.T.&amp; T. and the regional Bell telephone companies.
Rapid advances in automation have made it easy for telephone companies to weather a strike with few customers noticing any difference for at least a few weeks.


There's Still Planting to Be Done
Order hardy bulbs and plant them (except for tulips and irises) as soon as they arrive.
Don't forget colchicum, or the autumn-blooming crocus.
Plant corn salad, Chinese cabbage, kale, endive, fall peas and spinach.
Set out strawberry plants in deeply dug fertile soil.


New York, N.Y., It's Another Town
New York has entered a state of intense decay.
A giant fungus crawls across the city, feeding on brick and mortar.
The Hudson River has become a dusty plain, and what's left of Manhattan -- five seedy blocks surrounding the plundered towers of the World Trade Center -- has turned into an eerie universe of reptiles and con men.
Rotted car bodies have become easier to find than water or wood.
And an obnoxious despot, ruling the city with whimsical fury, has decided he had better do something fast, or the place will be history.


Campaign Mode
Rewind to 1988 and humid New Orleans.
George Bush trails a Democratic governor.
His prospects are uncertain; the shadow of Ronald Reagan looms large.
Mr.
Bush makes a surprisingly good speech, jumps ahead and stays ahead during a relentless, unedifying campaign.
Fast forward to 1992 and Houston, another hot, humid Southern city.
The same George Bush again trails his opponent, again a Democratic governor, this time by a wider margin.
His record is mixed, his message unclear, his party divided.
The economy is shaky, the public restless.
And Bill Clinton, learning from Michael Dukakis's 1988 paralysis, has plunged into a far more energetic campaign.


In Community Plots, the Gardening Is Organic
ALL through the spring and early summer, Bruce Paquette has watched over his eggplants and peppers.
"They're my babies," he said proudly.
"I don't want anything to happen to them."
Lillian Grimm is similarly attached to her tomatoes.
Ever-vigilant now, after some disappointing growing seasons, Mrs.
Grimm coats yellow coffee can tops with vegetable oil and tacks them on the fence behind the plants to lure away white flies.
"I have my tricks," she said.


Mutual Funds; A Safety Net for Money Funds?
At the same time that fund executives revel in the industry's prosperity, more and more of them worry about its Achilles' heel: money funds.
The public has basically been using money funds, with share prices fixed at $1, as substitutes for bank accounts.
Prospectuses warn investors that share prices can fluctuate, but none has yet.
Nevertheless, as the stakes grow higher -- money stashed in money funds totaled a record-breaking $569.7 billion on June 30, according to Lipper Analytical Services -- if a money fund did fall below the $1 share price a crisis of confidence might reverberate through the entire industry.


The Athletic Art Of Football Pictures
FOR photographers of every level, football games and their surrounding rituals offer enormous opportunities.
From small high schools to large universities, from the peewee leagues to the N.F.L., football is a world of action, color, halftime theater, humor and drama.
A photographer determined to make the most of the game can work almost as hard as the players.
Being in the right place at the right time is, of course, the best formula for a good sports picture.
But the most memorable photographs do not happen by accident, as Rich Clarkson knows from having photographed football for 41 years.


U.S. Olympic Baseball Coach Faced Peril in Secret
A week after returning from Barcelona, Spain, Ron Fraser, the coach of the United States Olympic baseball team, has revealed that for the last six months he has been living with a medical nightmare.
Fraser acknowledged Friday that doctors had been monitoring an aneurysm in his stomach since it was discovered accidentally in late January, after he required X-rays for a back injury.
The aneurysm is checked for size, he said, because should it grow, it could burst his aorta.


POSTINGS: Physicists Leaving; Moving Down to Maryland
The American Institute of Physics and the American Physical Society plan to move their headquarters next year from 335 East 45th Street, in Manhattan, to a 24-acre site in a mixed-use development called Riverside at College Park Metro, in Prince George's County, Md.
But it is not another case of nonprofit organizations fleeing New York City.
"The vision was to establish a home for physics in the United States," said Arthur T. Bent, treasurer and chief financial officer of the institute, which promotes the study of physics through publishing, education and information programs.
The Washington area was a logical setting, as so much money for physics projects comes from the Federal Government.
Also, Mr.
Bent said, "There was a desire to be close to a university with a significant physics program." The University of Maryland, which fit the bill, is only a mile or so from the new site.


Julie Halston, Ralph Howard
THE comedienne Julie Halston, 35 years old, whom many describe as a cross between Joan Rivers and Hayley Mills, is developing a sitcom with CBS based on her one-woman Off Broadway show, "Julie Halston's Lifetime of Comedy."
"It's about a girl from Long Island who is divorced and moves into the city and she's trying to find love in all the wrong places and she wants desperately to be a celebrity and she has a gay roommate," she said.
"It's my life on television."


Relief and Joy
To the Editor: Constantly reading of the dangers associated with travel around the Mediterranean area, and having been the victim of a purse-snatching in Spain, I wanted to report this experience..
My husband and I spent two weeks touring Sicily by car.
The end of our trip was spent in the magnificent medieval hill town of Erice.
Before returning to Palermo, we decided to take one last stroll through town.
We luxuriated in the sun on a park bench high above the plain and sea below.
When we returned to our hotel to pack I realized that my purse with the car keys and airline tickets was missing; I had left it on the bench.
We raced back, knowing that, given the hour time lapse, it would be gone.
It was.


Karen Murphy And John Mackie
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas P. Murphy of Irvington, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Murphy to John Manfredi Mackie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Mackie of Irvington.
A July 1993 wedding is planned.
Miss Murphy, 23 years old, is an assistant account executive at Edelman Public Relations Worldwide in New York.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Oswego.
Her father is a pressman at The New York Times.


Kelly Cass and Peter Boal
Kelly Cass and Peter Boal, dancers with the New York City Ballet, were married yesterday in Colwall, England.
June McQuaid, the superintendent registrar of Ledbury, England, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Market Place, a wedding hall.
Mrs.
Boal, 26 years old, is a soloist with the ballet company.
She received her early ballet training from Olga Kostritzky in Buffalo and continued her studies at the School of American Ballet in New York.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Cass of Lewisburg, Pa.
Her father is the safety and personnel supervisor for Gold Bond Paper Products, a maker of paper building products in Lewisburg.
Her mother, Patricia D. Cass, is a teacher at Community Child Care, a preschool in Lewisburg.


God Save the Sweater Set
It's not often that the Queen of England is singled out as a style setter.
But no one ever doubts her authority when it comes to good, serviceable stuff.
Ever since she was a slip of a girl, the Queen has been tootling around Balmoral Castle in Scotland wearing a pullover and cardigan.
Finally, the rest of the world has caught up with her.
This fall, the epitome of chic will be a simple sweater set -- like this one at right from the Gap.
It can become the base of a whole wardrobe, and is versatile enough to stretch from sporty day looks to those for glamorous lights.


U.S. Warning Fischer On Yugoslavia Match
The Treasury Department has alerted an lawyer representing Bobby Fischer that the reclusive chess master would violate American economic sanctions against Yugoslavia if he went ahead with his planned return match with Boris Spassky beginning Sept. 2.
A Treasury Department official said today that if Mr.
Fischer decided to "disregard the law and regulations, we would then have to take appropriate enforcement action." Mr.
Fischer, who is said to be in Yugoslavia, could potentially face fines or even imprisonment.


Sanderson Tells Different Story
The former Alabama basketball coach WIMP SANDERSON says he did not punch his former secretary in the face during a confrontation in his office last March.
So how did NANCY WATTS get that black eye?
Simple, Sanderson says.
He merely stuck out his left arm to defend himself against a "hysterical" attack and Watts collided with his hand.


U.N. Votes, but Serbs Keep 'Cleansing'
THE West took its first tentative steps toward military intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina last week as the United Nations approved a resolution authorizing the use of force to protect aid convoys.
But even as the United Nations was acting, Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina were continuing their policy of ethnic cleansing, under which Muslim Slavs and Croats are being driven from their homes in what was once an ethnically mixed country.


Parties' Core Differences in Platforms
To a remarkable degree, the party platforms they wrote this summer define the state of the Democratic and Republican Parties and highlight the differences between them.
The Democrats, like their Presidential candidate, Bill Clinton, are seeking new ground, a footing that they hope the American people will find more comfortable than the doctrinaire liberalism that has characterized the party in the last half of this century.


And Then There Was One
The Martha Graham School holds a harbor cruise, Aug. 11.


Voices Raised


Conflict in teh Balkans; Independence Is Followed By 4-Month Slide to Chaos
April 6: European Community recognizes Bosnia and Herzegovina.
April 7: Serbian forces shell Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital.


A Versatile Citrus, Thorns and All
THERE is an exquisite cousin to lemons and limes that is quite at home in my backyard garden in Brooklyn.
Some people around here, however, aren't attracted to it for its citrus lineage; they like it for its relationship to razor ribbon.
The plant, known as Poncirus trifoliata, or trifoliate orange, is theft-proof.
Would-be urban bush-rustlers might end up slashed by one-inch long, needle-sharp thorns that lie in wait just beneath a shroud of shiny green leaflets.
Planted beneath windows, it might be equally discouraging to a housebreaker.
Several trifoliate orange shrubs were planted in the 1960's inside the fence at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden in a successful effort to discourage trespassers.


Richard F. Walsh, 92, Stage Union President
Richard Francis Walsh, a former president of the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees and Moving Picture Machine Operators, which he led for 33 years, died on Thursday at South Nassau Communities Hospital in Freeport, L.I.
He lived in Baldwin, L.I. and was 92 years old.
The union, which reported his death on Friday, said it came after a brief illness.


A Small Whittling Down Of Federal Bench Vacancies
The Federal District Court in Manhattan has a backlog of cases, and until last week it had seven vacancies among its 28 seats.
The number of vacancies was reduced to five on Tuesday night, when the United States Senate unanimously confirmed President Bush's nominations of Sonia Sotomayor, a former assistant district attorney in Manhattan, and Loretta A. Preska, a partner in a Manhattan law firm.


Stop Dithering On Russian Uranium
The Administration ought to quit shilly-shallying and buy weapons-grade Russian uranium.
After four decades when America sought to limit and reduce the number of Soviet nuclear weapons, the U.S. and Russians have agreed to dismantle the preponderance of their overblown nuclear arsenals.
The disarming of thousands of tactical and strategic weapons raises the difficult question of what to do with the tons of uranium and plutonium they contain.


County Fights Plan on Power For Con Ed
WESTCHESTER officials went to Albany last week to argue against building a transmission line that the county says would bring Con Edison consumers electricity they do not need and cost $1 billion more over five years than the consumers should pay.
Westchester customers would absorb $150 million of that figure, according to the county, which estimates the average county homeowner would pay $35 more a year.
The remaining $850 million would be paid by consumers in New York City, the county says.


4 Frat Houses At Cornell Shut
LAST Wednesday, this city closed indefinitely four Cornell University fraternity chapter houses because of building-code violations discovered during a summer-long inspection crackdown.
The shutdowns will affect more than 100 of the 18,000 students returning for the fall semester this week.


A Small Western Town Rides into the Sunrise
TREELESS and flat as the floor, this is not the Colorado pictured on ski brochures or beer commercials.
Ninety miles of lonely road from Denver, it is too far-flung to be a suburb, too plain-faced to be a tourist town.
It is the kind of small town that is supposed to have become an anachronism.
But while so many other little towns are withering, Brush has pulled off a remarkable feat: It is growing.
In the past year, 12 small businesses have opened here.
The population has increased 2 percent since 1980, to 4,165.
The City Council has even been able to lower taxes.


AUGUST 9-15: The Doomsday Rock; New Evidence That a Crater Is a Dinosaur-Killer's Grave
The old hypothesis that a doomsday rock from outer space did in the dinosaurs became a bit more real last week as researchers announced new evidence for a collision on the Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico.
It turns out that a crater there, 110 miles wide and already identified as big enough to have created a global pall of dust to blot out the sun, was carved out of the Earth at exactly the right time.


New &amp; Noteworthy
SAVAGE INEQUALITIES: Children in America's Schools, by Jonathan Kozol. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Public schools are supposed to provide poor children with an educational opportunity equal to that of their more affluent peers; instead, Jonathan Kozol demonstrates, they perpetuate the inequities inherent in the rest of their pupils' lives.
"The ultimate issue is whether Americans can be induced to care about children other than their own," Andrew Hacker said here last year, calling this a "depressing -- and essential -- book."
TWO LIVES: "Reading Turgenev" and "My House in Umbria," by William Trevor. (Penguin, $10.) Each of these novellas explores the life of a woman who uses the power of her imagination -- and ultimately of fiction -- to transform a bleak reality.
In "Reading Turgenev," Mary Louise Quarry, unhappily married, retreats into the comfort of her cousin's love even after his death.
Emily Delahunty, the narrator of "My House in Umbria," is a romance writer who attempts to reshape the fates of the people staying at her villa, all victims of a terrorist bombing.
Last year our reviewer, Alida Becker, commended Mr.
Trevor, an Irish writer living in England, for the "shifting magic of his storytelling." "Two Lives," she said, is "one of the most absorbing books in a body of work that has, at least in America, been more widely praised than read."


A Chance to Prime The Pump
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein is right to suggest that there seem to be limits to the effectiveness of arts patronage in a democracy and that the National Endowment for the Arts has not often been bold enough in its support of the arts  [ "You Can't Please All of the People . . . ," July 26 ] .


If You're Thinking of Living in: Sayreville
SAYREVILLE is a no-frills community built by workers who toiled in one of the largest brick-making factories on the East Coast a century and a half ago, and it continues to benefit from an industrial base that keeps taxes low and provides jobs for many residents.
Named for James Sayre Jr. who, together with Peter Fisher, built the Sayre &amp; Fisher Brick Works along the Raritan River in the 1850s, the Middlesex County borough remains primarily a blue collar community, although its white collar population has been growing recently, according to Mayor John B. McCormack.


Conversations/Frances D'Souza; Working to Nourish Democracy Where Minds Are Being Starved
FOR anyone who thinks that censorship has been nearly eradicated since the breakdown of the Communist monolith in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, Frances D'Souza has some sobering facts.
Through her job as the director of Article 19, an international organization that fights censorship, Dr.
D'Souza can cite all too current examples of places where suppression of information and free speech is still rampant.
Among the transgressors, she says, are predominantly Roman Catholic countries in Latin America where information on family planning is prohibited; Islamic countries where fundamentalists regularly ban books, the press is state controlled and defiant writers are, at best, jailed; African and Asian countries where literary and journalistic fealty to the ruling dictatorship is demanded, and China, where the democracy movement continues to be suppressed in the aftermath of the Tiananmen crackdown of 1989.


Mezzo to Make Debut at Ives Center
THE 1991 recipient of the Marian Anderson award, Denyce Graves, will make her debut as soloist with the Ives Symphony Orchestra at the Charles Ives Center for the Arts in Danbury on Aug. 29.
The 28-year old mezzo-soprano, whose award was bestowed in the name of the contralto and longtime Danbury resident, will sing the five "Sea Pictures" of Sir Edward Elgar.
For the purely orchestral part of the program the guest conductor, Leon Botstein, will lead the Ives Symphony in one of its namesake composer's whimsical orchestral portraits, "The Gong on the Hook and Ladder or Fireman's Parade on Main Street", plus Ives's "Variations on America" in the orchestral edition of William Schuman.
The evening concludes on an expansive note with Mahler's Symphony No. 1, also known as "The Titan" (797-4490).


Nagle Is in Need of a Protective Coating
Jets quarterback Browning Nagle spent most of an exhibition game last weekend staring into the menacing faces of Washington pass rushers.
The rest of the time he spent picking himself up off the ground.
Jets Coach Bruce Coslet would like to see a little more pass protection for Nagle from the offensive line this afternoon in a game against the Green Bay Packers at Camp Randall Stadium in Madison, Wis.


World Markets; The Sad Saga of Nippon Telegraph
As the Tokyo stock market sank to a new low for the year last week and to its lowest level in six years, the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation was leading the way.
The stock of Japan's main telephone company has lost nearly a fifth of its value since the beginning of this month and reached an all-time low on Wednesday.
The stock is now 85 percent below its 1987 peak.
Even the fact that foreign investors were allowed to buy the stock for the first time this month did not help, because foreigners also shunned the shares.


AUGUST 9-15: The Recession's Effects; New York City Now Has 1 Million on Welfare
For the first time since the economic crisis of the 1970's, the number of New Yorkers on welfare last month rose above 1 million people -- almost one out of every seven city residents.
City officials blamed the sluggish economy for the 22 percent increase in the number of people on welfare since Mayor David N. Dinkins took office in January 1990.
The number rose from 823,691 then to 1,005,210 last month.
Of those now on welfare, 529,949 are children.


More on Reaganomics
To the Editor:
In "Time to Get Back to Reaganomics" (Forum, July 26), Edwin S. Rubenstein derides both the Congressional Budget Office's data as being "seriously flawed," and Massachusetts Institute of Technology Prof.
Paul Krugman's analysis of income growth based on that data, which showed that "the wealthiest 1 percent of American families received 60 percent of total income growth during the 1980's."


Public &amp; Private; A Fairy Tale
I was having a bad day when the 3-year-old demanded peevishly that I dress her in my best cocktail dress and sing the score to Walt Disney's "Sleeping Beauty" while she practiced her ballet steps.
"I am not your slave," I snapped.
"Are you insane?" said my husband. "What if I want to run for President?"


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending Aug. 1  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village 555,000
2 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. penthouse co-op in a postwar building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned-elevator, dining area, balcony; maintenance $1,316, 14% tax-deductible (Broker: Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  Flatiron District 200,000
140 Fifth Avenue (19th St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 875-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, dining area, 12-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $778, 68% tax-deductible (Brokers: J.G. Realty/Manhattan Homes)  SoHo 335,000
61-63 Crosby Street  2,500-sq.-ft. open loft co-op in a 4-story building; 1 bath, 16-ft. ceilings, 2 skylights, maple floors, walkup; maintenance $1,000, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Tabak Real Estate)  Upper East Side 335,000
200 East 89th Street  (Monarch)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. condo in a 6-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, pool and health club, terrace; common charge $385, taxes $2,000 (Broker: J.I. Sopher)  Upper West Side 317,147
645 West End Avenue (92d St.)  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar Victorian-style building; dining room, maid's room, 10-ft. ceilings; maintenance $1,152, 49% tax-deductible (Broker: Hunt-Kennedy Real Estate)  BRONX  Castle Hill 182,000
457 Torry Avenue  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Riverdale 102,500
640 West 231st Street  (Fairfield)  3-bedroom, 2-baths, 1,700-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; elevator, dining el, renovated kitchen; maintenence $634, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill 139,000
62 Bergen Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-year-old building; dining area, fireplace, deck; common charge $201, 100% tax-abated (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Park Slope 257,000
528 10th Street  2-family, 3-story brownstone; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in upper duplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in simplex; original moldings and details; 18.6- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,167 (Broker: Slope Realty Company)  Sheepshead Bay 220,000
2323 East 27th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining room, front and rear porches, 1-car garage, hospitality suite on 1st floor, 23- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,730 (Broker: Maryl Real Estate)  QUEENS  Elmhurst 165,000
43-16 Junction Boulevard  2-family, detached, frame house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; full basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Veterans Real Estate)  Forest Hills 260,000
75-11 Austin Street  (Arbor Close)  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick Tudor; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage, 18- by 85-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Manor Heights 162,500
289 Ganesvoort Boulevard  4-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, private driveway, 42- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,250 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  New Springville 77,000
1037 Rockland Avenue  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-year-old building; dining area, bedroom skylight; common charge $106, taxes $900 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)


Voters in Large States Carry More Clout
To the Editor:
In "Don't Fix the Electoral College. Scrap It." (letter, Aug. 2), David I. Wells wants to have it both ways.
If the Electoral College benefits the large states because of its winner-take-all feature, and the small states because it gives them a disproportionate number of votes as a result of the two "senatorial" electoral votes that each state receives, then where is the bias?


A First Job Fades as the Paper Route Grows Up
Eventually the newspaper strike that is afflicting the Pittsburgh area will be settled.
Some of the teamsters who walked off the job in May will return to their jobs as truck drivers, and some presumably won't.
But some people who have been idled know already that they have lost their jobs for good, like Bobby Griska, who is 14 years old.
Bobby is a paperboy, one of 4,300 young door-to-door carriers who delivered The Pittsburgh Press and The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Under the newspapers' plan for more efficient home delivery, all 4,300 young carriers have been dismissed.
They will be replaced by far fewer adults who can cover longer routes by flinging the papers onto lawns from car windows.


With Stars in Their Eyes
That the guy's only doing it for some doll, some doll, the guy's only do it for some dol-l-l-l.
The curtain came down, and the audience rose up.
They were giving a standing ovation, not to the stars of "Guys and Dolls," but to the dancers.


Punishment Before the Crime
A letter to the New Jersey editor in support of the death penalty (on July 19) argues that its "most compelling justification" is that "the murderer will never do it again." The writer fails to carry his logic to its conclusion.
The vast majority of murders are committed by one-time killers.
It follows that to insure that no one commits murder, we should prospectively execute everybody at the age when he first can use small deadly weapons, perhaps 4 or 5 years.


Business Diary/August 9-14
THE ECONOMY The Mexico Question


A Correction: No Plan to Curb High-Potency Vitamins as Drugs
The Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration says the agency has "not proposed" to classify vitamins as drugs if their potencies exceed the daily recommended allowances, the suggested amounts that adults consume daily.
Dr.
David A. Kessler, the F.D.A.'s Commissioner, said in a telephone interview that contrary to an article in The New York Times last Sunday, nothing in the agency's proposed food labeling regulations to carry out the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990 would affect the sale of high- potency vitamins "as long as they do not pose a health hazard or make misleading health claims."


Lee F. Barton, David C. Jones
Lee Forrester Barton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth H. Barton of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Charles Jones, the son of Col.
David J. Jones U.S.A.F., retired, and Mrs.
Jones of Santa Barbara, Calif.
The Rev.
Michael G. Ireland performed the Protestant ceremony at the Community Congregational Church in Tiburon, Calif.
Ms.
Barton, 32 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a teacher at the Marin Country Day School in Corte Madera, Calif.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received a master's degree in education from Lesley College.
Her father is the associate head of the Riverdale Country School in the Bronx.


In Pelham, Artists Who Take to the Road
THE Pelham Art Center has solved the vacation problem by going "On the Road" within its own four walls, that being the title of its current exhibition.
Of course, it is the artists who are -- or have been -- on the road in fact or fantasy.
Sandra Meagher would have the viewer believe that her charcoal drawings of a hitchhiker's hegira are autobiographical.
Whether this is the case, the artist milks the adventure for all it is worth, beginning with a diner's interior and a coffee cup held by the hand of a clearly plebeian man.


At Work; Benefits? For Part Timers?
Part-time employees tend to be the stepchildren of the American labor force.
Though they are students, retired people, parents and others who want flexibility, they are also, increasingly, full-time-worker wannabees bumped down to part-time status by companies looking to save money on benefits.
Except at the Starbucks Coffee Company, which takes the apparently counterintuitive approach that all employees, whether part time or full, are a resource rather than a liability.
The Seattle-based specialty-coffee roaster and retailer is coming up on the second anniversary of a program offering a full plate of benefits to its 2,000 or so full- and part-time workers.
The strategic logic of corporations that "discriminate" against part timers is flawed, said Howard Schultz, Starbucks's chief executive.
"We view them, at a minimum, as on an equal footing with full-timers."


As Kurds Enjoy Freedom, They Wake the Neighbors
THE Kurds of northern Iraq, who have managed to create the third de facto Kurdish state of this century, are worrisome not only to the Iraqi Government but to Turkey and Iran as well.
The new government, sworn in on July 4 after elections in May, is portrayed by the Kurds as simply filling the administrative vacuum left by Baghdad's withdrawal from northern Iraq last year after the intervention of American-led forces.
Wary of upsetting the neighbors, the Kurds are careful not to call their new domain the precursor to an independent state.


Mystic and Idealist (Tyrant? Huckster?)
Most of us try to judge artists by their work, not their personalities.
But what to do about a conductor who professes the noblest and most mystical ideals yet acts like a tyrant, presents the public image of a snake-oil huckster and seems now to have betrayed a lifelong credo of opposition to recordings?
In other words, how does one respond to the Romanian conductor Sergiu Celibidache?
After a strange and erratic career spent bouncing from second-rate orchestra to second-rate orchestra, Mr.
Celibidache (pronounced chell-ee-bee-DAH-key), who recently turned 80 years old, has finally settled in Munich, Germany, where he leads yet another second-rate orchestra, the Munich Philharmonic.
There, now that Herbert von Karajan, Leonard Bernstein and other cult competitors have died, Mr.
Celibidache has been elevated to near divinity.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS -- N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
July 92
June 92
July 91
Rents
181.2
+1.3
+3.8
Homeowner's costs
178.0
+0.3
+3.1
Fuel and utilities
109.9
+0.2
+3.3
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.22
8.27
9.48
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.47
5.51
7.21
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.09
8.14
9.37
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.27
5.33
7.15
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.12
8.11
9.44
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.30
5.20
7.03
Co-ops (N.Y.)
8.33
8.32
9.63
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.09
6.14
7.61
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.54
3.57
5.88
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.04
8.04
9.12
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


JAPAN MINISTERS VISIT WAR SHRINE
Defying a recent high court ruling, almost the entire Cabinet observed the anniversary of Japan's surrender in World War II by worshiping today at the Yasukuni shrine, a Shinto institution once regarded as the soul of Japanese militarism.
Government ministers and some Prime Ministers have made sporadic appearances at the Yasukuni shrine, which is dedicated to the souls of Japan's war dead, but the visits this year struck a particularly nationalistic note, coming so close to the court ruling on July 30.
The Osaka High Court ruled that Yasuhiro Nakasone's 1985 appearance at the shrine, the first official visit by a postwar Prime Minister, violated the constitutional separation between religion and the state.


Corrections
An article in some copies on Aug. 2 about the All-Breed Rescue Alliance, a group that readies mistreated dogs for adoption, misidentified a member.
She is Jody Caizza of Jackson.


Social Security Gives More Than It Took In
To the Editor:
In "A Refresher Course on Social Security" (letter, Aug. 4), Raymond Alfaya bristles at being lumped into the category of "greedy geezer" and points out that the Social Security program is a pension fund.
He believes a means test would therefore be a betrayal.
He adds that he contributed to Social Security for 51 years and deserves to receive his benefits regardless of means.
This is partly true.


What's All the Fuss? New Jersey People Ask
Ed and Gloria Steinfeld gazed in awe beyond the eight acres of new grass on the Edgewater Driving Range to the view -- a lush postcard across the Hudson of Riverside Drive.
"We love New York," Mr.
Steinfeld murmured.
But the Hackensack couple were definitely not impressed to hear that people on the other side of the river do not hold the same view about the driving range.


Sampling the Flavors of Southeast Asia
SAN FRANCISCO's reputation as one of the most Asian of American cities goes back to the middle of the 19th century, when the first Chinese immigrants arrived after gold was discovered at Sutter's Mill.
Like other immigrants, those earliest settlers brought their cuisine and their foodstuffs with them, and San Francisco became known early on as a good place to eat Chinese.
Today, with what are some of the classiest Chinese restaurants anywhere east of Taipei, the city is still a good place to eat Chinese.
But adventurous diners looking for new tastes and experiences may want to investigate a humbler food scene in the little mom-and-pop and storefront eating places that have grown up with more recent immigration from Southeast Asia, especially Vietnam and Cambodia.


On Sunday; At Play In the Fields Of the Vinca
ON a hill here behind a padlocked gate and electrified fences, Prof.
Ronald Parker, a plant breeder, hides his world-famous vinca test fields.
"I must be cautious," he says.
"I've had people try to bribe my research crews to tell them where these fields are. You're the only one who's been in the vinca fields this year."
It is not that the vinca is exotic.
On the contrary.
The University of Connecticut professor's genius lies in his ability to develop a colorful flowering annual that is perfect for your typical idiot suburban gardener.
No need to water vincas.
They love heat.
Deer and bugs hate them.


Empire of the Day and Night Creams
YUE-SAI KAN, a 43-year-old celebrity television host who produced "One World," a Western life-style magazine broadcast in China from 1987 through 1990, is about to wield yet another potential tool of cultural revolution.
It was 9 o'clock one recent morning, just two days before Ms.
Kan would leave Manhattan for China to introduce her own line of cosmetics, a line that will, she promised an Asian-American visitor, "make you gorgeous."


BASEBALL: EQUALITY'S HURDLES - A Special Report; Too Few Changes Since Campanis
The comments came on national television, on the opening day of the baseball season, and when they spilled forth from Al Campanis on April 6, 1987, it was as if baseball, and all professional sports, for that matter, had been hit by a cataclysmic earthquake.
Campanis, then the general manager of the Los Angeles Dodgers, was asked by Ted Koppel on "Nightline" why so few blacks attained executive positions in baseball.
He answered:


When Science Is the Star
The first thing to be said about the director Errol Morris's "Brief History of Time," the film version of the famed physicist Stephen Hawking's best-selling book about black holes and the origin and destiny of the universe, is similar to what Samuel Johnson said of the dancing dog: one is impressed not so much that the thing has been done well as that is has been done at all.
"A Brief History of Time" is, after all, a nonfiction feature film about science -- a real movie, in other words, shot on film in a wide-screen format, meant to be shown in theaters (it opens on Friday at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas), about one of the least popular subjects in all show business.
Feature films on science are so rare that you can make a trivia game out of trying to remember their titles. (Here are two: "The Hellstrom Chronicle," a 1971 film, produced by David Wolper and directed by David Seltzer, in which an actor posing as an entomologist told creepy tales about insects, and "The Secret Life of Plants," a 1979 pseudoscience curiosity from Paramount remembered principally for its Stevie Wonder score.)


If Giants Move East, It Will Be the End of a Beautiful Rivalry
Can a Dodger-Giant rivalry, transferred successfully from New York to California 35 years ago, survive if the Giants settle in the Tampa Bay area?
Probably not.
Two of the three necessary ingredients will be missing and, most likely, the third as well.


Conflict in the Balkans; Reporter for The Times Quits Bosnia After a Serb Warning
A reporter who contributes regularly to The New York Times left Serb-controlled territory in Bosnia and Herzegovina yesterday after being told by the Serbian authorities that his safety at Serbian checkpoints could no longer be assured.
The reporter, Chuck Sudetic, who has reported for The Times from the area since 1990, returned safely to Belgrade, where he lives.
The State Department in Washington issued a statement criticizing what it described as Mr.
Sudetic's expulsion.


To Budapest Mit Schlag
It is the perfect setting for a Sigmund Romberg operetta: a Renaissance Revival building of palatial proportions idyllically situated on the edge of a city park, with a zoo at its backdoor and a lake at its front.
Sometimes the air is filled with the sound of music, sometimes with the trumpeting of elephants.
But for decades the building in Budapest might as well have been a facade on a Hollywood sound stage.
Its imposing exterior concealed the remains of a restaurant that was once the finest east of Vienna.
Gundel, the gathering place of the bourgeoisie and the aristocracy when the Danube was still blue and Archduke Ferdinand had not yet been to Sarajevo, had survived two world wars, various occupations, revolutions and counterrevolutions and three months as a stable for Wehrmacht horses, but 45 years of Communist rule brought it to its knees.
Inside it looked like a 1950's cafeteria, and the food it dispensed made K-rations seem appetizing.


HAVING IT ALL
Prose is correct that Margaret Sanger was a powerful, intelligent and brave woman who lived her own remarkable life at a time when women generally were restrained by the conventions of society.
This seems admirable today, and we tend to avoid the more elusive question of what beliefs and philosophies drive such a person.


Passing Customs
To the Editor: Betsy Wade's article "How Customs Keeps Shoppers Honest" (Practical Traveler, July 12) reminded me of our recent experience.
A few months ago, my husband and I returned from a trip to Switzerland and Italy.
As we proceeded through customs at Kennedy Airport,an inspector looked at our passports and commented: "You're from Staten Island. How many bridges does it have?" My husband replied, "Four, the Outerbridge,Bayonne, Goethals and Verrazano." "Nope," said the inspector, "there's one more."


A Rebuttal. A Rebuttal.
To the Sports Editor:
During this last week, we have read with growing outrage as our passion, our discipline, our art has alternately been dismissed as "cotton candy," a "snicker sport," and "fluff." The purpose of introducing synchronized swimming to the Olympics was to garner it the recognition it so deserves, not to invite uninformed disparagement.


Firefighters Admit Role in Arson
Two volunteer firefighters and another man have pleaded guilty to arson for their roles in a series of fires that damaged dozens of stores, businesses and homes in Middlesex County in New Jersey.
Joseph Montanye Jr., 19 years old, and Ronald Kermes, 21, both volunteer firefighters with the Edison Fire Department, and the other man, Steven M. Toth, 20, entered their pleas on Friday in Middlesex County Superior Court in New Brunswick as part of a plea bargain with prosecutors for lighter sentences.


A Vaulting 'Comedy'
It's faster than a speeding couplet.
More powerful than a Shakespearean simile.
Able to leap tall stage sets in a single bound.
It's Antigravity, the troupe of gymnasts that intends to turn "The Comedy of Errors" at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park into a sequel to the Summer Olympics.
The seven-member troupe will be a-tumbling in the Shakespearean marketplace of Ephesus, doing aerial cartwheels on platforms, leaping from ramps, balancing on roofs and hanging from 35-foot rope pulleys in the play, which opens tonight.


HAVING IT ALL
Francine Prose wishes that Margaret Sanger could run for public office today.
I'm certain, however, that Sanger would be unable to succeed in being elected to even the lowest level of public office in view of her record of extreme racist beliefs and pronouncements.


Major Christian Party to Boycott Lebanese Voting
Christian factions battling to hold off elections took a step forward on Friday when Lebanon's powerful Christian Phalangist Party decided not to take part in the voting.
The country's first parliamentary elections in 20 years are scheduled for Aug. 23 and 30 and Sept. 6, just weeks before Syria is to pull its forces out of Beirut.


Asbury Park: A Child's Paradise Revisited
The article "In Asbury Park, Voices of Hope Refuse to Give Up" (July 26) inspired me to revisit my favorite childhood paradise.
As I walked across a stretch of boardwalk with my husband and 5-year-old son, Max, I remembered an era when there were dozens of rides, restaurants, a Ferris wheel that miraculously broke through the roof of Palace Amusements, puppet shows that visually tantalized and a seemingly endless array of sugary treats.


LIZZIE BORDEN TOOK AN AX
I enjoyed Mary Cantwell's article on Lizzie Borden ("Lizzie Borden Took an Ax," July 26).
If I offer some comments, it is because I have a vested interest.
I did a good deal of the original research for Jack Beeson's opera "Lizzie Borden," which was first presented at the New York City Opera in 1965.
You don't need conjectures about motive like those promoted by Professor Ryckebusch in your article.
Some time before the slaughter, Papa Borden had transferred two houses owned by his daughters to their stepmother, Abby.
He also stubbornly refused to allow Lizzie the money she needed for the annual meeting of the Christian Temperance Union.
He bestowed "silly trifles" on Abby, while the girls had to eat warmed-up mutton soup for breakfast.
Enough reason to do away with anybody!


Anne Moffitt, Ian Williams
Anne Stewart Moffitt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter M. Moffitt of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday in Leesburg, Va., to Ian Douglass Williams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Williams of Leesburg.
The Rev.
Elijah White 3d, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Oatlands, the former family home of the bridegroom's mother, Joan Beauregard Williams, and now a property of the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
Mrs.
Williams was until recently a teacher at St.
David's School in New York.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
Her father is the president of Moffitt &amp; Company, financial advisers, in Fairfield.
Her mother, Butzi Moffitt, is an assistant in the special events department of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Riverside Aims to Dim Golfers' Night Light in Edgewater
Ever since colonial times, the peoples of New York and New Jersey have had their disputes.
They have bickered and skirmished over taxes and tariffs, borders, jobs, garbage, the Westway project, the rightful ownership of the Statue of Liberty and the birthplace of baseball.
Now a new battle has flared in the periodic border wars between these uneasy neighbors -- this time over an issue that residents on the Upper West Side of Manhattan describe as nothing less than a vulgarity, an assault, a threat to their way of life: floodlights on a golf range.


Steamboats For Cruises
The line that operates the Delta Queen and the Mississippi Queen, which cruise along the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers, has decided to build a third ship, an official of the company says.
The Delta Queen Steamboat Company is expected to approve plans and financing for construction of its third paddle wheeler, tentatively named the Belle of America, at a board meeting on Aug. 25.
The 420-passenger ship is scheduled for completion in mid-1994 and will cost an estimated $50 million.
The Queens are the only overnight paddle wheel steamboats in America.


Made In the U.S.A.
To the Sports Editor:
Stephen King should stick to writing fiction.
All the Olympic teams played to win and our basketball team did it.
We fielded an unbeatable team that won the admiration of everyone and that made the hearts of Americans beat faster and prouder.
The world saw bravura basketball and no other country could have done it.
AMY BLOCHER  Belmont, Mass.


Kiki Smith: The Body As Political Battleground
Kiki Smith has become such a fixture of the art scene that it is easy to forget that her first solo commercial gallery show in New York occurred only four years ago.
Before then she enjoyed something of an underground reputation.
She was known as a member of Collaborative Projects, or Colab, an artists' collective formed in the late 70's, which exhibited in out-of-the-way spaces, produced a weekly cable television show and sold inexpensive objects at its own store in SoHo.
She was also known for belonging to a family of artists -- her father was Tony Smith, the Minimalist sculptor, and her sister Seaton is an artist (another sister, also an artist, died in 1988) -- although it would be wrong to label her an art world insider.
During most of the 1980's, the decade of stars like Schnabel, Fischl and Salle, the kind of art Ms.
Smith was making, and the kinds of places in which she was exhibiting that art, pretty much guaranteed her status on the periphery.


The Latest in Buzzwords: Mailed From America
After celebrating morning mass at the Good Shepherd Church near his modest brick flat in Morecambe, a seaside resort in Lancashire, England, the Rev.
Michael J. Smith eagerly watches for a little green van that more and more often is pulling up to his front door.
The van signals the arrival of yet another product he has ordered by mail from the United States.
Since he first saw an advertisement for mail-order shopping direct from the United States in a computer magazine about two years ago, Father Smith reckons he has spent more than $4,000, mostly on computer software.


Maureen Moore, William Auer
Maureen Elizabeth Moore, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas R. Moore of Milford, Conn., was married yesterday to William Bernhard Auer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernhard Auer of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Avery Manchester performed the Methodist ceremony at the First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Auer, 27 years old, is the director of publications at the New Canaan (Conn.) Country School, where she also teaches English.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father owns T. R. Moore, a painting and contracting concern in Milford.
Her mother, Maureen A. Moore, is a sales associate at Motors and Drives, an industrial electric motor distributor in Milford.


Christina Corbett, Thomas Kazazes
Christina Ann Corbett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Corbett of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Thomas Peter Kazazes, the son of Mrs.
Peter T. Kazazes of Yonkers and the late Mr.
Kazazes.
The Rev.
Sam Matarazzo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Vincent Ferrer Church in New York.
Mrs.
Kazazes, 27 years old, is the director of marketing and administration at Austin Investment Management Inc. in New York.
She graduated from the University of Florida and received a master's degree in international business from the Netherlands School of Business in Breukelen.


When Calypso Is the Food of Love
THE joys of ensemble playing were bountifully displayed in the Phoenix Theater Company's first two productions this summer.
But don't expect style, dazzle or even cohesiveness from the season's last show.
It would be charitable to dismiss "Twelfth Night" as a director's concept gone awry.
But then such frills as a Caribbean setting -- with an evocative curtain of tropical hues designed by James Tilton, acalypso beat and assorted noisy sound effects that include the rushing of waves -- do not add up to a concept, only ostentation.


POSTINGS: Rejuvenating Bridgeport; A Fully Leased Renovation
Long mired in a seemingly hopeless economic morass, Bridgeport, the largest city in Connecticut, is taking a major step toward rejuvenation with the renovation of the vacant former People's Bank headquarters in the downtown business district.
Mayor Joseph P. Ganim unveiled a rendering of the project this month at the start of renovations for the 11-story, 113,000-square-foot building, which is already fully leased.
Among the tenants are an accounting firm, a law firm and the Southern Connecticut Gas Company.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Avon, Conn. 244,500
46 Edwards Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; cathedral ceiling in living room, whirlpool, 2 decks, 0.75 acre; taxes $4,157.
East Hartford, Conn. 104,000
171 School Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 85-year-old colonial; enclosed rear porch, needs work, 1.9 acres; taxes $1,292.
Farmington, Conn. 197,000
27 Wyndwood Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; h/w floors, solar hot water heat, 0.50 acre; taxes $1,603.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 495,000
285 Patterson Road  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 7-year-old contemporary; tiled entry, family room, 2 stone fireplaces, solarium, deck, loft den, 2.2 acres; taxes $8,806.
South Salem, N.Y. 275,500
Lockwood Road
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 31-year-old ranch; fireplace, bay window, deck, garage apartment, barn, hot tub, 1.44 acres; taxes $5,291.
White Plains, N.Y. 442,000
7 Rosewood Road 4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old contemporary; fireplace, country eat-in kitchen, decks; taxes $9,000.
OTHER AREAS Freehold, N.J. 123,500
4 Turf Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, deck, 2-car garage; $2,121.
Green Township, N.J. 119,500
26 Shore Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 19-year-old raised ranch; new country kitchen, large deck; taxes $2,976.
West Islip, L.I. 135,000
307 Aster Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50- year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $5,100.


A Tainted Event at Festival
Anyone who thought the Highland Games were more Scottish folk festival than serious athletic competition may want to re-evaluate that view considering the lengths an athlete will go to improve his performance in the kilted caber toss and the other track and field events that make up the annual games in the highlands of Scotland. (For novices, a translation of the caber toss: a man wearing a skirt hurls, end over end, 20-foot logs that weigh150 pounds.)


Rabin Brings a Thaw Because He's Not Shamir
The scenes from Kennebunkport, Me., almost made you want to rub your eyes in disbelief.
Was that President Bush giving a tour of his family's seaside home to the Prime Minister of Israel?
Was that Mr. and Mrs.
Yitzhak Rabin staying overnight with the Bushes just like other "good friends"?
Yes, after almost four years of tension and acrimony the Bush Administration and Israel are having a belated honeymoon.
Democracies have a lot of disadvantages in conducting foreign policy -- domestic constituencies, noisy opinion-makers, multiple power centers -- but the United States-Israel relationship recalls that they also have one big advantage: they can change leaders.
They can go to the blackboard, erase what is on it and start over.
And to some extent that is what these two long-time allies did last week.
But is the rebirth of warmth in their relationship based on a real meeting of the minds between new players, or on political expediency?


Husband and Wife Arrested in Beating of Their 6-Week-Old Son
MANHASSET, L.I., Aug. 15 -- The Nassau County police have charged the parents of a 6-week-old boy with assault and child abuse, after the infant suffered a fractured pharynx, two broken ribs and two skull fractures in what the police described as a protracted beating last week.
Harry Waiser, a 28-year-old unemployed salesman from Roslyn Heights, and his wife, Ellen, 38, were arraigned today on charges of assault and endangering the welfare of a minor, said Detective Sgt.
Lawrence W. Gorman of the Sixth Precinct.


Debra H. Bajohr, Robert S. Marlan
Debra Holly Bajohr, a daughter of Laura and Howard Bajohr of Ellington, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Scott Marlan, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Morton W. Marlan of Rochester.
The Rev.
Michael Galasso performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Peter's Church in Hartford.
Mrs.
Marlan is a nurse at the St.
Francis Hospital and Medical Center in Hartford.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Connecticut, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in French literature from the University of Rouen in Mont-St.-Aignan, France, and graduated from the St.
Francis Hospital School of Nursing.
Her father, who is retired, worked at the Fishman &amp; Sons Construction Company in Hartford.
Her mother is a retired nurse.


Painting the Park Red
Parks Council party in the Loeb Boathouse, Aug. 12.


Conflict in the Balkans; Term for Serbs' Camps Is Being Disputed
Bosnia's President has called them "death camps," but most Western leaders have avoided the term, or rejected it, in referring to detention centers run by Serbian forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In generally accepted usage, a death camp is devoted to the factory-like, systematic killing of virtually all the prisoners sent there, and most historians reserve the phrase for some of the camps operated by Nazi Germany in occupied Poland.
Perhaps the most notorious example was Birkenau, part of the Auschwitz complex, which held the gas chambers in which an estimated 1.5 million people were killed.


At 67, Johnny Mandel Finds He's Back in Style
The secret of an enduring career, the veteran arranger and composer Johnny Mandel says, is "surviving long enough for your style to come back." At the age of 67, Mr.
Mandel has done just that, with two albums now at the top of the jazz charts: Shirley Horn's "Here's to Life" and Diane Schuur's "In Tribute."
On the Horn album, languid pop ballads are enfolded in Mr.
Mandel's cloudlike 49-piece arrangements.
The Schuur disk is a salute to 13 celebrated female vocalists, partly scored by Mr.
Mandel.
Earlier, he had arranged 7 of the 22 tracks on Natalie Cole's hit album "Unforgettable." And this after more than 50 years in the business, during which time he has composed dozens of film scores and done arrangements for many legendary singers and band leaders.
He has won five Grammys, including one for "The Shadow of Your Smile," from the 1965 movie "The Sandpiper." (He shared that Grammy, and an Oscar for the song, with the lyricist Paul Francis Webster.)


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BLOCKWATCH TOUR
It is not a conventional house tour being offered this afternoon in New Haven from 1 to 5 P.M.
Organized by Blockwatch 320, a group of property owners in the Park-Howe-Dwight Streets neighborhood bordering Yale, the self-guided walking tour covers 20 private residences built in the 19th century that until recently were threatened with extinction.


Trade-Ins Help Sell New Homes
BY early next year Stef and Linda Fogelson expect to be in the two-story French Provincial-style home they are building on a two-acre wooded lot in Chappaqua, N.Y.
The Fogelsons have not yet found a buyer for the home they now own and occupy, but they are not worried because the builder of their new house has agreed to buy their existing home if it has not sold by the time the new one is ready.


Caroline Gosse, S. P. Elmendorf
Caroline Ferebee Gosse, the daughter of Anthony C. Gosse of Lewisburg, Pa., and Dey Erben Gosse of New York, was married in Lewisburg yesterday to Stephen Philip Elmendorf, a son of Richard A. and Louise Elmendorf of Silver Spring, Md.
The Rev.
Paul C. Donecker performed the Episcopal ceremony at Bucknell Hall, a chapel on the campus of Bucknell University.
Mrs.
Elmendorf, 29 years old, is a lawyer with the Department of Justice in Washington.
She graduated from Princeton University and received her law degree from George Washington University.
Her father, who is retired, was an associate professor of English at Bucknell.
Her mother is a rare-book and art dealer in New York.


Tender Monsters
I was able to resist Squid Longer than most people of pretentious palate.
Many budding connoisseurs hone their taste for the cephalopod on French calamar gently simmered in bouillabaisse.
Or they warm to the idea of it through sampling the Italian calamari pickled with lemon and garlic, or cut in rings and deep-fried.
Some get used to the dense, white flesh in the Chinese salt-baked or stir-fried squid, or Thailand's yum pla muek.
All these preparations are predominantly a taste of culture, secondarily squid.
Therefore, one passes across the threshold of revulsion as easily as if it were a border between a ho-hum place and the promised land.


At UConn, Costs Squeeze The Students
The fall semester is more than two weeks away, but Karen Poulin is spending her summer working 48-hour weeks as a clerk at the University of Connecticut Co-op to help pay tuition and other college costs that have more than doubled in just five years.
"I can't make it without working," said the 20-year-old health-education major from Vernon, Conn.
"It's costing over $10,000 a year to go here."


In the Haight, Two Mansion Retreats
THERE is never just one way to visit a city, any more than there is just one way to live in it.
That's the beauty of urban life: the multiplicity of possibilities, the knowledge that while tomorrow can be like today, it doesn't have to be.
Where you stay, like where you live, shapes the serendipitous encounters that become your experience.
To choose a hotel is to commit to a location that leads to a whole set of consequences -- the soulmate you meet in a movie line, the lingerie outlet you happen to pass, the East African restaurant, listed in no guidebook, that beckons with enticing smells.


Jamie L. Bennett, Robert Hawkins
Jamie Lynne Bennett, a daughter of James E. Bennett of Dansville, N.Y., and the late Vivian O. Bennett, was married yesterday in Tivoli, N.Y., to Robert Eliot Dexter Hawkins, the son of Eliot D. Hawkins and Margaret O. Childers, both of New York.
The Rev.
Beverley Karsten performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Paul's Church.
Ms.
Bennett, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is a Ph.D. candidate in Russian literature at Columbia University, where she teaches Russian.
She is a cum laude graduate of Middlebury College, from which she also received a master's degree in Russian.
Her father is a retired vice president of Bennett Construction in Dansville.


George Bush, Prisoner of the Crazies
St.
Augustine, when he decided to dragoon reluctant people into the Christian camp, used a scriptural tag taken from the parable about the man whose guests did not come to his wedding feast:
Coge intrare
-- "Force them to come in" (Luke 14.23).
The Republicans have called a love fest in Houston, to which some are loath to come.
Their motto seems to be:
Obsecra ut intrent -- "Beg
them to come in."
People who have defied the President, called him weak or traitorous -- even branded him a tool of Satan -- are now being cajoled, asked not only to attend but to speak from the party's podium of honor.
The platform committee renounces as "recessionary" the President's tax rise.
A President in a strong position would not let his own party indirectly censure him.
He certainly would not let minor Republican figures criticize him with impunity.
But what is George Bush to do?
He cannot ban people from a feast that so many do not want to attend in any case.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ART THAT BITES
Twentieth-century artists who also served as political commentators and social critics provide the material for a dual exhibition opening today at the Katonah Museum.
Carrying on the tradition of Goya and Daumier with gusto and pungency, one section of the show contains 38 drawings, some never before shown, covering issues, people and events from 1908 through last year.
It is called "In Good Conscience: The Radical Tradition in 20th-Century American Illustration," and it includes George Bellows's "Murder of Edith Cavell" (1918), Reginald Marsh's "Bread Line" (1928), Paul Cadmus's "To the Lynching!" (1935), and Ben Shahn's "Sacco and Vanzetti" (1952).
John Sloan, William Gropper and Sue Coe are among the other artists whose work illustrates everything from reported German atrocities in World War I to the stock market crash of 1929 to the civil rights struggle, the Vietnam War, political assassinations, world hunger, homelessness and the AIDS crisis.
The curator for the segment was Bernard F. Reilly Jr., curator of prints and photographs at the Library of Congress.
A second show is devoted to the lithographs, etchings, drawings and sketchbooks of Alan E. Cober, titled "The Artist as Illustrator/The Illustrator as Journalist." The retrospective spans 30 years and includes commissions executed for Esquire, Harper's, Time, Rolling Stone, The Atlantic and The New York Times, focusing on Mr.
Cober's visual reportage of news, culture and the environment.
Steven Heller, a senior art director for The New York Times, was curator of the Cober part of the exhibition.
Both shows will remain through Sept. 27, after which they will travel to Dartmouth College in New Hampshire until mid-December, then to the Montgomery Museum of Fine Arts in Alabama through late February.
The Katonah Museum is on Route 22 at Jay Street, off Exit 6 of I-684, then east on Route 35 and south on Route 22.
Viewing hours are noon to 5 P.M.
Tuesdays, Thursdays, Fridays and Sundays; noon to 8 P.M.
Wednesdays, and 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Saturdays.
Admission is free.
Call 232-9555 for more information.
FISHING, ANYONE?
A family fishing expedition will be conducted by the County Parks Department today at 2 P.M. in Playland Lake.
The lake, made by damming a former bay, takes up 80 acres of the 90-acre Edith G. Read Sanctuary.
Ken Soltesz, curator at the sanctuary, will lead the group into knee-deep water with a long seining net supported by about 10 people.
The net is dipped into the lake to pick up a variety of marine life, which may include jellyfish, shrimp, small flounders, minnows, killifish, pipefish and sticklebacks.
The catch will be placed in buckets of water for observation before being returned to the lake.
In summer the tides bring in salt water and fish from Long Island Sound; during the rest of the year fresh water prevails, fed by rain.
At its deepest point the lake measures 10 feet.
To reach the site without paying a parking fee, drive to the left of the Playland toll booth, follow the parking lot past the roller coaster and watch for the sanctuary sign on the right.
The program will end around 3:30 P.M., and participants should wear clothes and shoes that withstand getting wet.
Another seining session is scheduled on Sept. 19 in Croton Point Park beginning at 7 P.M. and conducted by lantern light.
Christopher Letts will be the leader.
There is no charge for either event.
Call 593-2602 for more information.
SHOPS AND POPS
The site of the defunct Danbury Fair still draws people from several states.
But instead of admiring the livestock, rattling and rolling on the midway rides, and slurping cotton candy, they shop, shop, shop at the Danbury Fair Mall, at the dozens of shopping plazas around it, and at Stew Leonard's.
Getting to Danbury on I-684 from White Plains, then taking Connecticut Route 84 to the mall, is a matter of about 33 miles and 40 minutes.
At 8 P.M.
Saturday, a day of shopping might be completed with a pops concert conducted by Skitch Henderson and featuring Judy Collins and the Ives Symphony Orchestra.
It will be performed at the Charles Ives Center for the Performing Arts, on the Danbury campus of Western Connecticut State University, not far from the mall.
Reserved tent seats are $20 and $25; lawn seating is $12 in advance, $15 at the gate.
Call (203) 797-4490 for tickets.
The mall is anchored by Lord &amp; Taylor, Macy's, Sears, G. Fox and J. C. Penney and contains 210 specialty shops, including Laura Ashley and Lerner's, and 20 restaurants.
Stew Leonard's is a barnlike supermarket with 125,000 square feet of fresh produce, meats, fish, its own dairy products, takeout dishes, imported cheeses, groceries, flowers and an in-store bakery.
Outdoors there is a petting zoo; indoors, animated figures of singing cows, farmers and country musicians stand atop the food cases.
Prices are lower than average because of volume sales and spot purchasing.
ART OF A SORT
A promotional campaign at a Scarsdale shop is producing a bizarre display of "art," if one accepts the premise that anything that is framed is art.
Now being framed is an airplane wing from World War II.
To create a window display of travel mementos called "Souvenirs From the States" or "The Great American Frame-Up," the Scarsdale Art and Frame Shop is seeking items from all 50 states to be framed at a 20 percent discount, then displayed.
Marilyn Bloom, the owner, says, "Anything can be framed." So far her workshop has framed a Pony Express saddle bag, autographs of some of the signers of the Declaration of Independence, boat gear, Navajo rugs, sand paintings, and, assembled as a collage, a Colt 45, holster, sheriff's badge and photograph of a sheriff.
The shop is near the railroad station and the phone number is 725-1066.


Mutual Funds; Record Time for Closed Ends
The summer doldrums seem to have bypassed the closed-end fund industry: In July, a record-breaking number of new issues came to market.
Part of the surge of new issues is probably accounted for by today's low interest rates.
"People who don't know what to do with C.D.'s coming due are considering any alternative that surfaces," said Thomas J. Herzfeld, whose Miami firm specializes in closed-end fund investment and analysis.
In fact, the bulk of the new offerings are income funds of all stripes: corporate, foreign and municipal.


Riding the Waves
AFTER a frantic day buying and selling blocks of pension funds, Ming (Sam) Xu wanted a buzz.
Nothing too exhausting (like an endorphin high from an hour on a Stairmaster.) Or too stupefying (like a happy hour filled with frozen daiquiris.) Just a little synaptic sizzle.
Something to spark the theta waves.
Something to make the mind sharp but
relaxed
.
So, 30 minutes after Wall Street closes, money manager Sam, still in his Valentino suit, lies on a futon in an art-filled SoHo loft.
He dons a set of headphones and a pair of goggles with a tube of light ringing the lenses.
He listens to a tape of crickets chirping.


'Twelfth Night' Closes Purchase Season
THE joys of ensemble playing were bountifully displayed in the Phoenix Theater Company's first two productions this summer at the State University of New York at Purchase.
But don't expect style, dazzle or even cohesiveness from the season's last show.
It would be charitable to dismiss "Twelfth Night" as a director's concept gone awry.
But then such frills as a Caribbean setting -- with an evocative curtain of tropical hues designed by James Tilton, acalypso beat and assorted noisy sound effects that include the rushing of waves -- do not add up to a concept, only ostentation.


Hyla S. Tansky, Eric Weiss
Hyla Sharon Tansky, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton M. Tansky of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday evening in New York to Eric Weiss, a son of Dr.
Norma Svedosh of Tewksbury Township, N.J., and Dr.
Richard Weiss of Norristown, Pa.
Rabbi Joseph H. Ehrenkranz performed the ceremony at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Tansky Weiss, 27 years old, is an account executive at the Backer, Speilvogel, Bates advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Bergdorf Goodman.


Imponderables
To the Editor:
In my review of Alfred Doblin's "Destiny's Journey" (July 12), I wrote a sentence that contained the words "everyone was finally left to his own confused devices." This was also what appeared on the test copy I corrected, and this, I learn, is what the editor responsible for my piece saw and approved.


U.N. Let the Somali Famine Get Out of Hand, Aide Says
The famine in Somalia could have been mitigated if the United Nations had dispatched relief experts months ago instead of relying on a small crew of junior staff members in the country, a senior United Nations official said.
"It's so bad because we've let things simmer without paying proper attention," said Trevor Page, the newly appointed head of the World Food Program in Somalia.
"We've had inexperienced people who don't know what they are seeing, who don't know what the implications are and didn't blow the whistle."


President Gets Hypothetical
After President Bush said last week that he would support his granddaughter's hypothetical decision to have an abortion to end a hypothetical pregnancy, even bemused White House aides wondered where all these hypotheticals would end.
"Are reporters going to ask next, 'What if Barbara Bush were a member of the Medellin cartel?' " wondered Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman.


An Olympic End To a Successful Term
THE World Team Olympiad, beginning on Saturday in Salsomaggiore, Italy, will be the climax of a hectic and successful 16-month effort by a quiet man from Sao Paulo, Brazil.
His name is Ernesto d'Orsi, and he took on the presidency of the World Bridge Federation unexpectedly in April 1991.
The Olympiad will be the fourth and last of the major international events he will have supervised as president, following those in Ann Arbor, Mich., Yokohama, Japan and Corpus Christi, Tex.
In Italy he will hand over his office to Bobby Wolff of the United States.


The Man Who Answers
To the Editor:
"Mr. Bush argued that when a President answers the telephone in a middle-of-the-night crisis, 'The American people need to know that the man who answers the phone has the experience, the seasoning, the guts to do the right thing' " (The Week in Review, Aug. 2).


The Rich Get Richer, But Never the Same Way Twice
IN the late 1970's, during the Carter Presidency, the super-rich commanded a smaller slice of America's wealth than at any time since the 1830's, when Alexis de Tocqueville was struck by "the general equality of condition among the people" in the fledgling democracy.
By the end of the 1980's, soon after Ronald Reagan left the White House, wealth in this country had become more concentrated than at any time since the Roaring Twenties.
The share of net worth -- assets minus debts -- held by the top 1 percent of households jumped from below 20 percent in 1979 to more than 36 percent in 1989, acording to a new historical data series compiled by the economic historians Claudia Goldin and Bradford De Long at Harvard University and the economist Edward Wolff at New York University.


When Stairs Wobble
SQUEAKY, wobbly stairs are irritating.
If allowed to deteriorate, they can sometimes become a safety hazard.
Most stair problems are easy to repair in their early stages.
But because the construction of stairs generally is complex, major problems are often best handled by an experienced carpenter.
To fix squeaks, their sources have to be found.
Remove carpet or other covering from the stairs.
Have a helper step on each tread while listening for noise.
If there is a noise, have the helper rock back and forth on the stair while examining it closely for loose parts rubbing together.
That is what causes squeaks.


Coin for the 200th Year Of the White House
THE United States Mint has recently announced the issue of one commemorative coin and a design competition for another set of coins.
Congress authorized 500,000 coins for the 200th anniversary of the White House.
They will be produced at the West Point and Denver mints starting Aug. 28.
The Denver mint will strike the uncirculated versions, while West Point will make the proof versions, each of which is struck multiple times to assure crisp images.
This is the first proof commemorative to bear a "W" mint mark.


'The End of Equality'
To the Editor:
My thanks to The Book Review and to J. Anthony Lukas for his fine and attentive review of Mickey Kaus's book, "The End of Equality" (July 12).
As the editor of New Republic Books, I would like to add but one point of information.
While you correctly list the publisher of "The End of Equality" as Basic Books, the work's full imprimatur is: A New Republic Book/Basic Books.


Tech Notes; Keeping Eyes on the Windshield
Avionics manufacturers are teaming up in a race to deliver new systems for commercial pilots that combine sophisticated sensors with the "head-up display" technology used so successfully in military planes.
The head-up display projects instrument readings onto the windshield of a jet fighter, so the pilot does not have to look elsewhere to see them.
Alaska Airlines and some others have been using a head-up display for several years.
Even some cars are being outfitted with the equipment, to help keep a driver's eyes on the road.


Fumes at Holland Tunnel
Twelve workers at the Holland Tunnel became ill yesterday evening after ammonia fumes seeped from a storage tank in Jersey City, the Port Authority police said.
The workers, including seven in the toll booths, were taken to three hospitals after becoming light-headed and nauseated a few minutes after 6 P.M.
None of the workers was seriously injured.
Sgt.
John F. Murphy, a spokesman for the Port Authority police, said the fumes had leaked from the Union Terminal, a chemical storage facility close to the toll lanes.
Firefighters stopped the leak at 7:50 P.M., he said.
The fumes did not disrupt traffic into Manhattan, because officials allowed vehicles to pass through the booths without paying tolls.


Huddled Masses, Yearning to Buy Postcards
SHUFFLING off the ferry at Ellis Island, which opened as an immigration museum in 1990, you feel as if you should be wearing a babushka.
The summertime crowds on the Battery Park-Statue of Liberty-Ellis Island run go a long way toward recreating the steerage experience.
But when the original huddled masses disembarked there, the first thing they saw in the turreted Victorian building wasn't a gift shop.
Today, one greets you near the entrance.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
July housing starts, in millions
1.17
1.20
Wednesday
July trade balance, in billions
-$7.4
-$6.8
Thursday
Late July jobless claims, in thousands
469
510
Friday
Federal budget balance, billions
$3.8
-$34.5
Monday: Republican National Convention begins  Tuesday: Federal Reserve monetary policy meeting *
Canadian provincial ministers hold discussions on the Constitution  Thursday: Republican National Convention ends *
Germany's Bundesbank council meets  Friday: Federal Reserve Open Market Committee minutes from July are released


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Closed Stamford Bloomingdale's Optioned
A PARTNERSHIP called Stamford Center Associates, headed by Louis L. Ceruzzi, a Westport developer, has taken an option on the former Bloomingdale's department store in downtown Stamford.
The contract to purchase the 7-acre property, including the 225,000 square-foot store, a 900-space parking structure and a small vacant lot, are to be signed this month, according to the developers' lawyer, Arthur Hooper of the Manhattan law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts.


Carrie Goodman, Michael Pianin
Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Goodman of Stony Brook, L.I., have announced the engagement of his daughter Carolyn L. Goodman to Michael J. Pianin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Pianin of West Hartford, Conn.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Goodman, who is 28 years old and is known as Carrie, is an assistant vice president of Harwin Prospect Associates, a general contractor and developer in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Cornell University and a master's degree in real estate and development from New York University.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Smithtown, L.I., and an author.
She is also a daughter of the late Florence L. Goodman.
The prospective bride's stepmother, Jemmy Goodman, is the president of the Medical Risk Management Advisory Corporation in Smithtown.


Miss Jackson, Charles Rogers
Katharine Townsend Jackson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Jackson of Lawrenceville, N.J., was married yesterday in Belmont, Mass., to Charles Aloysius Rogers, the son of Dr.
Charles A. Rogers of Rochester and Abby L. Rogers of Santa Barbara, Calif.
The Rev.
Catherine Bowers performed the Unitarian Universalist ceremony at the First Church in Belmont.
Mrs.
Rogers, who is 32 years old and is known as Kate, is a client-relations manager at Copley Real Estate Advisers in Boston.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father teaches history at the Lawrenceville (N.J.) School.


Imitating Art
FATAL SUBTRACTION
The Inside Story of Buchwald v.
Paramount.
By Pierce O'Donnell and Dennis McDougal.
Illustrated. 576 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $25.


Elizabeth Hodder, Barclay Corbus
Elizabeth Espy Hodder, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melville T. Hodder of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday in Bar Harbor, Me., to Barclay Fleming Corbus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
Barclay Corbus of Arvada, Colo.
The Venerable Philip Newman, an Anglican archdeacon in Melbourne, Australia, and an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.
Saviour's Church.
Mrs.
Corbus, 30 years old, and her husband, 26, are M.B.A. candidates at Columbia University.
She graduated from Harvard University and Oxford University.
Her father is a senior vice president of Lehman Brothers in Boston.
Her mother, Elizabeth Hodder, is an instructor and research assistant at Harvard.


Silver, Jade and Bronzes Hold Their Own on the Block
In the lackluster art market of the 1990's, historically important objects, especially those with a royal pedigree, are thriving.
Several of the most impressive items have commanded exceptional, even record prices at recent auctions in New York, Monte Carlo and Hong Kong.
The costliest -- a cradle-shaped Imperial Easter egg made in 1905 by Peter Carl Faberge -- brought $3.2 million earlier this summer at Sotheby's in New York.
Made for Czar Nicholas II to give to his wife, Alexandra, on the birth of their son Alexei, the bejeweled and blue-enameled bauble rewrote the record at auction for a Faberge work.
Neither the seller nor the buyer was identified.


Anniversary of Moscow Coup's Defeat Is Clouded by Myths and Disillusion
The tanks that rolled into Moscow last Aug. 19, only to roll out again two days later, changed Russia and the other states of the old Soviet Union forever.
But the failure of the August coup also gave rise to a series of myths that one year later continue to cloud popular understanding of what actually happened.
For an increasing number of Russians, memories of the glorious defense of democracy at the barricades around the Russian Parliament building, where President Boris N. Yeltsin led the resistance to the coup, have faded, replaced by a mood of apathy and cynicism.


Martha Witbeck, Paul Chamberlain
Martha Elliott Witbeck, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Witbeck of Westwood, Mass., was married yesterday to Paul Edward Chamberlain, a son of William E. Chamberlain of Palo Alto, Calif., and the late Bernadette Chamberlain.
The Rev.
Alexander Daley performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Aidan's Chapel in South Dartmouth, Mass.
Mrs.
Chamberlain, 29 years old, graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
She was until recently a designer for Davison Inc., a decorator's showroom in Boston.
Her father is a New England regional coordinator for fixed income at Kidder, Peabody in Boston.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
125.98
127.50
137.30
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4652
1.4665
1.7645
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1922
1.1840
1.1447
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9215
1.9307
1.6575
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$335.30
$351.00
$357.70
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Johnny Suede Was Here
LIKE contestants at a carnival shooting gallery waiting for sitting ducks to appear, the television crews and paparazzi were stationed at the top of the escalators at the Loews Village Theater VII in the East Village on Tuesday night.
They were waiting for Brad Pitt, the star of the low-budget film "Johnny Suede," a David-Lynch-like character study of a Ricky Nelson manque with an extremely high pompadour.
It was already 7:30 and the movie was supposed to start, but the escalator kept bringing up regular people instead of famous ones.
Finally, the halogen lights snapped on.
Tina Louise, who played the redheaded movie star on "Gilligan's Island" for several years, ascended like a sliver of moon, dressed in a golden crushed velvet minidress.
"She looks a little bit out of her element," a cameraman said to a sound man after she walked off.


Rolling Into Penn Station In the Height of Elegance
Toward the end of rush hour on Thursday night, a lavishly renovated railroad car, built in 1928, rolled into Pennsylvania Station on its way to Boston, attached to the end of a thoroughly modern Amtrak train.
The car's passengers had been traveling around the country in high style since leaving Los Angeles on Aug. 4, wending their way through Houston, New Orleans, Memphis, Chicago and Washington.


Sarah K. Lamont, J. H. Kocmond
Sarah Kingsbury Lamont, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick F. Lamont Jr. of Lawrenceville, N.J., was married yesterday to Jonathan Howard Kocmond, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard C. Kocmond of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
The Rev.
Joanne Epply-Schmidt performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Pennington, N.J.
Mrs.
Kocmond, 22 years old, is an account coordinator at Kurtzman-Slavin-Linda, an advertising agency in Northfield, Ill.
She graduated from Brown University, as did her husband.
Her father is the director of corporate relations at I. Orrin Spellman, a public-relations consulting firm in Haverford, Pa.
Her mother, Mary Lou Lamont, is the manager of student loans at the University of Medicine and Dentistry in Newark.


Marie V. Smith, Danforth Knapp
Marie Virginie Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Arthur Smith Jr. of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., to Danforth Garfield Knapp, the son of C. Danforth Knapp of Chestertown, Md., and Mrs.
Thomas K. Roche of Muttontown, L.I.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church.


Ren and Stimpy's Triumphant Return
From high atop his stool at the drawing-board, John Kric falusi eyes a visitor quizzically.
" 'The Simpsons'?" he asks.
"We could write 'The Simpsons' blindfolded."
Summoning up an almost superhuman burst of patience, the creator, director and producer of "The Ren and Stimpy Show" explains that the popular Fox series he has just been asked about is, as far as he can tell, only an ink- and paint-filled sitcom.
"What we do," says Mr.
Kricfalusi proudly, "is animation."


Editors' Note
A front-page article in the New Jersey Weekly today about Vincent James Landano, who was released from prison in 1989 and whose bail was revoked on July 16, reports that he is awaiting the results of his request for a rehearing.
On Thursday, after the section had gone to press, Mr.
Landano learned that his request had been denied.
He remains free pending further appeals.


Bosnia Is Serbo-Croatian for Arms Bazaar; Religious Factions
To the Editor:
I am disturbed that you and others in the United States news media fail to distinguish between Muslims as a religious entity and an ethnic community, except when Muslims are the aggressors.
Meanwhile, Roman Catholics and Eastern Orthodox Christians in what was Yugoslavia are called by ethnic names, Croats and Serbs, so that their religious labels are hidden.


Corrections
An article in the Real Estate section last Sunday about a converted bakery in Harlem referred incorrectly to Urban Solutions, a nonprofit job-training organization.
It is still in operation, not a "failed venture."


No Headline
It destroys the notion that there are common questions and problems shared based on where people live, and says instead that the problems they share are based on their ethnicity. -- EDWARD COSTIKYAN, former Democratic leader, on New York City's new Congressional districts.  [ 41:1. ]


Aides to Dinkins and Vallone In Talks to Abolish Stein's Job
New Yorkers may have the chance to make Andrew J. Stein the last City Council President in history, depending on the outcome of negotiations between aides to Mayor David N. Dinkins and Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone to abolish Mr.
Stein's office.
The negotiators must resolve their differences by Sept. 3 if the proposal to abolish the office of council president is to be on this fall's ballot, said Peg Breen, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Vallone.
Under city law, voters must approve the action in a referendum.


BEST SELLERS: August 16, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost after her husband has a heart attack.
2
2
12
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
3
3
23
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
6
5
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $20.) A 90-year-old South Carolina woman recalls what she saw while becoming the doyenne of a Maine summer retreat.
5
4
9
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
6
7
6
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Random House, $21.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
7
8
5
EYE OF THE STORM, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) An American is hired by the British to thwart an Iraqi agent's attempt to kill Margaret Thatcher during the gulf war.
8
5
8
SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $22.) Continuing the story of the crowd that frequents an ultrachic Beverly Hills store. (LP)
9
9
11
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) An insane Jedi threatens Luke Skywalker in the second volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
10
10
4
IMZADI, by Peter David. (Pocket, $20.) The U.S.S.
Enterprise's Comdr.
William Riker discovers a new form of love in a "Star Trek" adventure.
11
11
14
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones. (LP)
12
1
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife share new visions while taking pictures of old bridges in Iowa.
13
12
13
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) On a mission to Africa, Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
14
13
17
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
15
14
121
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
7
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
2
2
12
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
3
3
9
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
4
10
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save it.
5
9
2
THE LAST TSAR, by Edvard Radzinsky. (Doubleday, $25.) The life of Nicholas II and his family, and their assassination in 1918.
6
5
8
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who created Wal-Mart.
7
6
5
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
8
8
15
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
9
1
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
10
11
14
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How powerful monied interests dominate the Government.
11
7
7
A BRILLIANT MADNESS, by Patty Duke and Gloria Hochman. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress talks about living with manic-depressive illness.
12
10
29
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
13 *
17
36
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
14 *
12
9
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $20.) Essays on the pleasures of living extravagantly during the high-flying 1980's.
15
14
4
DIANA: A PRINCESS AND HER TROUBLED MARRIAGE, by Nicholas Davies. (Birch Lane/ Carol, $21.95.) A life of the Princess of Wales.
16 *
15
13
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) The first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
2
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) The head of the Children's Defense Fund offers rules to live by for her own children and others'.
2
2
26
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
3
3
37
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
4
5
36
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
5
4
5
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE VOLCANO LOVER: A Romance, by Susan Sontag. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) One of our paramount critics extends her neck without damage in this grand, vigorous, witty and moral historical novel about Lord Nelson, his lover Emma Hamilton, her husband and Neapolitan society in the 18th century.
THE GREAT DEEP: The Sea and Its Thresholds, by James Hamilton-Paterson. (Random House, $23.) An intricate, scholarly, painful survey of the oceans and their imperilment by humanity.
THE COLOR OF THE SNOW, by Rudiger Kremer. (New Directions, cloth, $19.95; paper, $9.95.) A novel -- is it? -- that frustrates conventional expectations of reading fiction but artfully suggests some anxieties of modern German culture.
THE LINCOLN COUNTY WAR: A Documentary History, by Frederick Nolan. (University of Oklahoma, $49.95.) Mr.
Nolan's primary research and thoughtful treatment capture the spirit of a justly infamous episode of rotten behavior in the West.
THE JOURNEY, by Ida Fink. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) A splendidly constructed novel of survival that considers a pair of sisters who flee the Holocaust by entering Germany itself, disguised as Polish volunteer workers.
OSKAR KOKOSCHKA LETTERS: 1905-1976, selected by Olda Kokoschka and Alfred Marnau. (Thames and Hudson, $40.) The great Expressionist shows himself much concerned with the state of civilization and not less with his love life.
THE SELECTED LETTERS OF BERTRAND RUSSELL.
Volume One: The Private Years, 1884-1914, edited by Nicholas Griffin. (Houghton Mifflin, $35.) Russell shines here first as lover, only secondarily as the mathematical philosopher and logician.


Lakshmi Dastur, Willan Johnson
Lakshmi Khorshed Dastur, the daughter of Lieut.
Col., retired and Mrs.
Kaikobad K. Dastur of Pelham, N.Y., was married yesterday to Willan Louis Johnson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven L. Johnson of Denver.
Ann Simpson, a justice of the peace in Greenwich, Conn., performed the ceremony there at the Chieftans estate.
Ms.
Dastur-Johnson, 26 years old, graduated from Occidental College , as did her fiance.
She is the investments administrator for the college's endowment and trust funds.
Her father, now retired, was president of Velcro International in New York.
As a lieutenant colonel in the Indian Army, in the mid-1960's he served as military adviser to India at the United Nations.
The bride's mother, Piki Krishna Dastur, owns Piki's Potpourri, an Eastern gift boutique in Pelham.


Tribal Dispute Keeps Some Navajos in Squalor
THE GAP, Ariz. --
This may be the only place in America where the Federal Government forbids people to install electricity or running water.
It is part of a 1.5 million-acre stretch of empty high desert claimed by both the Navajo and Hopi tribes.
While trying to negotiate a settlement in 1966, the Government imposed what was meant to be a short-term ban on development, including improvements to the area's many dilapidated homes.


Culture With a Bit Less Cult
Towering above the Salzburg Festival concert halls is the Monchsberg, an enormous cliff.
The theaters were originally going to be built on top of the mountain, where one can walk today on paved paths offering panoramic views of farms, valleys and the church spires of the old city.
Instead, the connection to nature was made even more intimate: the theaters were built into the cliff's base.
Fifty thousand tons of rock were blasted away to construct the Large Festival Hall in 1960.
The oldest hall, called the Summer Riding School, was once an arena where bearbaiting and horse displays were presented for the local princely households.
It was literally carved out of the mountain 300 years ago: arches of cool, moist stone provided a primal backdrop to the festivities.
As Salzburg begins a new era under Gerard A. Mortier, directing his first festival this summer, that backdrop will provide stability amid change.
The presence of nature is one of the dominant features of the Glyndebourne Festival in England as well, though here the contrasts with the subtly crafted artifice of European opera are provided by the rolling hills of the Sussex Downs, by grazing sheep and cows, shaped hedges and formal gardens.
The theater has almost nothing to do with the pastoral surroundings; it was built as a humble appendage to an old country mansion -- itself an unimposing series of modifications to an Elizabethan core -- and is now being torn down to be replaced by a larger, free-standing opera house.


A Whiff Of Stardom
CHICAGO -- Marshall Field's, 111 North State Street.
Elizabeth Taylor's White Diamonds by Parfums International Ltd.
One ounce is $200.
"People who analyze why it sells think it's the scent, but I say the scent is a minor part of the whole formula," said Allen Burke, division merchandise manager of cosmetics.
"It's the identity, the marketing behind the fragrance that drives the success of it."


Hot, Molten Passion: Volcanoes Destroy but Inspire
"FOR, like any object of grand passion, the volcano unites many contradictory attributes. Entertainment and apocalypse. A cycle of substance displaying all four elements: starting with smoke, then fire, then flowing lava, ending in a lava rock, the most earth-solid of all."
So Sir William Hamilton, the British diplomat of the late 18th century, regards Mount Vesuvius with awe in Susan Sontag's new historical novel, "The Volcano Lover."


Jean Chorley, 88, Dies; Served History Groups
Jean T. Chorley, a former professional singer and a civic leader, died on Saturday at her home in Skillman, N.J.
She was 88 years old.
She had a history of heart disease and died in her sleep, her family said.


Finally, Vietnamization
AFTER THE WAR WAS OVER
Hanoi and Saigon. By Neil Sheehan. 131 pp. New York: Random House. $17.


Laurie Greener, Edward Sears
Laurie Page Greener, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Laurie Greener of Mystic, Conn., was married there yesterday to Edward Benjamin Sears, a son of Dr.
Marvin L. Sears of Stony Creek, Conn., and Myra B. Low of Darien, Conn.
Judge Frederick Moss of Probate Court in Woodbridge, Conn., performed the ceremony at the home of Patricia Brown Moore, the bride's maternal grandmother.
Mrs.
Sears, 30 years old, is to join the legal department of the Comptroller of the Currency in Washington next month.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in library science from Southern Connecticut State University and a law degree from the University of Connecticut.
Her father is a management consultant in Mystic.
Her mother, Margot Greener, is a physician's administrative assistant in Westerly, R.I.


Q and A
Bangkok to Angkor Wat
Q.
We will be in Thailand in January and would like to visit Angkor Wat in Cambodia while there.
Are there any tours? -- Walt Cannon, Sarasota, Fla.


This Was New York. It Was.
UP IN THE OLD HOTEL
And Other Stories. By Joseph Mitchell.  718 pp. New York:  Pantheon Books. $27.50.


Harry Truman's Reputation
To the Editor:
Your reviewer notes that readers of David McCullough's biography of Harry Truman "will not . . . find much engagement in the debates over such highly charged questions as the decision to use atomic bombs on Japan, the origins of the cold war, the motives for the North Korean invasion of South Korea in 1950 and Truman's policy in Vietnam." In short, this book seems to neglect the things Truman did that affected our country the most.


Hitting the Wall
A Vietnamese hairdresser told me that her 17-year-old brother punched a wall so hard his arm bone came out.
He was mad because his older brother had a girlfriend and he didn't.
He also claimed to be in love with her.
They drove him to the hospital screaming, the jagged pink protrusion covered discreetly by a towel.
She offered the story because I was in a cast myself; I had punched a wall and broken my fifth metacarpal.
On the way to the hospital, gloriously revved on adrenaline, I thought I must have done something terribly original.
It turned out I hadn't -- practically every man in my circle of friends had done the same thing.
One shattered his hand against a concrete block after missing a shot in a volleyball game; another brutalized a bathroom door for 15 minutes until his knuckles were blue.


The Cutting Edge Is Money
To the Sports Editor:
Thank you for George Vecsey's column, "The Knives May Be Out for Fencing" (The Times, Aug. 4).
As a foil fencer, I eagerly awaited the Olympics even though fencing is not televised.


Anne Comeau and Stephen Belgrad
Mae Comeau of Whitinsville, Mass., has announced September wedding plans for her daughter Anne Elizabeth Comeau and Stephen Harold Belgrad, the son of Herbert and Joanne Belgrad of Baltimore.
Ms.
Comeau is a marketing representative in the medical products division of the Hewlett-Packard Company in Andover, Mass.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut and received an M.B.A. from Harvard, as did her fiance.
She is a daughter of the late George H. Comeau.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Brick 140,000
215 Delta Place  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; 3,000 square feet of living space, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,120.
Freehold 123,500
4 Turf Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, deck, 2-car garage; $2,121.
Green Township 119,500
26 Shore Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 19-year-old raised ranch; new country kitchen, large deck, track lighting; taxes $2,976.
Manchester 98,200
616 Lawrence Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 10-year-old ranch; deck, fenced yard, w/w carpeting; taxes $2,026.
Mount Olive 169,900
180 Cloverhill Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old Cape Cod; wrap-around deck, h/w floors, c/a; taxes $4,201.
Sparta 274,000
66 East Shore Trail  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; lake lot w/boathouse, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $5,200.
OTHER AREAS Farmington, Conn. 197,000
27 Wyndwood Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; h/w floors, built-in bookshelves, solar hot water heat, 0.50 acre; taxes $1,603.
White Plains, N.Y. 442,000
7 Rosewood Road 4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old contemporary; fireplace, country eat-in kitchen, decks; taxes $9,000.
Williston Park, L.I. 180,000
50 Harvard Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, new windows, basement, finished attic; taxes $2,800.


Nuclear Power Plants Take Early Retirement
IN March, Lehman Brothers, the Wall Street investment house, held a half-day conference titled "Are Older Nuclear Plants Still Economic?" Last week an Oregon utility announced plans to shut a plant that is just 16 years old, the third such retirement announcement this year.
Paul C. Parshley, the organizer of the March conference, said that perhaps he had misnamed his event.
The question is not whether the older reactors are economically sensible to operate, he said, but whether
any
are.
When is a reactor old?
If Trojan, the Rainier, Ore., plant, is indeed closed in 1996, it would be only halfway through its anticipated 40-year life span.
Reactors seem to age on some accelerated calendar.
Trojan's steam generator is deteriorating.
The part is like a quarterback's worn-out knees: it tends to be the component that forces a decision.
Steam generators, which transfer heat energy out of the reactor, are common to one type of plant, but each design has a characteristic weak spot that grows worse with age.


HAVING IT ALL
Francine Prose's Hers column "Having It All" (July 26) invokes a reminder for many women to be grateful for Margaret Sanger's courageous contribution to social and sexual sanity.


Deals and Discounts
SWISS SAVINGS Swissair has set round-trip fares to Switzerland as low as $448 from New York, Boston, Philadelphia and its newest gateway, Washington.
That lowest fare is for travel Monday through Thursday from November through April, excluding Dec. 11 through 24 and April 7 through 12.
The fare for weekend flights in the same period is $498.
For the excluded dates and during October and May, fares are $548 and $598, respectively.
Travelers must buy tickets by Oct. 31 and stay a minimum of seven days and a maximum of 30 days.
Tickets are nonrefundable; seats are limited.
Call Swissair at (800) 221-4750.
CANADIAN HOTELS Canadian Pacific Hotels and Resorts has introduced a promotion at its hotels in British Columbia that allows couples to pay a double-room rate that corresponds to the year they were married -- for example, those married in 1968 will pay $68 in Canadian dollars.
The Second Honeymoon promotion will run Oct. 2 through April 30, 1993, at three hotels: the Hotel Vancouver, (604) 684-3131; the Waterfront Centre Hotel in Vancouver, (604) 691-1991, and The Empress in Victoria, (604) 384-8111.The dates are Oct. 1. through Nov. 30 at a fourth hotel, the Chateau Whistler Resort, (604) 938-8000, in the Whistler ski area.
The special rate is good not just for the anniversary date but for any day during the period.
For reservations, travelers call the individual hotel, request the Second Honeymoon rate and present their marriage certificates at check-in.


THE RUNNER STUMBLES
Those who criticize Carl Lewis for his candid desire to make a bundle of money via his athletic prowess might wish to reconsider their position ("The Runner Stumbles," by Trip Gabriel, July 19).
Has it become a sin for a man to use his initiative, drive and ability to improve his financial future?


November Snow Wins Key Filly Test by Nose
November Snow raced into the lead of the 3-year-old filly division today when she outran six of the fanciest fillies in the land and won the 112th Alabama Stakes by a nose.
It was the second major victory in two weeks for November Snow, who won the Test Stakes here on the first weekend of Saratoga's rousing season.
And she achieved it with a drive along the rail in the deep homestretch that nipped Saratoga Dew by the length of her nose, with the favored Pacific Squall nearly two lengths farther back and the popular Easy Now finishing seventh and last.


U.S. SAID TO PLAN RAIDS ON BAGHDAD IF ACCESS IS DENIED
The United States and its allies have decided to provoke a confrontation with Iraq on Monday morning over the right to inspect Baghdad's most closely guarded ministry buildings, American officials familiar with Administration planning said today.
The plan could lead to renewed bombing in Baghdad in coming days and the evacuation of United Nations personnel in Iraq.
Some United States Government officials said the timing appeared calculated to give President Bush a boost during the Republican National Convention, which begins on Monday, and could damage the credibility of the United Nations, which is carrying out weapons inspections in the name of the Security Council.


Therapist, Shrink Thyself
A CURIOUS CALLING
Unconscious Motivations for Practicing Psychotherapy.
By Michael B. Sussman. 304 pp.
Northvale, N.J.: Jason Aronson. $40.
SHRINK DREAMS
Tales From the Hidden Side of Psychiatry.
By Wayne A. Myers. 252 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $20.
THE PATIENT WHO CURED HIS THERAPIST
And Other Tales of Therapy.
By Stanley Siegel and Ed Lowe Jr. 196 pp.
New York: Dutton. $20.


A Decade Later, Mexico Is Loved By Investors
Happy birthday to a great bull market.
There were no parties to mark the occasion, but the great 1980's bull market turned 10 last week.
As it happened, it was Mexico, and the threat it posed, that was scaring many in this country both when that decade began and when it ended.


Miss Wainwright, Jeffrey S. Sohm
Marcella Heron Wainwright, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuyvesant Wainwright 3d of New York, was married yesterday in East Hampton, L.I., to Jeffrey Shepard Sohm, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacque E. Sohm of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Frederick Schulz performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church of East Hampton.
Mrs.
Sohm, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder and received a master's degree in early childhood education from the Bank Street College of Education.
She will begin teaching next month at the Town School in New York.
Her father is a financial planner at the E. T. Dayton Agency, a real-estate and insurance concern in East Hampton.
Her mother, Marcella Wainwright, is the director of the Park Avenue Christian Church Day School in New York.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Steinhauer Leads by One Shot


An Unusual Pub Becomes More Unusual
THE menu is moving uptown at Canterbury Ales of Oyster Bay.
Yet the restaurant still remains true to its pub roots.
This 15-year-old neighborhood favorite knows where it is coming from and where it is going.
Although Canterbury Ales has a new chef, menu and decor, big juicy hamburgers and Bass Ale-battered fried onion rings are still popular choices.


Two Myths of Linus In Greek Mythology
Vivien Raynor, in her art review on July 19  [ "In Katonah With Nothing but the Abstractions to Consider" ] , wrote that in Bulfinch's Mythology, Linus of Greek mythology was Hercules's music teacher, who was killed by Hercules in a fit of anger, and implied that the Linus version quoted by me in a news release in 1991 was not accurate.
The fact is there are two Linus myths; not
my version,
but two myths.
One myth is the myth quoted by Ms.
Raynor: of Linus who was Hercules's music teacher, who was eventually killed by Hercules in a fit of anger.
That Linus was the son of Apollo and a muse.


Dashing Duos
A fashion show for the Robin Hood Foundation and a lively park concert.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the 50th anniversary of the battle for Guadalcanal referred incorrectly in some copies to a Japanese fighter plane still in the jungle.
No human remains are inside the plane.


Who the Novelist Really Is
THE question "Who am I?" is one that each thinking person is under a theoretical duty to put to himself or herself, one way or another, with some frequency.
Nowadays I ask it, without reference to philosophic or literary concerns, each time I see in a mirror, or in a glass door, or on a television screen in an electric appliance store that videotapes innocent customers, the unwelcome, startling gray face of a sour-looking, grim stranger whom I recognize, with distaste, as myself.
Is it possible that this is me?
Where is the me I used to know, the me who looked too young to be served at a bar, the me with fresh skin and clear eyes unadorned by brown accordion hoods, the me who smiled as though expecting a pleasant surprise?
Whether such a smiling me ever existed outside my own head is, of course, another matter.
Since the publication last year of my novel "Wartime Lies," I have been asked by others with some insistence to answer variants of "Who are you?" and have put it to myself for reasons less immediately connected with the passage of time and my vanity.
As I do not dare to assume that all of readers of this essay have read my novel, I should explain that it is about a Jewish boy called Maciek who is born in Poland in 1933, the year of the Reichstag fire.
Except for the opening, two other short passages and the last chapter, the story is told by the boy, almost entirely from a young boy's point of view.
Maciek's mother died in childbirth.
He is brought up by a maternal aunt, a woman of great beauty, courage and cunning.


From Africa, the Ambassadors of Rugby
FIT and fleet after little sleep and two days on a plane, the Goshawks of Zimbabwe took over the field at the White Plains Y.M.C.A. day camp here and showed a rapt audience how to play rugby.
Whether the open-mouthed campers gaped more at the barefoot, bare-chested athletes or at the accent of the team's president, Robin Hartley, was hard to say.
Mr.
Hartley explained that Zimbabwe was in southern Africa, that rugby was the father of modern football, and that the Goshawks were making their first trip to America.


How to Get Cash After a Robbery
WHAT do you do if you are traveling overseas alone and your fears come true: You are mugged in the main square, the theater entrance or, as befell Julian W. Peterson of Boston, on the Copacabana beach in Rio?
Your money is gone, along with your credit cards, passport, traveler's checks and identification, and you are in a pickle.
Mr.
Peterson suffered chips on his thumb bone.
He had medical bills as well as hotel bills, and his nonrefundable ticket home was outdated.
After his thumb was treated and he got back to his hotel, he made a collect call to a friend at home and asked him to wire $1,500 to a local bank.
So far as he could learn, the money never got there, although he discovered later that it had actually arrived at another bank.
After this failure, and with the hotel pressing for payment, he went to the United States Consulate, and there he learned about the Overseas Citizens Service of the State Department, which has a channel through which people in the United States may send emergency money to the nearest embassy or consulate to be disbursed to a stranded American.
He again called his friend, who took the required steps to transmit $500, and Mr.
Peterson became one of the 3,778 United States citizens to use this emergency service in 1991.


Love Letters? Not Quite in the N.F.L.
Behind the scenes in the National Football League, issues between club executives can get quite testy.
Especially in their correspondence.
A series of letters between Washington Redskins General Manager Charley Casserly and the Cleveland Browns' Ernie Accorsi in the autumn of 1990 -- exhibits from the current N.F.L. trial over free agency in Minneapolis -- are an example.
And while they are not the rule, they do illustrate what has and still does happen, on paper, at least, when front office personnel of N.F.L. teams lock horns.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 2 about hiking in Norway referred incorrectly to the country's monarch.
Crown Prince Harald became King Harald V in January 1991 upon the death of his father, King Olav V.


New Owner = New Manager? Anderson Hopes It Isn't So
SPARKY ANDERSON isn't one to blow his own horn (bubbles are his bag), but facts are facts.
The way Anderson sees things, it won't take him long to find a new job if the new owner of the Detroit Tigers decides he wants a new manager.
After all, the 58-year-old Anderson has had his share of success in his 22 seasons as a manager, 14 of them in Detroit, and more than a few teams would be delighted to get him.
With the sale of the Tigers from TOM MONAGHAN to MIKE ILITCH expected to gain major league approval this week, Anderson admits he has grown fond of the old burg, so much so, he told The Detroit Free Press, that if he is fired, "it would be the greatest disappointment of my career."


Monica Melady and Jeffrey Micklos
Monica Belisle Melady, a daughter of Ambassador and Mrs.
Thomas P. Melady of Rome, was married yesterday in Fairfield, Conn., to Jeffrey George Micklos, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward F. Micklos of Trumbull, Conn.
Bishop Edward M. Egan of Bridgeport, Conn., performed the ceremony at Pius X Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Micklos, 24 years old, graduated from Villanova University and received a master's degree in social work from the Catholic University of America.
She is to begin work as a medical social worker this month at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
Her father, president emeritus of Sacred Heart University in Fairfield, is the United States Ambassador to the Holy See.


Vote on Unity Clouding Mitterrand's Vacation
President Francois Mitterrand and most of his Cabinet are on vacation this month, but there is no certainty they are relaxing as doubts grow over the outcome of a referendum here on Sept. 20 that could decide the fate of an ambitious new treaty on European union.
For the moment, polls continue to suggest that a majority of those who have made up their minds will vote to approve the treaty -- by 57 percent to 43 percent, according to the newspaper Liberation, or by 56 percent to 44 percent, according to Paris-Match magazine.
But the gap between the "yes" and "no" opinions has shrunk sharply over the last six weeks.


Burden of Commuter Smog Falls on Employers
CONNECTICUT employers must now start thinking about how their employees get to work, as much as how hard they work.
This is because an updated and revised version of a 1970 Federal law, whose provisions are being phased in throughout this decade, makes large companies in areas as polluted as Connecticut responsible for curbing the pollution associated with commuting.
A draft plan prepared by the state Department of Transportation calls for large employers to consider such measures as sharing the cost of van-pooling and mass transit with commuters, providing preferential parking for car poolers and permitting flexible work hours to encourage car pooling.
Although there has been much criticism of Federal delays in developing regulations needed to meet the goals of the new legislation known as the Clean Air Act of 1990, the Transportation Department, trade groups and planning agencies are joining together to help companies prepare to meet the letter of the law.


The Silent Summer
What's happened to the annual serenade of the katydids in New York's wooded suburbs?
By late July, the forests normally throb from dusk to dawn with "Katy-did, Katy-didn't," the tireless theme song of a billion lovesick insects.
Yet here it is mid-August and in much of the region, the nightly clatter has yet to begin.
It's another, silent sign of the queer summer of '92.
Spring was too warm, too soon.
Then June and July followed, wet and cool.
These climatic twists were salubrious for daffodils, forsythia and rhododendrons, but not for roses -- or native corn, which was late and scrawny.
And the strange weather appears to have confused katydids, which look like green grasshoppers with overgrown legs.


Tony Williams, 64; Platters' Lead Singer
Tony Williams, a former parking-lot attendant who crooned the 1950's hit songs "Only You" and "The Great Pretender" as the lead singer of the Platters, died on Friday at his Manhattan apartment.
He was 64 years old.
He had been suffering from diabetes and emphysema and died in his sleep, said his wife, Helen.


Johnson Is Facing Shoulder Surgery
The scoreboard stare, a nightly August ritual carried out in major league dugouts, has a special, sorrowful edge to it for Howard Johnson.
If the Mets, who can't be mathematically eliminated from the race in the National League East for weeks, remain effectively beyond reasonable hope, he could have shoulder surgery before the end of the month.
"It's Al Harazin's call," said Johnson, who says he has been bothered by damage in his left shoulder for much of 1992.
"I'm sure everyone involved will use their common sense. We can't come right out and concede at the moment. But the concern is to be 100 percent healthy for 1993."


Italian Food, Sunny Style, Moderate Prices
THE quarters of the New Orleans-style Bourbon Street in Stamford has been taken over, with relatively few decorating changes, by Vicolo's Ristorante Italiano.
Inside is a large room with brass railings, cane-back chairs and frosted-glass panels separating tiered dining areas.
What used to be a raw bar in front has been replaced by a pizza oven.
Seemingly unchanged is the sunny greenhouse in the rear (facing the parking lot), which is especially pleasant for lunch.


Anne T. Young, Ronald Walker
Anne Towner Young, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie T. Young of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Ronald Lee Walker, a son of Richard L. Walker of Baltimore and the late Cynthia W. Walker.
The Rev.
Thomas G. Speers performed the Presbyterian ceremony at St.
Michael's Lutheran Church.
Mrs.
Walker, 27 years old, is the director of riding at the Garrison Forest School in Garrison, Md.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
Her father, a Republican Representative in the Connecticut Legislature, is an assistant vice president of Dean Witter Reynolds in Greenwich.


Perspectives: West Side Development; Capital Cities/ABC Plans New Studios
THINK of it as as an urban television "back lot," says Capital Cities/ABC, trying to describe the expansion it plans on vacant land behind an existing studio building on the West Side.
In the front lot, along West End Avenue from 64th to 65th Streets, there would be three residential towers of 39 stories, with 930 apartments and a 350-car garage.
The company is in the preliminary review phase in the Department of City Planning on a proposal to build two 15,000-square-foot television studios plus support space behind the existing studio, which is at 320 West 66th Street.
Public land-use review is expected to begin in October.


New York Crime Statistics vs. Reality
Seattle is a more dangerous place to live than New York City.
So are Memphis, Jacksonville, Fla., and Columbus, Ohio.
At least that is what New York City's analysis of Federal statistics shows.
Which is as good a reason as any to be suspicious of crime statistics.


Inside the Political Mimic's Fun-House Mirror
To the artist, what is more dangerous: the possibility of giving offense or the refusal to look and to see?
When the rest of us have turned our attention to other matters, the impressionists, the parodists, the comics, are still watching.
Historically, their vigilance is what has kept them on the outskirts of society.
In our own time, Dana Carvey's impressions of President Bush on "Saturday Night Live" won him an invitation to the White House.
On another occasion the President's speechwriters asked Mr.
Carvey to talk to them about the President's mannerisms.


90 Feet of Nadia Comaneci
Nadia Comaneci, the petite Olympic gymnast, is about to become a very big sex symbol.
Earlier this month, Jockey International began constructing an 18-foot-by-90-foot billboard in Times Square of Ms.
Comaneci, who scored seven perfect 10's and won three gold medals at the 1976 Summer Games in Montreal.


'Secret Gardens' in New Orleans
Visitors to the French Quarter in New Orleans often peer through courtyard gates in hopes of getting a good look at profusions of exotic flowers and lush greenery inside.
Often they find the glimpse more tantalizing than satisfying.
For the benefit of these garden lovers, the quarter's Patio Planters organization conducts tours of "secret gardens" every fall.
This year the tours are on Oct. 10 and 11 from noon to 5 P.M., when hosts wearing ante bellum costumes will be on hand at each of the 8 or 10 gardens.


WHY PARIS WORKS
Steven Greenhouse's article "Why Paris Works" (July 19) was correct, insofar as it went.
The most important reason for excellence in Paris (and in France, on the whole) is that the French are very demanding.
While the cultures of other countries, notably Great Britain and the United States, find virtue in a human nature that "makes do" or behaves like "a good sport," not so the French.
On the contrary, the inability to find fault and to criticize is regarded by the average Frenchman as a sign of naivete and shows a lack of education and refinement.


Cultural Lineup Hits .333
The Olympics are over, you've been to a game at Shea and the hockey season doesn't begin for almost two months.
There's time for a little culture.
A novel, a play, a movie.
The best first.


An Honor to Be Hispanic
NAME: Francisco Romeo.
IDENTITY: Creator and executive producer of "Desi Entertainment Awards," honoring Hispanic entertainers.
The show, to be taped tomorrow in Los Angeles, is to be syndicated and broadcast nationally between Aug. 31 and Sept. 13. (In New York, it will run on Sept. 5 at 8 P.M. on WPIX-TV.)


Rebellion in Western Sahara Limps to a Halt
The defection this week of a leader of the Marxist Polisario Front guerrilla movement seems to signal the closing chapter of the 17-year war in Morocco's western desert.
Brahim Hakim, who served as foreign minister of the so-called Democratic Arab Saharan Republic, was the most senior of nearly a thousand dissidents to abandon their challenge to the pro-Western monarchy of Morocco over the last decade as the group suffered a series of military setbacks.


Let It Snow, Let It Snow, Let It Snow
No self-respecting souvenir shop should be without snow domes (or snow shakers), and the shop at Ellis Island is no exception.
This snow dome is particularly sentimental.
The palatial red and white building that received 12 million hopeful immigrants, distorted under water and seen through slow-drifting fake snow, is the very stuff memory is made of.


About the B.C.C.I. Agenda
To the Editor:
It is entirely too simple to draw sweeping conclusions from the messy and illegal affairs of the Bank of Commerce and Credit International.
But "The Real B.C.C.I. Agenda: Islam," by Rachel Ehrenfeld, (Forum Aug. 9), is an article in which facts appear to have been interpreted to fit a particular conclusion.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Albertson 211,000
35 Grant Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 38- year-old Cape Cod; dining room, new kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.
East Northport 118,000
512 Third Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, finished basement, aluminum siding; taxes $2,700.
Levittown 154,000
161 Haven Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 44- year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, dining room; taxes $4,000.
Valley Stream 140,000
53 Gold Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 53-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, basement; taxes $3,600.
West Islip 135,000
307 Aster Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50- year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,100.
Williston Park 180,000
50 Harvard Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, new windows, basement, finished attic; taxes $2,800.
OTHER AREAS Farmington, Conn. 197,000
27 Wyndwood Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; h/w floors, built-in bookshelves, solar hot water heat, 0.50 acre; taxes $1,603.
White Plains, N.Y. 442,000
7 Rosewood Road 4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old contemporary; fireplace, country eat-in kitchen, decks; taxes $9,000.
Sparta, N.J. 274,000
66 East Shore Trail  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; lake lot w/boathouse, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $5,200.


AUGUST 9-15: No Special Prosecutor; Now, Figuring Out Who Helped Iraq and When Will Be Up to the Democrats
The Bush Administration refused last week to seek appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate possible misconduct by Federal officials who orchestrated American policy toward Iraq before the Persian Gulf War.
The unintended effect of that decision was to give Democrats in Congress both a license and an incentive to press their own investigations, which could prove politically embarrassing to President Bush.


Salut, Sancerre
In the old days, when Allard was everyone's favorite Paris bistro, no one asked, "Would you care for an aperitif before dinner?" Not for regulars.
Sancerre was the house white wine.
Veteran waiters would spot habitues coming through the door and a bottle of Sancerre would be on the table, in ice, before they were seated.
Now and then a young couple would find their way in and nervously order a half-bottle of white wine.
Out would come a full bottle of Sancerre.


Correction: F.D.A. On Vitamin Policy
A front-page article last Sunday about Federal action on vitamins and other food supplements described new regulations incorrectly.
The Food and Drug Administration has not proposed classifying vitamins as drugs if their potencies exceed recommended daily allowances.


Great Work If You Can Get It


Pinnace, Not Pinnacle
To the Editor:
The June 14 Book Review contained a nice review by Doris Grumbach of "Leah, New Hampshire: The Collected Stories of Thomas Williams." However, Ms.
Grumbach states that, having reread Williams's novel "The Moon Pinnacle," she realized that on her first reading she "went through it too fast to see its quality." She must have reread it pretty fast too -- that wonderful book (published in 1986) was entitled "The Moon Pinnace."  PRESTON BROWN Washington


Gretchen Engel, Keith A. Gertsen
Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Engel Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, Gretchen Engel, and Keith Andrew Gertsen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth C. Gertsen of Glen Arm, Md.
The couple are 23 years old and graduates of Johns Hopkins University, where she is a program assistant for the division of business and management.
Mr.
Gertsen is a securities trader with Alex.
Brown &amp; Company in Baltimore.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE BACHURA SCANDAL And Other Stories and Sketches.
By Jaroslav Hasek.
Angel Books/Dufour Editions, paper, $14.95.


When Stairs Wobble
SQUEAKY, wobbly stairs are irritating.
If allowed to deteriorate, they can sometimes become a safety hazard.
Most stair problems are easy to repair in their early stages.
But because the construction of stairs generally is complex, major problems are often best handled by an experienced carpenter.
To fix squeaks, their sources have to be found.
Remove carpet or other covering from the stairs.
Have a helper step on each tread while listening for noise.
If there is a noise, have the helper rock back and forth on the stair while examining it closely for loose parts rubbing together.
That is what causes squeaks.


Wall Street; The Long and Short of It All at U.S. Surgical
Sometimes medical experts inflict a lot of pain.
That seemed particularly true on Wall Street recently, where few have been complaining more about portfolio afflictions than investors in the U.S.
Surgical Corporation, once a shareholder's dream.
Shares of the surgical instrument maker have been trounced since trading at a heady $134.50 in January, closing on Friday at $77.75.
Last week's drop totalled $6.50, or about 7.7 percent.


After Riots, Will Beijing Sell Reform Short?
IT was Merrill Lynch's dream: a million would-be investors filling the streets and lining up all day to get an application to buy stocks.
Even when policemen beat them for failing to line up properly, even when dozens were injured in the jostling, throngs of Chinese clamored for the opportunity to pay three weeks' salary for an application that would have a 10 percent chance of being approved to buy new shares.
That scene over the last week underscores the enthusiasm that many people here feel for the capitalist buds that are emerging, as the Chinese saying goes, like bamboo shoots after a spring rain.
But the episode also illustrated the pitfalls of economic transition: the would-be investors rioted on Monday night when applications ran out.


All About/Insect Repellents; Companies Grapple With the Bugs in Repellents
For biting insects, this season offers a two-month feast of exposed arms and legs around most of the nation.
To ward off the bugs' unwelcome advances, people douse themselves and their children with more than $50 million worth of insect repellents a year.
Sales have spurted as much as 30 percent in recent years in areas affected by outbreaks of Lyme disease, primarily the Northeast, and encephalitis, mainly in the Southwest.
Those illnesses have turned the feeding habits of some mosquitoes, gnats, ticks and flies into more than the usual annoyance.


Radio Stations for Sale But Buyers Hold Back
UNTIL recently, a radio station seemed the closest thing to the United States Mint for making money: pick a format popular with listeners and advertisers -- all-sports, all-heavy metal or all-horoscope -- and watch the dollars roll in.
A skeleton crew to monitor the machines kept costs low and profits high.
But even though there are two radios for every man, woman and child in America, the nearly $9 billion industry is in trouble.
Bankruptcies among major advertisers, competition from MTV and other cable-television music programs, and too many debt-burdened station owners have combined to close more than 300 radio stations in the last few years.


GIVE THIS DOG A JOB
Working a dog is a fine idea.
For those without a sheep or cattle ranch, Donald McCaig recommends "dog events" ("Give This Dog a Job," July 5).
This may sound like a good idea, but, in practice, it's usually not.
Most dog events are really people events, designed to fulfill the competitive urge of the owners.
Speed, precision or strength become the goals -- instead of fun or exercise for the dog.


Holly Moore, Edward Swaine
Holly Toye Moore, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Franklin H. Moore Jr. of New York and Dublin, N.H., was married yesterday to Edward Terrell Swaine, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard R. Swaine of Marquette, Mich.
The Rev.
Richard Palmer performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Dublin home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Moore, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, is a lawyer in the office of the legal adviser at the State Department in Washington.
She graduated from Haverford College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Yale University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.


Networking; Breaking the Fax Logjam
Facsimile gridlock has become a major problem for most businesses.
"We waste a lot of time at the fax machine," said Thane Terrill, local area network administrator of Bahai International in New York.
"You can spend half an hour just trying to send a two-page fax out of the country."
His solution: a system from Optus Software of Somerset, N.J., that lets the 30 people on his network send a document directly from their PC's to either a fax machine or another computer, inside or outside the building.


Specter Getting Teachers' Support, With Scolding
The president of the American Federation of Teachers promised today to scold Senator Arlen Specter for "insensitive behavior" at the Clarence Thomas confirmation hearings, but said the union's endorsement of Senator Specter for re-election this year would stand.
The union leader, Albert Shanker, told 4,000 delegates at the group's annual convention that he would send Mr.
Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, a letter that "expresses in no uncertain terms the anger" many members feel about the Senator's role in the questioning of Prof.
Anita F. Hill at the hearing.
Critics of Mr.
Specter said his tactics and tone were those of a prosecutor.


Bahr's 3 Kicks Help Giants Win
The Giants were bland but fairly productive on offense and better than they had been on defense.
The Cleveland Browns were inept on offense and overmatched on defense.
The result was a methodical 16-7 victory for the Giants tonight in their preseason game at Giants Stadium.
This was not the greatest game ever played.
Jeff Hostetler, the Giants' starting quarterback, has a hyperextended passing elbow and he played only as the holder for field goals and a conversion.
Bernie Kosar, the Browns' quarterback, did not play because Coach Bill Belichick wanted to get a good look at the backup, Todd Philcox.
He got the look.
He did not see too much.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 2 about the forfeiture of assets in drug cases in Somerset County, N.J., referred incorrectly to a partnership between Thomas C. Miller, the county counsel, and Robert P. Corcoran, a local banker.
It was dissolved in 1987.
An adjoining article also misstated the role of Mr.
Miller in the granting of a $150,000 mortgage by the Somerset Trust Company for a parcel of land involved in a drug case.
He prepared the legal papers for the transaction but did not authorize it.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Host City; G.O.P. Convention: Champagne and Deep Pockets
Two glasses of champagne shimmering atop a grand piano adorn the front of the invitation beckoning recipients to "the insider party after the party," an event it calls "the one evening of the convention you simply cannot miss."
Among invitations to hundreds of social events planned around the Republican National Convention, this is one of the hottest tickets in town.
For a $2,500 contribution to Victory 92, the Texas Republican Party's campaign treasury, a select and generous few will toast President Bush's renomination at a champagne breakfast after the convention's closing session on Thursday.


Signing Up Madonna
Madonna is no longer a hypocrite when it comes to voting.
In 1990, the singer, draped in nothing but an American flag, shot a public-service announcement for Rock the Boat, a music-industry group that encourages voting.


The End (Really!)


Baltic Cruises
To the Editor: After noting "Baltic Capitals Are Ports of Call" (Travel Advisory, March 29) my wife and I booked on the first cruise of the Kristina Regina on June 8.
Having returned, we would like to share our satisfaction.
The cruise was a wonderful way to visit St.
Petersburg, Estonia, Lithuania and Kaliningrad as well as Visby and Stockholm in Sweden and Helsinki.


Growing Numbers Recount Histories of Incest
THEY call themselves survivors, never victims.
They have survived the incest and sexual abuse that was committed in their childhoods, leaving them with deep emotional scars.
"We have to respect ourselves as survivors," an artist from Manhattan said, "because we are here to tell the story."


'Exemplary Job'
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein bemoans the N.E.A.'s abandonment of a single universal esthetic standard of evaluation.
Yet the endowment's recognition of varying esthetic criteria for different ethnic groups does not signal the abandonment of critical standards or artistic excellence, as Mr.
Rothstein contends.
The endowment's challenge is to understand and uphold the highest standards of excellence as defined by the various ethnic communities it serves.
Folk Arts, a division of the arts endowment that Mr.
Rothstein acknowledges but clearly does not understand, does an exemplary job in this regard.
Grant proposals are judged by a panel of trained folklorists and ethnomusicologists who areintimately familiar with the wide array of American ethnic arts.
The panelists must select the best representatives of any given tradition using the specific criteria of that tradition.


Bosnia Is Serbo-Croatian for Arms Bazaar
To the Editor:
Repeated calls by numbers of politicians for military intervention in the former Yugoslavia, as in "Stop the Excuses. Help Bosnia Now." (Op-Ed, Aug. 6) by Margaret Thatcher, can only end in a further escalation of the fighting to a level that these politicians are unaware of.
The meddling, mainly of Austria and Germany, has triggered the ever-worsening conflict that envelops us on our televisions every day.


Divers Find Rocky Ledge That Snagged the QE2
Federal divers today found the rocky ledge where the Queen Elizabeth 2 damaged her hull last week, and they said it was uncharted.
Divers aboard a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ship, the Rude, discovered "an expanse of pulverized rocks" this afternoon within a tenth of a mile from where the QE2 had reported running aground on the night of Aug. 7, said a spokesman, Brian Gorman.


Katie Long, Adam Gelb
Catherine Ehlers Long, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clay C. Long of Atlanta, was married yesterday to Adam Barnet Gelb, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie H. Gelb of New York.
The bride's mother, Judge Elizabeth E. Long of Fulton County Superior Court, performed the ceremony at the King and Prince Hotel on St.
Simons Island, Ga.
Ms.
Long, who is called Katie, is 28 years old and is keeping her name.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Virginia.
She was until recently a reporter for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
She is to enter Boston University Law School this fall.
Her father is the chairman of the Atlanta law firm of Long, Aldridge &amp; Norman.


POSTINGS: 25 Mount Laurel Units; After 12 Years, a Far Hills Start
Twelve years after developers proposed the first multifamily complex for Far Hills, N.J., an exclusive residential enclave in Somerset County, site work has finally started for a 125-unit town-house complex there.
"Far Hills may be one of the few places in the country where a 12-year delay is worth the wait," said Brian Bocina, a principal with Far Hills Development, the Basking Ridge development company that bought out the first developers in 1986.


Market Issues
To the Editor: I read Frances Mayes's account of her shopping excursion through Camucia's market ("Market Day in a Tuscan Town," July 19) with vicarious pleasure, but feel compelled to comment on her responses to the animals offered there.
As one who wears leather, eats chicken and fish with relish, and supports animal testing for medical, but not household or cosmetic research, I can appreciate the myriad responses to the ethical, health and environmental implications of eating.


Airline Lawsuit
To the Editor: Having represented victimized travelers in lawsuits for 15 years, I must state my outrage at the inadequacy of the settlement of the Domestic Air Transportation Antitrust case.
Simply stated, the settlement creates a $50 million fund for legal fees and costs while offering only purchase credits -- vouchers -- to consumers that have a limit of no more than 10 percent of the value of any future ticket.
I recommend that the settlement be changed to create a fund of $250 million to be divided pro rata among consumers or an alternative credit fund of $500 million with a $5 million maximum for lawyers' fees and costs.


Jane Huth, Stephen Walsh
Jane Huth, the daughter of Edward E. Huth of Wayne, Ill., and the late Mary H. Huth, was married yesterday in Manchester, Vt., to Stephen Gaynor Walsh, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David R. Walsh of Quincy, Mass.
Nancy J. Tschorn, a justice of the peace, officiated at Hildene, a historic house.


Laurie Jean Woog, Jay Goldring
Mr. and Mrs.
James K. Woog of Westport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Laurie Jean Woog to Jay Goldring, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman M. Goldring of Chicago.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Woog, 31 years old, is a lawyer with the law firm of Lawton &amp; Cates in Madison, Wis.
She graduated from Harvard University and received her law degree from Northeastern University.
Her father, a stockbroker, is the executive vice president of Propp &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Josephine Woog, teaches piano in Westport.


Oregon Measure Asks State to Repress Homosexuality
Using videos from gay pride marches and a children's book called "Heather Has Two Mommies" to stir the electorate, a conservative political group has forced a referendum on the strongest anti-homosexual measure ever considered by a state.
The proposal, which would classify homosexuality as "abnormal, wrong, unnatural and perverse" and allow discrimination against homosexuals in Oregon, is part of a burgeoning backlash against homosexuals and a theme that has flared, in a much less defined way, in the Presidential campaign.


The Republicans: Can They Get It Together?
"You won't find any registered Democrats in this town," says Robert R. Pyle, the burly, pipe-smoking librarian of Northeast Harbor, Me., a picturesque resort village 180 miles up the coast from George Bush's summer retreat in Kennebunkport.
"If you encounter any, they were either abused by their mothers as children or they're from away," Pyle adds, deploying the local expression for those who've immigrated from someplace else.


Corrections
A report in Styles of The Times last Sunday about the wedding of Deborah E. Rowe and John A. Marchiony referred incorrectly to the bridegroom's mother, Eve Marchiony.
She is no longer living.


Andrea Malkin, Richard Brenner
Andrea Susan Malkin, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin F. Malkin of Cranford, N.J., was married last evening in Summit, N.J., to Dr.
Richard V. Brenner, a son of Marjory and Gerald Brenner of Woonsocket, R.I.
Rabbi Charles Kroloff officiated at the Grand Summit Hotel.
Mrs.
Brenner, 24 years old, is the director of campus leadership at Mount Vernon College in Washington.
She is also the project coordinator of the National Women's Student Leadership Project of the National Association for Women in Education.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in higher-education administration from Boston College.
Her father is the executive director for planning and management at Merck Research Laboratories in Rahway, N.J.
Her mother, Carol F. Malkin, teaches in the middle school of the Solomon Schechter Day School in West Orange, N.J.


Data Bank/August 16, 1992


In Hartford, G.O.P. Finds Hope Behind Enemy Lines
Talk about electoral locks: Connecticut's First Congressional District seat, which is centered in Hartford and held by Barbara B. Kennelly, a Democrat, is so firmly entrenched in Democratic hands that no Republican can win -- at least that's the opinion of a Democrat who is endorsed by the Republicans to challenge Mrs.
Kennelly.
The challenger, Robert F. Ludgin, said the G.O.P. should not even think about putting up a candidate to run against Mrs.
Kennelly in a district where only 23 percent of the registered voters are Republicans.
And so far, the argument has worked.
Last month, Mr.
Ludgin, a registered Democrat, was endorsed by the Republicans, who hope to lick the Democrats this year by joining them, sort of.
But first, Mr.
Ludgin must win a primary on Sept. 15 against a registered Republican, Philip L. Steele.


Two New Leagues With Two More Avenues of Opportunity
They will not exactly be thought of as leagues of their own.
But members of minority groups, frustrated by the lack of entry points with the long-established sports confederations, have been greeted with open arms by two new leagues associated with professional baseball and football.
The first to establish and open an array of opportunities was the World League, the two-year-old international springtime affiliate of the National Football League.
The second, starting this October, will be a six-team Arizona winter baseball league for major league prospects.


With the Brave Young Dead
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE
By Norman Maclean.
Illustrated. 301 pp.
Chicago:  The University of Chicago Press. $19.95.


Cultural Lineup Hits .333
The Olympics are over, you've been to a game at Shea and the hockey season doesn't begin for almost two months.
There's time for a little culture.
A novel, a play, a movie.
The best first.


Streetscapes: Columbus Ave. Sidewalks; Bluestone Dressing For Historic District
FEW people pay serious attention to city sidewalks.
But more eyes will soon be cast downward as New York City's Department of Transportation embarks early in 1993 on a $2.2 million sidewalk replacement for 44 blockfronts on Columbus Avenue in the Central Park West Historic District.
Strollers do not risk life and limb traveling this thoroughfare of shops and restaurants.
The project is not for repairs but for esthetic reasons only.
It will cover sidewalks from 66th to 88th Street with a uniform mix of concrete tinted gray to imitate bluestone.


Paula H. T. Chan, James J. Y. Huang
Paula Helen Taklun Chan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Pak Yuk Chan of Parkchester, the Bronx, was married there yesterday to James Jing You Huang, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Huang of Queens Village, Queens.
The Rev.
Joseph Dietz officiated at St.
Raymond's Roman Catholic Church.


Dispute on Bronx Sidewalk Leads to Fatal Shots
Mean looks exchanged on a sidewalk in the Bronx late Friday night escalated into gunshots only minutes later in a subway station, leaving one teen-ager dead and another wounded, the transit police said.
A transit police spokesman, Albert W. O'Leary, said that Cory Dubose, 15 years old, of 2030 East 177th Street in the Bronx, died from a shot in the head, and Nicholas Williams, 19, was shot in the back and the left thigh.
Mr.
Williams was in serious but stable condition after surgery at Bronx Municipal Hospital Center, a hospital spokesman said yesterday.


China Is Said to Put Direct Pressure on Pol Pot
In an effort to exert pressure on the Khmer Rouge to cooperate with United Nations peacekeepers in Cambodia, a high-ranking Chinese official held a rare meeting in Bangkok last week with Pol Pot, diplomats here say.
The meeting, which has not been confirmed by Beijing, would support the widely held view that Pol Pot continues to wield control of the radical movement, which brutally restructured Cambodian society in the 1970's.
Estimates of the number of Cambodians who died range from hundreds of thousands to more than a million.


Amy A. Epstein, Leonard Feldman
Amy Allison Epstein, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul E. Epstein of Gladwyne, Pa., was married last night in Penn Valley, Pa., to Leonard Frank Feldman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raphael Feldman of Montville, N.J.
Rabbi Gerald I. Wolpe officiated at Har Zion Temple.


Pleasures of Homemade Ice Cream
IN the summer, there is nothing like ice cream for dessert, whether it is a few spoonfuls to go with a fruit tart, or a large bowl of the stuff to eat with cookies.
And once you have tasted the homemade kind, commercial ice creams won't seem the same again.
Ice cream is very easy to make.
Most recipes are based on an English custard (creme anglaise) that is mixed with fruit purees.
The ice cream becomes smooth and creamy when air is churned into it -- a job that used to involve hours of hand cranking in wooden pail freezers, but nowadays is done by an ice cream maker.
When I was a child we used to freeze ice cream in ice trays covered with aluminum foil, taking them out once in a while and giving them a stir to prevent crystals from forming.
We were perfectly happy with the result, but it wasn't a patch on the smooth fine-textured ice cream one gets from a machine.


Hello? Hello? Deal Is Hung Up
"Pay me or trade me. Click." That, more or less, was the entire contribution of defensive back TERRELL BUCKLEY to a conference call on Friday he had requested involving himself, his agent, CARL POSTON, and RON WOLF, the general manager of the Green Bay Packers, the team that made the former Florida State star the No. 5 pick in the April draft.
After Buckley abruptly hung up without listening to Wolf's reply to his demand for either a huge salary or a trade, both Wolf and Poston were nonplussed.
"It was a little bit of a surprise to all of us," said Poston, who found an explanation for his client's rudeness.
"He wanted to indicate his seriousness," Poston said.
"I think he did."


Barrie Sardoff, Emmanuel Roman
Barrie Fern Sardoff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Sardoff of East Meadow, L.I., and Emmanuel Roman, the son of Philippe Roman of Paris and the late Veronique Jordan Roman, were married last evening in New York.
Cantor Bernard Fitch performed the interdenominational ceremony at Tavern on the Green, with the Rev.
James Wentz, a Unitarian Universalist minister, participating.
Mrs.
Roman graduated and received a master's degree in computer science from Columbia University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. degree from Stanford University.
She was until recently a clothing industry analyst at Oppenheimer &amp; Company in New York.
Her father is an account executive for The Daily News in New York.


Moving a Manager by the Bay
If the sale goes through and the Giants pack up and move to Florida, Manager ROGER CRAIG is pretty sure the new owners will want him to be part of the baggage.
But Craig is not so sure he wants to make the trip.
The 62-year-old onetime Dodger who followed the team from Brooklyn to Los Angeles in 1958 thinks one cross-country trek per career may be enough.
"I hate the thought of packing up and moving everything to Tampa," said Craig, a former Padres manager who moved up the coast to San Francisco in 1985.
"Everything I've got is in the San Diego area."


Topics of The Times; Ode to an Old Friend
Occasionally, one of them can still be spotted resting forlornly atop a file cabinet, gathering dust -- sad discards, the dodo birds of the pre-computer era.
The object under discussion is the manual typewriter.
Over the years, the typewriters have remained silent as the indignities piled up.
A 10-year-old computer whiz's only comment when he encountered one was, "What's that?" Even purchasing managers, who get worked up over a wasted paper clip, treat typewriters with contempt.
A writer who recently spotted an abandoned Remington asked if the company would sell it.
"If you'll just get it out of here," he was told, "it's yours."


Esther K. Gayner, Artist, 78
Esther K. Gayner, a painter, sculptor and printmaker, died on Wednesday at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park.
She was 78 years old and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.
She died of pneumonia, which was a complication of leukemia, her family said.


Romania Town's Prosperity Means Pollution
The scruffy trees surrounding this old mining town in northwestern Romania bear the scars of Baia Mare's economic success amid Romania's poverty.
The city is grappling with the same dilemma of prosperity versus environmental concerns faced by much of Eastern Europe, but it also is a victim of the legal vacuum that makes environmental damage virtually unstoppable in Romania today.


And the Dispute Goes On
La Toya Jackson, who returned to New York recently after ending her much publicized stint at the Moulin Rouge in Paris, still hasn't paid $71,000 in back rent.
In April 1989, Ms.
Jackson and Jack Gordon, her husband and manager, signed a year's lease for a condominium at Trump Parc on Central Park South, agreeing to pay the owner, Yoritada Matsuda, a Japanese businessman, $16,000 a month in rent.
The couple failed to pay for the last four and a half months they lived there, and last year Judge Bruce J. Gould of New York City Housing Court, ordered them to pay up.
But so far they haven't.


Culture Is Destiny
WHO PROSPERS?
How Cultural Values Shape Economic and Political Success.
By Lawrence E. Harrison. 280 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $22.


Whose Life Is It, Anyway?
Forget cat burglars.
Muggers and bank robbers are equally passe.
The cleverest thieves on screen right now are after something subtler than money, something not easily carried off in the dead of night.
The prize in many current films is someone else's peace of mind, whether it is co-opted through delicate treachery or stolen outright by a brazen impersonator.
Quicker than you can say "Vertigo" or "Persona," the movies have filled up with identity-snatching bandits who have uncanny abilities to invade the privacy of their prey.
The means for this kind of psychic crime may vary, and the tone can be sinister or comic.
But the attempt to borrow a target's best attributes remains essentially the same, whether the thief is copying someone's appearance, stealing a lover or invading a home.
The latest example, and a film whose villain attacks on all three of the above-mentioned fronts, is "Single White Female," in which the small, vaguely dangerous Hedra Carlson (Jennifer Jason Leigh) does all in her considerable power to steal the identity of her willowy roommate, Allison Jones (Bridget Fonda).
Then there's "Basic Instinct," which makes such a point of how badly Beth (Jeanne Tripplehorn) wants to become Catherine (Sharon Stone) that this identity-lifting subplot obscures the solution to its murder mystery. (Still wondering who did it? Look at the printout on Catherine's computer when she finishes her novel.)


Protest Over Arrest of Van Driver


AUGUST 9-15: Trouble Under 160 Units; Too Little Cholesterol May be as Bad as Too Much
At first, it sounded too weird to be true.
A few studies seemed to show that people with very low levels of cholesterol in their blood were just as much at risk of dying prematurely as people with the highest levels.
Instead of dying of heart disease, however, like those with high cholesterol levels did, those with low levels died of a variety of seemingly unrelated causes.


Morris Still Gives That Extra Yard
Joe Morris is facing one struggle that leads to another.
He wants to play pro football again this year, but first he must make the Cleveland Browns again, and that may be difficult.
Then, if he makes the team, he must live away from his wife, Linda, and their two daughters for at least five months, as he did last year.
"That's the tough part of playing football away from home," he said last week.
"It's especially tough when I see other people with their kids. Linda and I aren't happy that the three of them are here and I'm there, but we think that being here is best for the kids."


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE IMPERSONATOR  By Diana Hammond.  Doubleday, $20.


Women Artists Engage the 'Enemy'
Richard Serra's "House of Cards" is a Post-Minimalist landmark of the late 1960's made of four thick sheets of solid lead propped casually against one another to form a somewhat threatening four-foot open cube.
Rachel Lachowitz's sculpture is identical -- except that its slabs are bright red and made of lipstick.
In case anybody misses the point, Lachowitz has named her piece "Sarah."
This season, the art world has seen a trend toward more confrontational art by women -- ranging from Kiki Smith's life-size wax sculptures of battered women, seen at the Fawbush gallery in SoHo, to Marlene McCarty's Neo-Conceptual word installation that lined the walls with profanities at Metro Pictures.


Bang on a Pan


Artists Who Follow Their Own Paths
THE Montclair Art Museum's "Divergencies," which was started in 1988 by Robert Koenig, then the museum's director, is billed as a series devoted to New Jersey artists who are going it alone.
That is, they adhere to no school, participate in no trend.
At a time when there are no schools and trends are little more than passing fads, this is not hard to do.
The series, therefore, might better be described as a praiseworthy effort on the part of the museum to single out artists who have proved themselves but have not yet reached the top rung -- however that may be defined.


Specter Getting Teachers' Support, With Scolding
The president of the American Federation of Teachers promised today to scold Senator Arlen Specter for "insensitive behavior" at the Clarence Thomas confirmation hearings, but said the union's endorsement of Senator Specter for re-election this year would stand.
The union leader, Albert Shanker, told 4,000 delegates at the group's annual convention that he would send Mr.
Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, a letter that "expresses in no uncertain terms the anger" many members feel about the Senator's role in the questioning of Prof.
Anita F. Hill at the hearing.
Critics of Mr.
Specter said his tactics and tone were those of a prosecutor.


Making a Difference; A Nemesis of Management Strikes Again
For corporate democracy to work, scholars and regulators say, America needs lots of activist institutional investors who will use their voting power to hold managers accountable to shareholders.
They have in mind, no doubt, legions of investors just like Guy P. Wyser-Pratte, the president of Wyser-Pratte &amp; Company in New York, his family's private arbitrage and money management firm.
To be sure, a world full of Wyser-Prattes is a vision that could spoil a lot of executive breakfasts across the country.
In the past 20 years, the French-born Mr.
Wyser-Pratte, 52 years old, has made a habit of waging proxy wars against incumbent boards and chief executives, from Gerber Products in the mid-70's to Sears last year.


Flowery Species Take a Late Summer Bow
THOSE who believe that the flowery display from trees occurs only in the spring may want to look again.
A number of trees bloom during the summer months and gardeners are missing a good show if they don't have at least one of these handsome specimens on their landscapes.
A particularly unusual flowering tree, handsome in its form and elegant with its flowers, is the native sourwood (Oxydendrum arboreum).
From a distance, the tree puts on quite a display and can be the talk of the neighborhood.
But the unusual sourwood flowers are worth a close look.


Puzzles in Dance That Tickle The Imagination
Two remarkable dances recently set audiences cheering.
What helped make them out of the ordinary was the fact that, even though they stirred appreciative responses, they were largely inexplicable.
Among the highlights of this summer's American Dance Festival in Durham, N.C., was the Dayton Contemporary Dance Company's interpretation of Ulysses Dove's "Vespers." And American Ballet Theater's spring season at the Metropolitan Opera House included the successful New York premiere of "Grass," by the Swedish choreographer Mats Ek.


A la Carte; Dim Sum Delights
THE China Gourmet is the Oriental counterpart of the casual Italian pasta cafes that have proliferated on Long Island.
The modest little eat-in-takeout Chinese restaurant in the Delco Plaza shopping center at 285 Broadway in Hicksville (931-1117) features so-called Chinese pasta and dim sum.
It is a terrific place to sample a large number of different dishes.
The portions are small, the prices are low, and the choices are interesting.
Therefore diners can order an array of unusual foods and Chinese standards without much financial damage.


A Chilling Message
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein gripes about Karen Finley and Tim Miller's cries of censorship, "as if freedom of speech were being abolished simply because the Government declined to finance a particular project."


Miss de Havenon, Joseph Fowler
Sarah Alicia de Havenon, the daughter of Dr.
Anna Lou de Havenon and Gaston T. de Havenon, both of New York, was married yesterday to Joseph Martin Fowler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Fowler Jr. of Wantagh, L.I.
Irwin Brownstein, a retired justice of New York State Supreme Court, performed the ceremony at the summer home of the bride's father in East Hampton, L.I.
Miss de Havenon, 32 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a freelance photographer in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and completed the residency program at the Maine Photographic Workshop in Rockport.
Her father is an art dealer in New York.
Her mother directs the Action Research Project on Hunger, Homelessness and Family Health, a nonprofit advocacy group in New York, and teaches anthropology at the Mount Sinai Medical School.


Greenburgh's Stand On Affordable Housing
The article "Momentum on Affordable Housing"  [ Aug. 2 ]  pointed out that the town of Greenburgh voted down a request to seek state subsidies for a housing project.
I hope that leaders do not come away with the impression that every proposed affordable housing project will be blocked.
The town of Greenburgh reviews every proposed housing project on a case by case basis.
My colleagues on the Town Council and I consider a number of factors before determining whether a project deserves our support -- the availability of similar housing in existing neighborhoods, whether the area is overdeveloped, traffic congestion, drainage, among other issues.


History Through War Collectibles
ON the third Monday of every month, the Veterans of Foreign Wars post here is transformed from a sleepy little gathering hall into a living history lesson, with its instructors as diverse and colorful as the long-ago campaigns to which they are attracted.
The participants, armed with boxes of artifacts like a Civil War cap and a thermos bottle from a B-17 bomber, fill the folding tables with military items that for some collectors represent a lifetime of hunting, scouring and searching to piece together moments of history from the Revolutionary War to the Persian Gulf.


Traffic Alert
Madison Avenue between 23d and 45th streets will be closed from noon to 2 P.M. today for the Indian Association parade; Madison Avenue between 23d and 26th streets will remain closed until 8 P.M. for the Indian Association street fair.


Rail Offer for Visitors to Italy
Visitors to Italy who want to keep their transportation options open may want to consider a program that offers holders of Alitalia airline tickets from Rome to Florence, or from Rome to Naples, the option of making either trip by rail instead of air.
The program, begun in July, is run by Alitalia and Ferrovie Dello Spato, the Italian state railway.
According to the two companies, the rail option is likely to appeal to many passengers because getting to Florence or Naples has traditionally meant changing planes in Rome, and then taking shuttle flights.
With the rail option, Alitalia passengers -- international or domestic -- can board trains that since 1990 have linked the Mergellina railroad station in Naples and the Santa Maria Novella railroad station in Florence directly to the Leonardo da Vinci International Airport in Rome.


Baltic Cruises
To the Editor: I came away from my recent three-night cruise from Helsinki to St.
Petersburg on the Russian flag Baltic Lines' Konstantin Siminov with renewed empathy for what the Soviet citizen has been living through for 75 years.
The Baltic Lines brochure said that credit cards and Finnish currency were the only forms of payment acceptable on board.
The cruise director advised us that only Finnish currency was acceptable for payment of shore tours.


Cruise Line Emerges From Chapter 11
Society Expeditions, the pioneer adventure cruise operator, has emerged from bankruptcy and intends to repay its creditors, the company announced late last month.
Glenn McQuiston, the president, said passengers who made deposits on cruises that were canceled when the company filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Act in January will be offered cash reimbursement or comparable trips on one of four ships now being marketed by Society Expeditions: the World Discoverer, the Society Explorer, the Frontier Spirit and the Kapitan Khlebnikov.
Passengers who prefer cash may have to wait until the reorganized company earns some revenue, he said, adding that of the 500 or so passengers polled about half elected travel instead of cash.
Mr.
McQuiston said that creditors numbered about 800, a minority of whom were passengers, but he was unable to say how many passengers were owed money.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FLIGHT By Fran Dorf. Dutton, $20.


Before or After Saying 'I Do'
Living happily ever after is less a mystery than the mastery of certain skills, modern researchers say.
When a team at the University of Washington in Seattle said last week that it had found a way to predict 94 times out of 100 which couples will still be married four years later, it corroborated the work of another psychologist in the field, Dr.
David H. Olson at the University of Minnesota.


War! Mia Fights Back With (Gasp!) Publicity
The list of words used to describe Woody Allen, from "New York genius" to "neurotic existentialist," received two more yesterday: "desperate and evil."
In the latest public relations salvo in a custody battle that may rival the Donald and Ivana Trump divorce for the media attention it receives, Maureen O'Sullivan, the mother of Mr.
Allen's companion, Mia Farrow, issued a statement through her spokesman criticizing Mr.
Allen.


Sports of The Times; A Winning Contribution In Atlanta
THE Atlanta Braves, fortunate in their first-place performance in the National League West, are all the more blessed this season because their off-field demeanor is as winning as, say, their Friday night 15-0 pounding of the Pittsburgh Pirates, another division leader.
That professional, team-oriented behavior is reflected in the relaxed nature of the team's manager, Bobby Cox.
For he knows that, as of this moment, Atlanta's latest roll over National League opponents has as much to do with cohesiveness and cooperation among his players as it does with talent and luck.
Managers like Toronto's harried Cito Gaston and Oakland's sometimes-frustrated Tony La Russa -- burdened with balking, peevish superstars -- should be so lucky.


To Turn Peru's Tide of Terror
Peru's Shining Path guerrillas are a political nightmare come true, fanatics who think like the killers of Cambodia's Khmer Rouge and who finance their brutality with "taxes" extorted from drug traffickers.
Despite President Alberto Fujimori's recent seizure of dictatorial powers, Shining Path terror steadily paralyzes more and more of Lima, home of one of every three Peruvians.
The tide can still be turned, but not from outside.
Peruvians have no use for the Shining Path.
But they have grown dangerously estranged from their Government and armed forces.
The answer is more democracy, not less.


Stephen King: Good Idea, But...
To the Sports Editor:
Stephen King ("Dream Team: Just Another Horror Show," The Times, Aug. 9) starts out with a good idea and goes berserk.
The Dream Team was a disgrace.
Sending an overpaid group of N.B.A. all-stars to play basketball in the Olympics was the ultimate in media hype and commercialism.
But who is responsible for a system that allows college (amateur?) coaches to earn a million dollars a year?
The couch potatoes who watch this stuff on television and provide the money?
No, of course not.
Why, it's Reagan/Bush, who invented greed, and probably sloth, envy and the common cold.
And speaking of the Dream Team, let's drag in Grenada, Panama and junk bonds, all the result, naturally, of the famous 12 years.
If King's next novel doesn't sell, he'll blame President Bush.
Maybe I can fault the President when I miss a three-foot putt.
DAVID P. PEARSON  Locust Valley, L.I.


The Migrations of a Behemoth's Soul and Software
On the rare occasions when Charles B. Wang, the chief executive of Computer Associates International Inc., finds himself with a little time alone at home, he likes nothing better than to take apart an early-vintage personal computer and stuff it with the latest processors and accessories.
Then he takes it into work, presents it to one of his management team, and delights in their surprised looks as the customized electronic hot rod speeds through its paces.
"I like to make it fly," he chortled in a recent interview here at the company's airy new headquarters in central Long Island.


Districts Drawn for Minority Votes Complicate New York's Election
In the name of helping minorities, whose voting strength Congressional mapmakers have squelched in the past, this year's redistricting has torn and twisted New York's political map in ways an old-fashioned gerrymanderer might admire.
But in doing so the effort has produced some unusual challenges to old notions of representative democracy, among them whether voters should be represented by people who broadly share their outlook or by people who look like them.


Pleasures of Homemade Ice Cream
IN the summer, there is nothing like ice cream for dessert, whether it is a few spoonfuls to go with a fruit tart, or a large bowl of the stuff to eat with cookies.
And once you have tasted the homemade kind, commercial ice creams won't seem the same again.
Ice cream is very easy to make.
Most recipes are based on an English custard (creme anglaise) that is mixed with fruit purees.
The ice cream becomes smooth and creamy when air is churned into it -- a job that used to involve hours of hand cranking in wooden pail freezers, but nowadays is done by an ice cream maker.
When I was a child we used to freeze ice cream in ice trays covered with aluminum foil, taking them out once in a while and giving them a stir to prevent crystals from forming.
We were perfectly happy with the result, but it wasn't a patch on the smooth fine-textured ice cream one gets from a machine.


The Tomb of Caiaphas Unearthed?
Israeli archeologists are used to stumbling across the touchstones of early Christian and Jewish history. in the Mideast, it is a common occupational pleasure.
But even they were a little amazed when an elaborate cave on the edge of the Judean desert near Jerusalem turned out to contain the family tomb of Caiaphas, the Jewish high priest who presided at the trial of Jesus.
Caiaphas's murky role in the death of Christ has made him one of Jewish history's most disliked men.
He is said to have spent so much time cozying up to the Roman governor, Pontius Pilate, that he had little energy left to serve his own people.


Jill Edwards, Ed Jenovese
Jill Anne Edwards, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth C. Edwards of Columbus Grove, Ohio, was married there yesterday to Ed Kovens Jenovese, the son of Leone K. Jenovese of Saranac Lake, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Patrick Jenovese.
The Rev.
Donald H. Brown performed the ceremony at the United Church of Christ.


Give Michael A Break
To the Sports Editor:
I don't get it.
In "On Loyalty to Company or Country," (The Times, Aug. 2), Dave Anderson seems to accuse Michael Jordan of putting his commercial interests ahead of his country's in the great logo race.
Anderson might better attack those who have turned the Olympics into a veritable colossus of commercialism.


For Archbishop of Hartford, Still No Place to Call Home
Exactly where the new Roman Catholic Archbishop of Hartford is going to live, and how much it should cost, have been up in the air since he first arrived in the city earlier this year, and the questions remain cloudy still.
Plans to buy a $430,000 house for the new Archbishop, Daniel A. Cronin, were scrapped in March amid concerns that the news would upset some Catholics in the state and reduce donations to a major fund-raising drive called the Annual Appeal, which was just then beginning.


SERBS FOLLOWING A TWIN STRATEGY
Serbian forces today permitted a United Nations convoy to reach Gorazde, one of Bosnia and Herzegovina's beleaguered cities, in an operation that underscored the limits of this week's United Nations resolution on the Balkan war.
As fighting continued around Gorazde, eight truckloads of food and medicine were delivered to the city, which has been cut off from supplies since April, said Peter Kessler, a spokesman for the United Nations High Commission for Refugees.


Taxpayer Relief?
To the Editor:
There's a simple solution to the conflict between the N.E.A. and democracy: privatization.
As a private charity financing the arts, the endowment would be free from the restrictions of Congress and the executive branch.
Like the Guggenheim, Rockefeller, Ford and other private foundations, a privatized N.E.A. could pursue its own artistic muses.
Privatization offers empowerment to the arts community, which should vigorously support Congressional efforts to end the endowment's dependence on Government handouts.
LAWRENCE JARVIK Washington
The writer is Bradley Resident Scholar at the Heritage Foundation, a conservative public-policy research institute.


A Year After Coup, Gorbachev Grumps, Rues and Ruminates
The man who had the most to lose -- and lost almost everything -- after last August's attempted coup was President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
One year later, the former President of a country that no longer exists is now the head of the International Foundation of Socio-Economic and Political Research, which is housed in a vast complex that was built as a higher party school for foreign Communist leaders.


Flowery Species Take a Late Summer Bow
THOSE who believe that the flowery display from trees occurs only in the spring may want to look again.
A number of trees bloom during the summer months and gardeners are missing a good show if they don't have at least one of these handsome specimens on their landscapes.
A particularly unusual flowering tree, handsome in its form and elegant with its flowers, is the native sourwood (Oxydendrum arboreum).
From a distance, the tree puts on quite a display and can be the talk of the neighborhood.
But the unusual sourwood flowers are worth a close look.


Nonstop, Year-Round Casino Approval Stuns Monitors
On a midweek morning at an hour when the sun is just starting to break over the Boardwalk, Joann Loucka stood before a dollar slot machine, barking words of encouragement to her best friend, Sophia Nicolan.
"Hurry up before the machine gets cold," Mrs. Loucka said.


Noted With Pleasure
Falling Into Art
An artist's true home can be found only in the sweet abandonment of creation, as a musician discovers while playing venerable folk songs before a drunken, largely oblivious crowd in this excerpt from Milan Kundera's novel "The Joke" (Aaron Asher/HarperCollins).


Rebecca Patton, Edward Fenno
Rebecca Mulford Patton, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Grant W. Patton Jr. of Charleston, S.C., was married there yesterday to Edward Thorndike Fenno, a son of J. Brooks Fenno Jr. and Mrs.
Frederic N. Phinney, both of Wellesley, Mass.
The Rev.
Richard Belser performed the ceremony at St.
Michael's Episcopal Church.


Cynthia M. Jenkel And Jeffrey Treuhaft
Cynthia Morris Jenkel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul H. Jenkel of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday in Mount Kisco, N.Y., to Jeffrey Michael Treuhaft, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur W. Treuhaft of Pepper Pike, Ohio.
The Rev.
Jack S. Miller officiated at the Mount Kisco Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Treuhaft, 22 years old, and Mr.
Treuhaft, 23, are graduates of Skidmore College.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; Bush Ads Disappoint Many in G.O.P.
One of the immediate tasks facing James A. Baker 3d when he begins exerting influence over the Bush Presidential campaign is to repair a television advertising effort that Republicans inside and outside the campaign concede has been disappointing, if not disastrous.
Nearly all Republicans agree that the Bush campaign squandered a critical opportunity in the weeks leading up to the Republican National Convention by broadcasting commercials that were poorly executed and did little to advance a message of why people should vote for Mr.
Bush.


Maradona Rejects Naples
DIEGO MARADONA yesterday rejected a reply from Naples concerning his conditions to return to Italy following his 15-month suspension for cocaine use.
"At this time there is no chance that Diego will return to Italy," Maradona's manager, MARCOS FRANCHI, said upon arrving in Buenos Aires after return from Europe.


WHY PARIS WORKS
Having visited Paris many times, I was fascinated to learn why and how it works so well.
My husband and I marvel at its beauty, its cleanliness, its efficiency, its hospitality.
But Paris has still another virtue: It seems to function on the honor system.
For example, there are chairs everywhere -- on the sidewalks, in the parks and gardens and museums -- and they are not chained or nailed down.
They can be turned or moved to get a better view.


Corrections
A report in the Egos &amp; Ids column of Styles of the Times on July 26 omitted the name of Annette Tab ert's co-author for the forthcoming book "The Power of Style." She is Diana Edkins.


Rae Ellen Malpass, Robert E. Gilson
Rae Ellen Malpass, the daughter of the late Adm. and Mrs.
Ray E. Malpass of Maitland, Fla., was married in New York yesterday to Robert Edwin Gilson, the son of the late Marguerite Gilson Crawford of Burlington, Vt.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls.
Mrs.
Gilson, 40 years old, is a saleswoman at the Classic Marketing Group, a New York real-estate company.
She graduated from Florida State University.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.


The Ups and Downs of 'Paint Your Wagon'
"Paint Your Wagon" is a musical about heartache and greed.
About wanting to wrap your arms around somebody and yearning to lay your hands on a fortune.
About having stars in your eyes some of the time and dollar signs the rest of the time.
Perhaps these are not mutually exclusive concerns.
But they don't go together particularly well in this 1951 musical by Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe about the rough and tumble and, yes,
tender
days of the California gold rush.
The heartache makes for a tone of autumnal wistfulness and the greed is behind the periodic explosions of raucousness.
When the grizzled prospectors of Rumson Creek are not threatening to demolish the town dance hall, they are off pining in the woods.
Life is not merely uncertain in these here parts.
It borders on the manic-depressive.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  PLAN TO CHALLENGE IRAQ


Sale of WNEW-AM Could Replace Sinatra With Stock Reports
Cirino Colacrai remembers when a few minutes on WNEW-AM meant the difference between a hit and a flop.
Like the Brooklyn Dodgers and the old Pennsylvania Station, those days are gone forever, and music on WNEW-AM -- any music, except for the jingles in commercials -- may soon be gone, too.
The station is expected to switch from the pop charts to the stock charts once a $13.5 million deal to sell it to a financial-information entrepreneur goes through.
It is a change that Mr.
Colacrai, a songwriter, is not looking forward to.


Postcards From the Edge: The Houston Nomads
The ancient Hebrews left Egypt to find the Promised Land.
Odysseus embarked on his odyssey to return to his faithful wife Penelope.
The writer Jack Kerouac went "On the Road" in search of spiritual fulfillment.
And the Houston Astros are on a monthlong tour of National League cities because, well, because George Bush needs the Astrodome.
The 25 Astros evicted from their home receive $59 a day meal money, stay in four-star hotels and get $150 to wash their clothes.
No one in Houston is starting an Astros homeless fund.


The Executive Computer; Who Lives by Technology Dies -- Slowly -- by Technology
The keynote speaker bounded on stage, cheerfully greeted the several hundred people in the audience, and hit the power switch on his portable computer, which had faithfully served as a prompter through dozens of speeches.
Nothing happened.


Mets May Not Officially Be One of the Worst Bargains Ever, but It's Close
The August onslaught of physical mayhem committed against the Mets or by the Mets against themselves has shattered any thoughts that the disappointing team had of staging a last-lap sprint toward the National League East championship.
It will also most likely prevent the Mets from finishing first in the salary standing and becoming only the second team to do that with a losing record.
Injuries to Bobby Bonilla, Howard Johnson, Bret Saberhagen, Dave Magadan and Willie Randolph in the first 12 days of this month forced the Mets to summon a platoon of players from the minor leagues, and their low salaries have reduced the team's average salary.


Here's Everybody! After Carson, A Host of Late-Night Wannabes
Can we talk? and talk. and talk. can we ever!
Now that Johnny Carson has buttoned it up, would-be heirs from Whoopi Goldberg to Rush Limbaugh, radio's right-wing provocateur, are adding their voices to the late-night talk-show crescendo.
As Mr.
Carson noted in his farewell monologue on the "Tonight" show, the total population of the earth increased by 2.4 billion during the 30 years he was host and, even more amazing, "half of those 2.4 billion people will soon have their own late-night TV show."


INSIDE
The Wisdom of Staying Away
Gov.
Pete Wilson's decision to skip the Republican convention is grounded in more than his state's budget crisis.
It is also good politics.
Page 28.
Small Gains in Sports Hiring
Despite concerted efforts to hire members of minority groups, professional leagues have made unsteady progress.
SportsSunday, section 8.


AIDS Test
AIDS is not a Republican disease.
To be sure, plenty of Republicans have died of AIDS, and plenty more are sick.
But the party has never been comfortable talking about the disease.
The epidemic was more than five years old before President Ronald Reagan uttered the "A" word publicly.
The wrath of God, the right wing said.
All those homosexuals and blacks and drug abusers.


Laura Burman, Bruce Monrad
Laura Joan Burman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Burman of New Smyrna Beach, Fla., was married last evening in Newton Centre, Mass., to Bruce Haffenreffer Monrad, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest E. Monrad of Weston, Mass.
The Rev.
C.
Phillip Ijams performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Monrad, 27 years old, is studying for an M.B.A. at Columbia University.
She graduated from Virginia Polytechnic Institute.
Her father retired as a vice president of the Lanman Companies, a photolithography concern in Washington.


Ms. Wickersham, Keith Mestrich
Tilney Wickersham, the daughter of Margaret P. Wickersham of Westport, Conn., and James H. Wickersham Jr. of Southport, Conn., was married yesterday to Keith Richard Mestrich, a son of Sandra Mestrich of Coon Rapids, Minn., and Dr.
Richard K. Mestrich of Andover, Minn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Alastair Votaw performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Southport.
Ms.
Wickersham, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, teaches history at Alice Deal Jr.
High School in Washington.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University.
Her father is an investment banker with Wickersham Associates in Stamford, Conn.


Ren and Stimpy's Triumphant Return
From high atop his stool at the drawing-board, John Kric falusi eyes a visitor quizzically.
" 'The Simpsons'?" he asks.
"We could write 'The Simpsons' blindfolded."
Summoning up an almost superhuman burst of patience, the creator, director and producer of "The Ren and Stimpy Show" explains that the popular Fox series he has just been asked about is, as far as he can tell, only an ink- and paint-filled sitcom.
"What we do," says Mr.
Kricfalusi proudly, "is animation."


Talking: Tree Care; Preserving An Asset To a Home
FALL is traditionally viewed by arborists as one of the best times to plant, trim and do other tasks needed to maintain yard trees.
Tree work is important and should be included in a regular property maintenance program because attractive trees help improve visual appeal and value, and unkempt trees pose a hazard and imply careless ownership.


A Whiff Of Stardom
CHICAGO -- Marshall Field's, 111 North State Street.
Elizabeth Taylor's White Diamonds by Parfums International Ltd.
One ounce is $200.
"People who analyze why it sells think it's the scent, but I say the scent is a minor part of the whole formula," said Allen Burke, division merchandise manager of cosmetics.
"It's the identity, the marketing behind the fragrance that drives the success of it."


Objects of His Affection
This wonderful book of Picasso's still lifes, the catalogue for a traveling exhibition, opens with an unfortunate statement by Jean Sutherland Boggs, the show's curator: "Picasso is not an artist we would normally associate with 'things.' " Nonsense.
If there is anything one can safely say about Picasso, it is that he spent his whole life devouring, transforming, animating and creating "things." Luckily there is much more to PICASSO &amp; THINGS (Cleveland Museum of Art/Rizzoli, $75).
In 1920 Picasso painted a jug topped by a saucer topped by two apples that evokes a comical curvaceous body with an open mouth; in 1939 he painted a trio of sheep skulls that seem to be laughing.
And in 1972, at the end of his life, he drew a self-portrait that makes him look more dead than alive.
"The head," Ms.
Boggs astutely observes, "has been turned into a skull. And the skull . . . is a very poignant still life."


New Haven Rallies for a Tennis Week
WHEN Jim Westhall moved the Volvo International Tennis Tournament from Stratton Mountain, Vt., to New Haven two years ago, there were doubters galore.
And no wonder.
Since 1970 the tournament was held in such bucolic resort settings as Bretton Woods and North Conway in New Hampshire and at Stratton Mountain.
For all its educational, cultural and entertainment amenities, New Haven has never been mistaken for a vacation retreat.


Making a Difference; From Dolby to Zoran: A Sound Plan for the Home
Nine years ago, when Levy Gerzberg co-founded the Zoran Corporation, it was with the aim of taking digital signal processing technology developed for the Israeli military into consumer markets via partnerships.
That strategy got a strong endorsement last week when Dolby Laboratories Inc. chose Zoran to develop a chip that will bring its latest professional digital stereo sound process for movies into the home.


Nancy Friedman, Charles Swift Jr.
Nancy Lee Friedman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Friedman of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., was married yesterday to Charles Wortley Swift Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Swift of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Paul De Hoff, a Presbyterian minister, performed the Protestant ceremony at the Union Church of Pocantico Hills in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received a law degree from Harvard University.
She expects to begin as a clerk in September for Judge Charles S. Haight Jr. of Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Her father, who is retired, was the national accounting manager of United Parcel Service in Greenwich.
Her mother, Mary Lee Friedman, is the tax manager for Trans World Airlines in Mount Kisco, N.Y.


What Else Is New? Mets Lose 10th of Last 11
The reign of failure spares no one for the Mets, not even their success stories.
Anthony Young, the converted starter who had developed an identity and amassed an impressive array of accomplishments as a short man out of the bullpen, entered last night's game against the Phillies with the score 3-3 and the scene set for a decision.


Sweden to Close Tourist Bureau
The Swedish Government has decided to turn over the promotion of Sweden in other countries to the private sector and to close its Swedish Tourist Board office in New York.
But the office has been given a partial reprieve.
Instead of closing before the end of this year, as had been initially planned by the Swedish Government, it will remain open with a reduced staff until August 1993.
The office, at 655 Third Avenue between 41st and 42d Streets, is part of a complex of Scandinavian tourism boards operated by Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland and Iceland.
The Swedish board has been in New York for more than 40 years, providing information to travelers and travel agents, while marketing Swedish tourism.
Earlier this year the Swedish Parliament dissolved the Tourist Board, headquartered in Stockholm, and cut off financing to all its offices.
The travel bureaus in Chicago and Los Angeles closed on June 30.


What's Really in a Name?
To the Editor:
"Names Securities Analysts Love . . . and Hate" (Aug. 9) raises several questions:


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Weary and Feeling the Presidency's Weight
His aides see it sometimes around his eyes, an expression of weariness that was not there before.
The Peter Pan President who seemed to grow younger and bouncier during the first years of his Administration has faced health problems and staff problems and political problems, and he has finally felt the weight of the office he once wore so lightly.
Gleaming, for a Moment
When George Bush put his old Texas pal, James A. Baker 3d, in charge of the future this week, he recovered some of his gleam -- at least momentarily.
The President laughingly defended himself to his spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, for wearing white socks to a press conference with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel.
He returned to his favorite rituals, poking fun at his straight man, Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser, and trading spicy jokes with Mr.
Baker.


Commercial Property: Co-ops as Landlords; Problems, and Opportunities, for the Retail Tenants
AS long as most people could remember, a 50's-style delicatessen hugged the northeast corner of Madison Avenue at East 86th Street.
It was a popular eating spot, "near and dear to all our hearts and stomachs," said Dr.
Larry Kirstein, president of 49 East 86th Street, the co-op that now owns the building where the deli was situated.
For the final four years of the deli's life, however, a less popular owner took a lease and eventually defaulted.


17th-Hole Eagle Keeps Sauers Soaring in P.G.A.
In perfect concert with the underdog tradition of golf's fourth major championship, Gene Sauers continued to play the best golf of his life today to maintain his two-shot lead at the 74th P.G.A.
Championship.
The 29-year-old Sauers fired a one-under-par 70, punctuated by an eagle 3 at the 17th hole, for a 54-hole total of seven-under 206 that put space between him and several other underdogs, and even more between Sauers and some of golf's biggest names.


Slaughterhouse Five
To the Sports Editor:
While the participation of N.B.A. players in these Games sealed Olympic gold for the U.S. basketball team, this fan prefers to see a "good game" rather than be assured of hearing the Star Spangled Banner one more time.
The decision to allow our pros to play was not made out of desperation, only out of our desire to dominate the rest of the world.
Recent losses in international competition do demonstrate improvement in the skills of our foreign counterparts.
But it is our obsession with winning that has pushed us into a frenzy solely responsible for activating the Dream Team for duty.


A Deliberate, Unflinching Witness to History
In September of 1990, when PBS broadcast Ken and Ric Burns's "Civil War," television taught its audience a new respect for still photography.
The little screen ingeniously deployed what were actually quite limited images of a long-ago war.
The emotional pull of those still photographs -- and they were exceptionally still, for moving people, animals and trees registered as blurs -- was rather peculiar when you thought about it.
Only five months later television would provide a ringside seat at the Persian Gulf war while the battle was raging, and most of the visual spectacle would be scarcely more memorable than a game in a video arcade.
The impact of the images obviously did not depend solely on the state of the technology.
Civil War photographs, taken 25 years after photography was invented, made history on several levels.
One of the prime documents, Alexander Gardner's "Photographic Sketch Book of the War," published in 1866, is on view at the International Center of Photography (Fifth Avenue at 94th Street) through Sept. 6.
Not the first war ever photographed, the Civil War was the first covered so extensively.
Wide distribution of small photographs and stereographs during the conflict, as well as wood engravings after photographs in popular magazines, began to change the general expectation of what might be seen of war and other current events.
From late 1862, when Gardner left Mathew Brady's employ and set up his own studio, it was not Brady but Gardner and his assistants (including Timothy O'Sullivan) who had the major responsibility for photographing the conflict.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 1 about sentence reductions offered to cooperating witnesses alluded incorrectly to biblical accounts of the 30 pieces of silver paid to Judas.
Although the Gospel of John links the Pharisees to Judas's betrayal of Jesus, it does not mention any payment of money.
The Gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke, which do mention payment, do not link the Pharisees to Judas's betrayal.


Office Space Still Plentiful Despite Bright Signs
WHEN the subject is office space, the good news locally is that many small and medium-size companies are leaving Manhattan and relocating their operations in Westchester.
But the bad news is that the flurry of activity is not strong enough to turn the market around.
"Bluntly put, there is still a tremendous amount of office space to be absorbed before it will be fair to say that the county has turned the corner," said John Rostenberg, president of the Rostenberg-Doern Company, a commercial brokerage with offices in Purchase and Stamford.


Nassau Police Say They Have Fisher's Gun
The Nassau County police yesterday confirmed a report in New York Newsday that they had found a gun last week that they believe was used by Amy Fisher to shoot Mary Jo Buttafuoco on May 19.
A small automatic handgun was discovered with a set of stolen New York State license plates on Monday in a storm drain at the corner of Hewlitt and Cheryl Avenues in Merrick, not far from Ms.
Fisher's home, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew DeSimone.
Ballistics tests are being conducted on the gun, which "has not yet been connected scientifically with the shooting," Officer DeSimone said.


Club Med Cuts Rates at Six Sites
Club Med is reducing rates by more than 10 percent at six of its villages this winter, prompted by fierce competition from other resort operators, according to Michael Kubin, president of Club Med sales in the United States.
All Club Med packages, whether land programs or land and air plans, include all meals, sports instruction and use of sports equipment as well as lodging.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
House
1.
Neighborhood Schools Improvement Act: a bill to funnel $846 million a year to state and local governments to devise comprehensive changes in elementary and secondary education
1
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
N
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
N
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
N
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
Y
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
N
2. Hughes (D) . . .
N
3. Pallone (D) . . .
N
4. Smith (R) . . .
N
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
N
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
N
8. Roe (D) . . .
N
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
N
10. Payne (D) . . .
N
11. Gallo (R) . . .
N
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
13. Saxton (R) . . .
N
14. Guarini (D) . . .
N
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
N
2. Downey (D) . . .
N
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
N
4. Lent (R) . . .
Y
5. McGrath (R) . . .
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
A
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
A
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
N
9. Manton (D) . . .
N
10. Schumer (D) . . .
N
11. Towns (D) . . .
A
12. Owens (D) . . .
N
13. Solarz (D) . . .
N
14. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
15. Green (R) . . .
N
16. Rangel (D) . . .
N
17. Weiss (D) . . .
N
18. Serrano (D) . . .
N
19. Engel (D) . . .
N
20. Lowey (D) . . .
N
21. Fish (R) . . .
N
22. Gilman (R) . . .
N
23. McNulty (D) . . .
N
24. Solomon (R) . . .
A
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
N
26. Martin (R) . . .
Y
27. Walsh (R) . . .
N
28. McHugh (D) . . .
N
29. Horton (R) . . .
N
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
N
31. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
N
33. Nowak (D) . . .
N
34. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on Aug. 2 about bus tours of the Southwest misstated the telephone number for Tauck Tours in some copies.
It is (800) 468-2825.


Camps Along 2 Rivers and Plenty of Salmon
The sun was low in the west when Joseph Cullman 3d and I were driving down the last two miles of the woods road that leads to the Two Brook camp on the Upsalquitch River in New Brunswick.
As we jounced down the hillside at a speed I would have deemed excessive were it not for an awareness that every minute gained was an additional minute to fish for Atlantic salmon, our heady flight to pleasure was stopped by a female ruffed grouse standing in the middle of the road.


Nina Pam Samuelson and Jeffrey Sable
Nina Pam Samuelson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Samuelson of Port Washington, L.I., was married last evening to Jeffrey Sable, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart Sable of Cleveland.
Rabbi Martin Rosenberg performed the ceremony at the Congregation Beth David in Lynbrook, L.I.
Mrs.
Sable, 26 years old, was until recently a recreational therapist for the Massachusetts Department of Mental Retardation.
She graduated from Boston University, as did her husband.
Her father is a group vice president of real estate for R. H. Macy &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Adele Samuelson, is a math teacher at John Bowne High School in New York.


Freed From Prison, He Fears a Return
ON Aug. 13, 1976, a Newark police officer was shot and killed during an armed robbery in Kearny.
Vincent James Landano, a 37-year-old Staten Island man, was charged with the killing, convicted and sentenced to life in prison.
Thirteen years later, after a bizarre legal odyssey that included recanted testimony, a missing witness and charges that evidence had been lost and witnesses had been improperly influenced by law-enforcement officials, Mr.
Landano was freed from prison.
A Federal judge ruled that prosecutors had systematically withheld evidence that could have helped Mr.
Landano prove his innocence.


Cultural Lineup Hits .333
The Olympics are over, you've been to a game at Shea and the hockey season doesn't begin for almost two months.
There's time for a little culture.
A novel, a play, a movie.
The best first.


Fund-Raising Counsel Explains His Role
In his letter  [ "County Libraries Differ From New York City's," Aug. 2 ] , Maurice J. Freedman writes that I am "a professional fund raiser," a statement that is incorrect.
I am, in fact, a fund-raising counsel.
The Executive Law of the State of New York defines the two categories and differentiates them.
Most significant, a fund-raising counsel, unlike a professional fund raiser, does not, and may not, solicit.
MILTON GOLDIN Tarrytown


Heidi S. Light, John Birnbaum
Heidi Sandra Light, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Light of Edison, N.J., was married yesterday to John Kenneth Birnbaum, a son of William Birnbaum of Delray Beach, Fla., and the late Bernice Birnbaum.
Rabbi Barry Friedman performed the ceremony at Headquarters Plaza Hotel in Morristown, N.J.
Mrs.
Birnbaum, 27 years old, is an account executive for First Option Sportswear, a manufacturer of women's clothing in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a labor arbitrator in Edison.


Rediscovering Strauss, With One Extra Song
FOR years, 40 or so recordings and countless concert performances have attested to the enduring worth and popularity of Richard Strauss's "Four Last Songs." Now, through the research of Timothy Jackson, a professor at Connecticut College in New London, it appears that the four songs are really five.
From studies of the Strauss notebooks and manuscripts, Dr.
Jackson determined that the composer, before finishing the four new songs he was writing between 1946 and 1948, returned to a lied he had created more than half a century before, on a connected text, giving it the same kind of orchestral setting he was providing for the others.


Pamela Duffy, R. F. O'Sullivan
Pamela Anne Duffy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Duffy of Locust, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard Fintan O'Sullivan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Denis O'Sullivan of Dublin.
The Rev.
Joseph A. Murray performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Cross Church in Rumson, N.J.


Thomas Block Rubnitz Artist and Film Maker, 36
Thomas Block Rubnitz, an artist and film maker, died on Wednesday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 36 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, his family said.


Ms. Guggenheim, John Shaw Miller
Daniel M. Guggenheim of Newport Beach, Calif., and Mrs.
John R. Coutts of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kristin Allyn Guggenheim to John Shaw Miller, a son of Frank Miller of Darien and Emily Appleton of Sun Valley, Idaho.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Guggenheim, 25 years old, is an account representative for Metropolis magazine in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is the president of the Guggenheim Company, a real-estate development company in Newport Beach.
Her stepfather is the chief operating officer of Peak Technology Inc., a holding company in New York.
Ms.
Guggenheim is a great-granddaughter of Daniel M. Guggenheim, the industrialist and philanthropist, and a great-grandniece of Solomon R. Guggenheim, the museum founder.


Carnivale on L.I.
Rio came north for one night, at a fund-raiser for Southampton Hospital on Aug. 8.


How Government Mismanaged Public Housing; Nightmare for Elderly
To the Editor:
"Volatile Mix in Housing: Elderly and Mentally Ill" (front page, Aug. 3) graphically describes a trend familiar to nonprofit groups that operate federally subsidized housing for the elderly.
Many private, nonprofit senior citizens' facilities have been forced by Federal law to accept nonelderly people with severe mental disabilities and drug problems.


Redlaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mass Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Slaying Case Crawls Toward End
"The devil has entered," Evelyn Rodriguez sneered in Spanish as the man she believes killed her daughter walked into a Bronx courtroom last week.
The man, Alejandro Henriquez, did not acknowledge her.
He sat down and stared ahead silently.
Mr.
Henriquez, who is charged with murdering a woman and two girls, has revealed little of himself during his trial, which is in its fifth week.
But through the testimony of others, a complex portrait of the defendant has emerged.
Even if he is not a killer, Mr.
Henriquez has apparently played many roles in his 31 years: successful businessman, high roller, admitted liar, bigamist.
He is a man with an extraordinary talent for befriending children and seducing young women.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A HUMANE WAY TO MOVE THE HOMELESS
More than a decade after New York City started grappling with a surge in homelessness, a program by the Port Authority to combine police enforcement with treatment and referral programs has cleared out the authority's midtown bus terminal and started to wear away the building's image as a grim example of the link between bureaucratic failure and human misery.
The program has raised a tentative hope that the city's slow-moving bureaucracies may have finally started sketching out answers that move beyond the "sweeps" and "crackdowns" that typified early efforts, which were attacked as cruel and ineffective.
Advocates for the homeless give the Port Authority's integrated approach grudging praise and complain only that the program should be better financed and integrated into a citywide plan.
A1.
BUSINESSMAN, BIGAMIST, KILLER?
Alejandro Henriquez has revealed little of himself during his five-week-old trial for three murders in the Bronx.
But through the testimony of others, a complex portrait of the defendant has emerged.
Even if he is not a killer, Mr.
Henriquez has apparently played many roles in his 31 years: successful businessman, high roller, admitted liar, bigamist.
He is a man with an extraordinary talent for befriending children and seducing young women.
Prosecutors have also attempted to show that Mr.
Henriquez has a quick temper and a taste for violence.
The images are often contradictory.
The jury, for example, knows that Mr.
Henriquez was a livery-car driver, not the best-paying of jobs.
Yet he somehow could afford expensive new cars, like the gray Mercedes-Benz the police say he used to dump off the body of Shamira Bello in July 1988.
B3.
FAMILY FEUDS CHALLENGE POLICE
Family quarrels are among the most ticklish matters the police are asked to handle.
Each squabble is unpredictable in its own way, and the rules can shift in a flash.
A father who sees nothing wrong in pummeling his children may grow indignant that the police are arresting him for such private trifles, humiliating him as "the man of the house." His children may even rush to his defense.
One study showed that 56 American police officers from 1973-84 were slain stepping into so-called domestic disturbances, roughly 5 percent of the 1,031 killed on duty over that time.
A textbook illustration of how matters can get out of hand was a recent scuffle between two brothers, the sons of Ann B. Dodds, a community leader in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, that led to complaints of Rodney King-like police brutality and the indictment of a sergeant on assault charges last week.
B3.
BABY BEATEN AND FATHER ARRESTED
In what the police have termed a case of child abuse, a 1-month-old Bronx boy was left in critical condition with a fractured skull and other injuries, his 20-year-old-father was under arrest and the police were trying to make sense of the incident.
The baby was taken by relatives to Montefiore Medical Center Saturday evening with head injuries, a broken shoulder and internal bleeding, the police said.
B3.
REGION  DOWNED PLANE IS FOUND IN WOODS
The wreckage of a small plane missing since Thursday has been found on a heavily wooded mountainside near Bradford, N.Y., in the Finger Lakes region.
The plane went down in bad weather Thursday evening after the pilot reported having trouble with his instruments.
All three occupants died instantly in the crash, authorities said.
Emergency workers trying to remove the bodies were being hampered by the densely forested terrain, the state police said.
B6.
WHERE THE BELLHOPS CHECK YOUR PULSE
At the New Haven Medical Hotel, the third-floor concierge is an emergency medical technician, the bar is wheelchair-accessible and tennis stars stay under the same roof as gallbladder patients.
The hotel, which opened in January 1991, was intended strictly for medical use, a place where people would stay for several days while recovering from surgery at nearby facilities.
But because several major insurers have refused to cover the hotel stay, the medical business has not been brisk.
And with upscale hotel rooms rare in New Haven, groups like the Volvo International Tennis Tournament, conferences from Yale University and corporate groups have clamored to fill the 93 rooms.
B6.
The Traffic Map B7


Gradco Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vegetable Juices: Having Their Day?
Imagine a company that for years has marketed a prosaic product that sells well but quietly.
Then, seemingly out of nowhere, comes a hot trend into which the product fits perfectly.
Does the company seek to take advantage of that?
The answer is as obvious as the answer to the question "Which juice has the same name as a type of engine?"
In new humorous television commercials for V-8, the Campbell Soup Company's vegetable juice, FCB/ Leber Katz Partners in New York plays upon the national mania for heathful juices by urging consumers to "drink your vegetables." In "person on the street" vignettes, energetic men and women make colorful remarks about V-8's attributes: "Tons of vegetables in it," "It's a zippy kind of thing," "They kind of crush it all up."


Valley Forge Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Freed by Serbs, Croats Find Joy and Grief at a Homecoming
It was Nov. 20, 1991, and Miljenko Rubic's life was flickering before his eyes.
Croatia's most fiercely defended city, Vukovar, had just fallen to Serbian forces after an 88-day siege that cost both sides thousands of casualties.
Mr.
Rubic and 56 men stood in a line along the desolate marsh as a Yugoslav Army major played God, with advice from a local Serb named Dusan.


Play It Again, Broadway
New York City is a summer music festival, as multicultural at the city itself, and all for free.
There are dozens upon dozens of outdoor performances all over town, and the calendar grows longer every year.
Some of the performers are world famous companies, like the Metropolitan Opera and the New York Philharmonic, in world famous settings, like Central Park.
Others are the not-so-famous, like the long-running Sunday concerts by the George Seuffert band in the George Seuffert bandshell, in Queens.


Ranchers Wary of Plan To Wreck Missile Silos
Ranchers of western South Dakota may be more relieved than most people by the end of the cold war.
They were right in the cross hairs of it.
With 150 Minuteman II missiles ready to bolt from silos that the Air Force had bored 90 feet into their pastures, they were sitting ducks for a pre-emptive Soviet strike.
Now, after 30 years in which nothing happened, the ranchers' own Government intends to do what the Russians never dared.


Computer Telephone Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Warrantech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the shooting of a police officer in an undercover narcotics deal in the Bronx described the victim incorrectly.
The wounded man, Dominick Laperuta, was a backup officer, not the officer who bought the drugs.


Biosearch Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Partech Holdings reports earnings for Year to June 30


Victoria Godsick, Leonard Hersh
Victoria Lewisohn Godsick, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter A. Godsick of New York, was married in New York yesterday to Leonard Harris Hersh, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Hersh of Edison, N.J.
Rabbi Ronald Sobel officiated at Temple Emanu-El.


Review/Television; On Aging, or Rather Avoidance of It
"Never Say Die: The Pursuit of Eternal Youth" operates on the premise that efforts to look young and not feel old reflect a determination to defy death.
This surprisingly cheery hourlong documentary begins with the discouraging fact that after about age 12, the human body begins to come apart.
When wear and tear show up in the form of wrinkled skin, sagging muscles, failures of sight, hearing and memory and so forth, many people begin to fight back.
After a few upscale nude scenes in a spa in Baden Baden, Germany, the British producer Antony Thomas concentrates on the American way of not dying, especially the businesses that cater to the wishful readiness of many to try anything.
Mr.
Thomas, a wry guide, lets his specimens speak for themselves.


Fleet Aerospace Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chyron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


True Crime, and Publishers, in Russia
Publishers, film makers and television producers have long understood the commercial value of a juicy crime story.
Often, a crime has barely been registered on the police blotters before the competition begins to buy the rights to the story from the victims, the criminals, the lawyers, even the neighbors.
But in an unusual twist to the literary and cinematic ambulance chasing, two American publishers have signed up books about one of the most celebrated and gruesome cases in Russia's criminal annals.


Books of The Times; On the Dirtiest Word in the Political Language
The Democrats' Dilemma Walter F. Mondale and the Liberal Legacy By Steven M. Gillon Illustrated. 468 pages.
Columbia University Press. $34.95.


If You're Sick and Retired
For millions of retired Americans, life's journey has turned into a potholed path.
Pension funds designed to last a lifetime are going bust or being skimmed.
An estimated 4.5 million pensioners face the probability of having their retirement medical coverage reduced or abruptly terminated.
In a survey of 1,380 companies, two-thirds said they would be cutting medical benefits for retirees.
Hardest hit are employees who took early retirement and are not yet 65 and eligible for Medicare.
In one mammoth case, 40,000 nonunion employees are suing General Motors over a proposed cut in their medical benefits.
G.M., they say, promised them almost 100 percent coverage when they left.


Review/Theater -- The Comedy of Errors; Broad Farce Made Even Broader With Acrobats and Sound Effects
As a brief farce of mistaken identities, "The Comedy of Errors" has been widely transplanted in place and time, musicalized as "The Boys From Syracuse" and turned into a funny forum for the unbridled theatrics of the Flying Karamazov Brothers.
Most recently at the Royal Shakespeare Company, a portly clownish actor played both of the twin masters (and one actor played both servants) in a quick-witted cartoon version.
Confronted with infinite possibilities for interpretation, Caca Rosset has settled for interpolation, with a knockabout, or rather a throwaway, production.
Broadness is the mode as the actors are led to overreact and innuendo is underscored with a thick crayon.
No production of "The Comedy of Errors" can be humorless, but in the case of Mr.
Rosset's staging at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, the laughs are marginal.


The Edinburgh Festival and Its Pointedly Lunatic Fringe
The curtain comes up here today on three weeks of entertainment ranging from mainstream to downright weird.
Other festivals may have more art, better opera and a larger selection of films, but only Edinburgh can boast a rapping rabbi, a Buddhist interpretation of "Peer Gynt" and a major Tchaikovsky retrospective.


Deluxe Hotel Has It All, Including Medical Staff
Last year when Goran Ivanisevic played in the Volvo International Tennis Tournament here, he stayed in a hotel where doctors and nurses are as common as bellhops and maids.
He liked it so much, he came back this year.


Hold It! Handley Wants to Go Back
The Giants' grand experiment to reshape their offensive line is dead.
Coach Ray Handley said today that he was scrapping his plan to move three starters to new positions.
Two of them, William Roberts and Doug Riesenberg, will return to their old spots on Monady.


Prime Medical Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jennifer S. Gill, David S. Fondiller
Jennifer Susan Gill, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan J. Gill of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to David Stewart Fondiller, the son of Dr.
Shirley H. Fondiller of New York and the late Harvey V. Fondiller.
Rabbi Arnold Sher officiated at B'nai Israel Synagogue in Bridgeport, Conn.


G.O.P. Moderates From Congress Don't Feel at Home
For Republicans whose views are not as conservative as those that will prevail at their party's convention this week, Houston is not a congenial place.
Many prominent ones are staying away, and some who are coming are lying low.
More than a third of the Republican members of Congress and many governors are skipping the convention.
Some, perhaps most, are doing so because they would rather spend the time campaigning or doing something else.
But others are clearly uncomfortable with the platform, particularly the uncompromising position against abortion, and the way the roster of speakers is weighted in favor of the right.


Putting Darkness to Flight, Rubiano Wins Forego Handicap
It was cloudy, dark and cold at old Saratoga Race Course today, but several stars were shining in the gloom, starting with the senior sprinting star Rubiano.
He won the Forego Handicap with a power dash through the muddy homestretch for the seventh victory in his last eight races.
The other rays were cast by his rider, Julie Krone, who won for the third time today, and his trainer, Scotty Schulhofer, who won for the fifth time in two days this weekend.


Basin Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Eve Jacobson, Chanan Kessler
Eve Maxine Jacobson, a daughter of Murray and Rosalind Jacobson of New City, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Chanan Elliot Kessler, a son of Drs.
Seymour and Hilda Kessler of Berkeley, Calif.
Rabbi Levi Lauer performed the ceremony at the New City Jewish Center.


Amylin Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSH SAYS POLITICS IS NOT MOTIVATION IN PLANS FOR IRAQ
President Bush angrily denied yesterday that he wanted to provoke a clash with Iraq to help his re-election campaign, but he confirmed that he was consulting with allies about using any means necessary to force the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, to submit to United Nations weapons inspections and to end his repression of Iraqi Shiites.
"The United States has plans to be sure that Saddam Hussein does what he is supposed to do," said Mr.
Bush, when asked if the United States was ready to use military force today to back up an anticipated request by the United Nations to inspect sensitive Iraqi ministries.
Mr.
Bush added that the Iraqi President will no longer be allowed "to dictate what can and cannot be inspected."


Electro-Sensors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brenda Mendlowitz, Mark Berman
Brenda Rachel Mendlowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome P. Mendlowitz of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to Mark Arthur Berman, the son of Selma Berman Hacker of Whitestone, Queens, and the late Elliott Berman.
Rabbi Steven Graber officiated at the Warren Hotel in Spring Lake, N.J.


Trial Puts Unwelcome Light on C.I.A.
As the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George unfolds in Federal District Court here, the Central Intelligence Agency finds itself on the kind of display it abhors.
The agency is a citadel to secrecy, its officers steeped in codes of silence and loyalty.
But the trial of Mr.
George, the most-senior agency official to be charged in the Iran-contra affair, has featured long discussions of agency procedures, the exposure of C.I.A. cables and briefing books, and often-dramatic accounts of how its senior people behaved in a crisis.


World Economies


Dubrovnik Is Prostrate but Finally Free of Shelling
Normally at this time of year, the marble-paved streets of Dubrovnik's carefully preserved Old Town are so packed with tourists that it is difficult to move.
Today, however, the historic monuments are pockmarked with shrapnel holes, and the main promenade is all but abandoned.
All of the cafes and smart boutiques are closed, and it is not even possible to buy a tourist guide to the spectacular 15th-century ruins that have made this sun-drenched town one of Europe's favorite vacation spots.
The only hotel still functioning has no electric power, a facade of windows shattered during last year's Serbian artillery attacks and a sign on the front door asking visitors not to bring automatic weapons inside.


After a Long Ascendancy, G.O.P. Seems to Falter
It is more than a quarter of a century now since the Republicans hit bottom with the humiliation of Barry Goldwater and people began saying they might never win another Presidential election.
Instead, the party of Lincoln has staged one of its greatest runs, piling up five victories while losing the White House only once, and then only when one of its members became the first President to resign.
Until a few months ago, Republicans seemed so invulnerable that some experts were saying the Democrats might never win another Presidential election.


Jill Sabin, Charles Garner
Vivien Jill Sabin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold L. Sabin of New York, was married yesterday to Charles Hugh Farkas Garner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robin L. Farkas of New York.
Rabbi David Lincoln officiated at the Essex House in Manhattan.


Hand Injury Sidelines Dykstra for the Season
Outfielder Lenny Dykstra, who fractured his left hand sliding into first base in Saturday night's 4-3 victory over the Mets, will be lost to the Philadelphia Phillies for the rest of the season.
X-rays taken yesterday morning revealed a spiral fracture to the second metacarpal bone.
He will be examined by Dr.
Phillip J. Marone, the club's physician, today in Philadelphia.
Larry Shenk, a Phillies spokesman, said Dykstra won't be placed on the disabled list until after the examination.
Dykstra's injury came in the ninth inning sliding into first base in beating out an infield hit.
He went on the disabled list on opening day when he broke his right hand and on July 3 when he suffered a pulled right hamstring.
Until last season, he had never been on the disabled list until a car accident on May 6, 1991.
Dykstra is batting .301 in 85 games with 39 runs batted in, six homers and a team-leading 30 stolen bases.
So Far, Giants Have the Votes
If the major league owners voted now on the proposed move of the San Francisco Giants to St.
Petersburg, Fla., the deal would be approved, according to a survey published yesterday.
A survey by The San Francisco Examiner found three out of 14 National League teams would vote against the deal and two of 14 American League would vote no.
The sale must be approved by 10 of 14 N.L. teams and 8 of 14 A.L. teams.
While backers of the Florida bid are pushing for a vote at baseball's quarterly meeting in St.
Louis on Sept. 9-10, Commissioner Fay Vincent said a quick vote is unlikely.
According to the survey, the N.L. teams that would oppose the deal are the Colorado Rockies, the Pittsburgh Pirates and the San Diego Padres.
The A.L. teams that would oppose the deal are the California Angels and the Texas Rangers.
The Straw Stirs
Dodgers right fielder Darryl Strawberry, facing back surgery only two weeks ago for a herniated disk, has been given clearance by doctors to resume playing as early as September.
Strawberry met yesterday with Drs.
Frank Jobe and Robert Watkins and general manager Fred Claire.
"I have to show myself, the ball club and the doctors that I can play before I can go into spring training next season," Strawberry said.
"I have to know that I won't have any problems and can continue to work and get strong through the therapy." A Rare Sight: E4's at Wrigley
Cubs second baseman Ryne Sandberg, a nine-time Gold Glove winner, made two errors in Saturday's loss to Houston.
It was only the fourth time in his career that Sandberg had made two errors in one game; the last time was against San Diego on April 29, 1989.
One-Liners
Rod Beck's saves Friday, Saturday and yesterday against the Dodgers were the first by the Giants bullpen since July 16, when Beck saved a game against the Mets in New York. . . .
Texas lost its sixth straight home game Saturday night.
The Rangers have lost 10 of their last 11 at Arlington Stadium. . . .
Darren Daulton's 21 home runs are the most by an N.L. catcher since Gary Carter had 24 for the Mets in 1986. . . .
The Brewers lead the major leagues in stolen bases with 171, showing a 70 percent success rate (171 for 245 attempts). . . .
Carlos Baerga's 75th r.b.i. gave him the most by a Cleveland second baseman since Joe Gordon had 84 in 1949. . . .
The Cubs are considering the idea of turning shortstop Shawon Dunston, out for the season because of back surgery, into an outfielder. . . .
The Pirates are 44-20 against the N.L.
East but just 22-31 against the West.


A Convention with Swing


Colonial Commercial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Interpharm Laboratories Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Trico Products Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Softball Team Seems a Natural at Winning
The Raybestos Brakettes, a women's softball team from Stratford, Conn., are clinging to a tradition.
They have played for the national championship 32 times.
Yesterday, in a double-elimination format for the championship, the Brakettes lost for the first time this season, but won when it counted: with a 1-0 victory over the Redding Rebels of California for the title.


Information Solutions reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Empire Blue Cross Has Some Really Good Friends in Albany
To the Editor:
Re your July 29 news article on the financial woes of New York's Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield:


Integral Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Peggy Z. Douglas, a Fund-Raiser And Champion of Arts, Dies at 94
Peggy Zinsser Douglas, who helped raise hundreds of millions of dollars for the arts and other charitable causes in 60 years of volunteer work, died on Saturday at her home in Tucson, Ariz.
She was 94 years old.
Her family said she died of unspecified natural causes.


Dance in Review
Trisha Brown Dance Company Damrosch Park Lincoln Center
It might have been the open feeling of a big, outdoor performance in a free city festival, or the shock of John Cage's death earlier in the day.
But all three of the works presented by the Trisha Brown Dance Company on Wednesday night at the band shell, as part of the Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival, seemed to deal in varying degrees with the public versus the private.
The dances all make use of the kind of disengaged movement style for which Ms.
Brown has become known.
All the pieces were danced, as they have been other times, without scenic elements.
Altogether, this was an evening of distanced-looking dance by superb movers plowing individual plots of space and time.


Sharing the Convention Spotlight
Richard N. Bond  The Republican national chairman will call sessions to order.


Mestek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Pop; Archie Roach's Agenda
Archie Roach's set at the Knitting Factory on Friday night packed more grim tales than the evening news.
There were stories of homelessness, alcoholism, children separated from their families and green land gone brown at the uncaring hands of progress; there were incidents of domestic violence, racial injustice, poverty of the literal sort and poverty of spirit.
Although most of his lyrics derive from the predicament of aborigines in Mr.
Roach's homeland, Australia, his songs have a sweeping, disheartening universality: "Told us what to do and say/Told us all the white man's ways," he sings in "Took the Children Away," from his album "Charcoal Lane."
Unlike television networks, though, Mr.
Roach has yet to figure out how to make bad news entertaining.
He has a warm, full voice, but he seldom uses it to express any moral or emotional dynamics.
His three-chord folk songs, played on just an acoustic guitar, vary little in tone or tempo; his only accompaniment was a vocalist, Ruby Hunter, who often echoed his melodic lines rather than adding harmonies.
Like Tracy Chapman, Mr.
Roach's causes are his gimmick.
Without them his music would be unremarkable.


Clinical Data Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Dance; Ballet de Ville, a New Troupe, at Jacob's Pillow
A man in white tie and tails dances in a romantic mist.
The night is no longer young, though there is still Champagne to be uncorked and eyes to be gazed into.
But the man -- tall, elegant and clearly eager for love -- is alone.
By the end of Peter Anastos's smart and fizzy "Footage," performed by his new Ballet de Ville company on Thursday night at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival here, the man has met his match in a beautiful and tempestuous young woman.
He and she have danced at the center of a swirl of other young romantics, dressed, as they are, in handsome evening wear.
It is a familiar scenario, but Mr.
Anastos has made it fresh again in "Footage."


More Than a Game For Londoners As 49ers Triumph
It was just another exhibition game, but for the 61,722 roisterous fans at Wembley Stadium, the arena in north London better known for the kind of football Americans call soccer, the seventh annual American Bowl tonight might have been the Super Bowl.
On the field, the San Francisco 49ers rallied to beat the Washington Redskins, 17-15, when Mike Cofer kicked a 48-yard field goal as time ran out.


First Federal of Alabama reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


After a Long Ascendancy, G.O.P. Seems to Falter
It is more than a quarter of a century now since the Republicans hit bottom with the humiliation of Barry Goldwater and people began saying they might never win another Presidential election.
Instead, the party of Lincoln has staged one of its greatest runs, piling up five victories while losing the White House only once, and then only when one of its members became the first President to resign.
Until a few months ago, Republicans seemed so invulnerable that some experts were saying the Democrats might never win another Presidential election.


Fortune Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Belden &amp; Blake reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Plains Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Leslie Ann Hill, Alec Dov Sokolow
Leslie Ann Hill, a daughter of Patricia A. Hill of Atlanta and Leslie S. Hill of Parma, Ohio, was married yesterday to Alec Dov Sokolow, a son of Diane Sokolow of New York and the late Mel Sokolow.
Cantor Debra Stein-Davidson performed the ceremony at the Southampton, L.I., home of Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the real-estate developer and publisher.


India Debates Ethics of Buying Transplant Kidneys
The sale of kidneys from people who need money to people who need transplants has developed into a multimillion-dollar business across India that is drawing recipients from Europe and the Middle East.
A sprawling network involving hundreds of doctors and other health workers, middlemen, patients and donors, India's kidney bazaar has prompted a bitter dispute among doctors who use agents to find donors, those who don't and those who favor a ban on transplants from living donors.


August Surprise?
The timing is unfortunate.
United Nations arms inspectors want access to Iraq's Ministry of Military Industrialization to search for weapons of mass destruction.
If they are denied access, American officials say the U.S. will bomb Iraq.
It's unclear what impels such an abrupt turn to confrontation.
The Administration has yet to explain what new information is so critical that it compels preparing for air strikes.


Market Place; Delayed Financial Report Shows Company in Trouble
Investors in public companies rely on audits to sleep at night.
Whatever hoopla a company may generate, the dull prose of an annual audit is a shareholder's assurance that the company's ledgers have passed the clear-headed, timely review of an independent professional.
Unless, of course, the shareholder is an outside investor in the Met Capital Corporation of Boca Raton, Fla., a small diversified company controlled by Martin Hackman, a former real estate developer, and members of his family.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Alden Press Co., 2.5 million common shares. William Blair &amp; Co.


While in Houston to Help Bush, Many Have Eyes on 1996
Squadrons of political aides will be tensely watching their candidate this week to make certain he gets the biggest possible boost from the Republican National Convention.
But many of them will have their eye not on George Bush but on one of the Republicans already angling for a run at the Presidency in 1996.
And as crucial as the convention is to Mr.
Bush, it is almost as important to the others -- Vice President Dan Quayle, Patrick J. Buchanan and Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp, to name just a few.


No Choice, or Voice
What
political
sense does it make for the Republican National Convention in Houston to accept, as it will in a few hours, such a merciless platform position on abortion?
Notwithstanding a little last-minute bow to contrary views, the platform replays the G.O.P.'s harsh past positions.
For instance, "We believe the unborn child has a fundamental individual right to life which cannot be infringed." In other words, if there's a choice between saving the fetus or the mother, the mother must die.


Taiwan Sees Less Saving
Taiwan's savings rate, though still one of the highest in the world, is expected to fall to a 17-year low this year because consumer spending has surged and capital has been moved overseas.


McFarland Energy Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


It's a Party Town, Darling!; Hollywood Comes to the Hamptons -- for a Weekend
Hollywood was supposed to invade the Hamptons over the weekend.
For the second time in three years, Michael J. Fuchs, the chairman of Home Box Office, gave a screening and soiree for 400 guests from each coast, to encourage the twain to meet at the East Hampton Cinema and for supper afterward.
For weeks before, invitees indulged the grousing that is de rigueur.
Hollywood must bemoan the frenetic East Coast social scene, its barbaric lack of amenities, its ambient and un-Zenned agita.
The Hamptons must stamp its Topsidered foot and rumple its baggy Bermuda shorts when its bucolic hamlets are stampeded by sculpted legs in Day-Glo Lycra.


Accounts
*
Pressman Toy Corp., New York, to Berenter Greenhouse &amp; Webster, New York, to handle the toy manufacturer's account, with $5 million in billlings, previously at R.D.A.
International, New York. *
Nicklaus Golf Equipment Co., Riviera Beach, Fla., to Fahlgren Martin, Atlanta, as agency of record for the golf equipment and accessories company recently formed by Jack Nicklaus.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


How Government Mismanaged Public Housing; Not Social Services
To the Editor:
"Memo to Democrats: Housing Won't Solve Homelessness" (The Week in Review, July 12) focuses on the housing positions of Nancy Wackstein, before and after her term as director of the Mayor's Office on Homelessness and Single Room Occupancy Housing in New York City.


Security Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hachette Set To Give Elle A Makeover
Gilles Bensimon, the 48-year-old creative director of Elle, is surprisingly blunt about the fashion magazine's recent troubles.
"Elle got to be boring," he said quietly in a heavy French accent, leaning back in a black leather sofa at Hachette Magazines' headquarters in Manhattan.
"Our articles are going to be more deep."
That is quite an indictment coming from a man who has worked at Elle since it burst on the American scene in 1985 by being spunkier than Vogue, putting high fashion with street fashion and emphasizing faces rather than outfit-clad figures.


Abroad at Home; The Vicar of Bray
Would George Bush really provoke a confrontation with Iraq so American bombs fall on Baghdad in the week of the Republican Convention?
The story, reported by Patrick E. Tyler in The New York Times, suggests a use of Presidential power so cynical that it makes one gasp.
But George Bush is the man who said he would "do what I have to do to be re-elected." And he is the man who in a lifetime of politics has traded every value he may ever have had for the sake of office.


The Show's No 'Dallas,' But a Soap Opera Plot May Unfold in Houston
Will Barbara and Marilyn twirl a Texas two-step to top the Hillary and Tipper jig at Madison Square Garden?
Will the Astrodome quake as a vengeful Patrick J. Buchanan recalls President Bush's "no new taxes" pledge?
Will Mr.
Bush pull the silver foot out of his mouth and deliver the speech of his political career?
While the Republican National Convention may not make for as tantalizing television as the Olympics, there will be moments worth tuning in for when the four-day spectacle opens Monday night.


Temptations Of Chocolate
Two marketers of expensive chocolates are introducing campaigns that present their products as more than thoughtful gifts.
Godiva Chocolatier and its agency, Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, both based in New York, have print ads celebrating, in a low-key fashion, the love of chocolate.
Each ad features Godiva chocolates surrounded by a golden light as shadows take unusual shapes in the background.
One, for instance, shows shadows of hands reaching into a box of assorted chocolates.
The headline reads "Now I know why we invited the Millers."


For the Bushes, Politics Is a Family Enterprise
"Family values" will be one of the main political themes of this week's Republican National Convention, and to drive home that point, convention officials plan to give plenty of exposure to President Bush's large, extended clan of children, grandchildren, siblings, spouses and cousins.
In all, 71 Bush family members will be in Houston, three more than attended the 1988 convention in New Orleans.
Some will be delegates, some will work behind the scenes on various convention matters and some will be along just for the fun.


Aerospace Publications Hurt by Military's Cuts
A big decline in Pentagon spending and economic problems in the commercial airline industry have drastically cut advertising and have forced staff cuts at aerospace publications.
The fortunes of many trade publications and of the industries they cover often rise and fall in tandem.
And as military spending is set to drop for at least the next few years, few in the aviation-publication industry see an upturn soon.


Ashe Getting Support for AIDS Foundation
ARTHUR ASHE's Foundation for the Defeat of AIDS is picking up momentum.
The drive to raise $15 million in 15 months begins Aug. 30 with a one-day tournament at the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows before the United States Open.
ANDRE AGASSI, JIM COURIER, JOHN McENROE, PETE SAMPRAS, MARY JOE FERNANDEZ, STEFFI GRAF and ARANXTA SANCHEZ VICARIO will participate, as will another female pro still to be chosen.


IIS Intelligent Information reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Deborah Krauss, Jeffrey Snyder
Deborah Jill Krauss, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin R. Krauss of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Aaron Snyder, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles B. Snyder of Lincolnwood, Ill.
Rabbi Alfredo Winter performed the ceremony at the Colonial Terrace in Cortlandt Manor, N.Y.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Monetary experts think the Fed will shun further cuts in interest rates when its Open Market Committee meets.
Despite the weak recovery, new action that could reduce the lending rate for overnight bank loans and eventually the discount rate is considered unlikely during the Republican National Convention.  [ Page D1. ]
A sharp drop on Thursday raised doubts about the future of the bond market's rally.
Although many traders and investors seemed not to be paying attention to the Presidential campaign and the Federal budget deficit, last week's one-day slump may have changed that.
News Analysis.  [ D1. ] International
Germans are awakening uneasily to the prospect of having to give up the Deutsche mark.
Their opposition could unravel the introduction of a common European currency and seriously hinder the European Community's quest for full union.  [ A1. ]
The economic rhythms in Laredo, Tex., have been set by events on the other side of the Rio Grande for 250 years.
But it is clear that few events in Laredo's colorful history would prove more epochal than the removal of high tariffs that protected Mexican commerce from competitors in the North.  [ D1. ]
The free trade agreement is a potent source of anxiety for workers rattled by recession.
But economists have reached a consensus that the negative effects of freer trade on jobs, though painful, would almost certainly be smaller than many fear.  [ D3. ] The Media Business
Profits of the U.S. version of Elle have skidded.
In response, the magazine is diversifying, including more conservative fashion coverage and a wider range of articles.  [ D1. ]
Though few newspapers are being bought and sold, prospective buyers with cash in hand are sensing that some real bargains are available from owners who need to sell.
Alex S. Jones: Press.  [ D6. ]
A big decline in Pentagon spending and economic problems in the commercial airline industry have drastically cut advertising and forced staff cuts at aerospace publications.  [ D6. ]
Two American publishers have signed up books about one of the most gruesome cases in Russia's criminal annals.  [ D6. ]
New Woman, a women's magazine that focuses on relationships, is seeking to renew its own relationship with advertisers and agencies.
Complicating that task is one of Madison Avenue's most vexatious verities: relationships between media and buyers of advertising can be as difficult as those between any quarrelsome couple.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D7. ] Today's Column
Audits usually help investors rest easy, although that is not the case with holders of Met Capital shares.
The long-delayed financial report substantially revised the company's earlier audits, noted that an important subsidiary had been forced into bankruptcy and disclosed that the chairman's family had been trading the stock for years without reporting the transactions.
Market Place.  [ D1. ]


August Surprise?
The timing is unfortunate.
United Nations arms inspectors want access to Iraq's Ministry of Military Industrialization to search for weapons of mass destruction.
If they are denied access, American officials say the U.S. will bomb Iraq.
It's unclear what impels such an abrupt turn to confrontation.
The Administration has yet to explain what new information is so critical that it compels preparing for air strikes.


Chiat/Day/Mojo To Reorganize Unit
Chiat/Day/Mojo will reorganize and restructure its North American unit, effective Sept. 1, creating a separate operating unit called Chiat/Day/ Mojo Regional to place more emphasis upon its regional accounts.
"The restructuring is designed to enhance our commitment to localized marketing for our national clients," Adelaide Horton, chief operating officer in New York, said in a telephone interview.
She added that it would also "raise the level of importance of the offices to better serve clients, like Nissan, more effectively."


Re-examining Bonds' Rally  New Questions Arise About Underpinnings
The sharp fall in bond prices on Thursday raised doubts in the markets about the future of the rally that had carried the yield on the 30-year bond to its lowest level in five and a half years.
And those doubts, in turn, are making investors think about what has actually been driving this rally and what can upset it, even though bond prices rebounded on Friday.


Commercial Programming Unlimited Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dana Ilyne Post and Jim Adler
Dana Ilyne Post, the daughter of Gary and Arleen Post of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., was married yesterday to Donald James Adler, a son of Myron and Elaine Adler of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
Rabbi Aryeh L. Gotlieb performed the ceremony at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.


MORE ON THE CONVENTION
Put Off by Conservatives, Many Moderates Stay Away
More than a third of the Republican members of Congress and many governors are skipping the convention, many because they are not comfortable with the conservative views that will dominate.
Page A7.
Protecting a Winning Streak
The Republican Party rose from the humiliation of Barry Goldwater to stage a White House winning streak of five victories and only one loss.
But there are signs that their glory days might be numbered.
Page A9.
November?
Enough Already.
What About the '96 Ticket?
Though George Bush will be the focal point of the convention, squadrons of political aides will have their eyes as well on the Republicans jockeying, however discreetly, for the 1996 Presidency.
Page A10.
Judging a Party by Its Cover
No one knows if Republicans and Democrats are created by nature or nurture.
But the differences seem to go beyond ideology: They plain look different, act different and favor different color combinations.
Page A7.


Critic's Notebook; Studying Art of Today At a Small Rural College
Last spring Bard College, 90 miles north of New York City in rural Dutchess County, completed the first phase of establishing a pioneering graduate program devoted exclusively to the study of contemporary art and culture.
The program was conceived by Bard's president, Leon Botstein, and carried out largely by two benefactors, Richard Black, a businessman, and his wife, Marieluise.
The Blacks not only put their own sizable collection of contemporary art on permanent loan to Bard as a research collection for the program, but also financed the construction of a 38,000-square-foot building to house it.
The building, the Richard and Marieluise Black Center for Curatorial Studies and Art in Contemporary Culture, was dedicated last April at an international gathering of figures from the art world.


Catholic Indians Try to Reconcile 2 Traditions
More than 1,000 American Indian Roman Catholics from across North America met here in early August for an annual celebration of unity and their dual heritage, but on the final day an angry debate over the place of American Indians in the church left the meeting in disarray.
For three days at the 53d annual Tekakwitha Conference, representatives from 60 tribes and about 500 non-Indians shared extraordinary rituals and prayer reflecting the traditions of Indian tribes and of Rome.


Review/Pop; It's a Growl or a Roar; It Shakes the Rafters; It's Neil Diamond's Voice
Nobody plays the role of pop music's storm-gatherer with more flourish than Neil Diamond.
When the star, who opened a six-performance engagement at Madison Square Garden on Thursday, shakes his fist at the sky, the earth rumbles and laser beams split the heavens.
As he strode around a revolving stage at the center of the Garden on opening night, the scowling, gray-haired star suggested a pop music Zeus, a middle-aged gladiator and a tent evangelist rolled into one.
The singer's craggy bass-baritone has always been one of pop's more rugged voices and, now that he is 51 years old, that voice has deepened into a growl that shades into a thundering roar.
Not a word issues from Mr.
Diamond's mouth onstage that isn't weighted with an oratorical self-importance.
That bombast is thumpingly underscored by his longtime band, whose thickly textured guitar and synthesizer arrangements propel a "Star Wars" grandiosity with a driving pulse that inflates clumping folk-dance rhythms with arena-rock pretensions.


Altron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


As Much of a Nation Starves, A Young Somali Grasps Life
The almost naked body of a small boy was wheeled into an outdoor center for the starving on a rickety wheelbarrow in the late-afternoon chill and placed under a tree with others lined up ready for burial.
But when Anita Ennis touched the motionless form, with the thin, bare legs caked in dirt, he opened his eyes.
Two tears crept down his sunken cheeks.


Gayle Pollack, Ivan Dolowich
Gayle Lynn Pollack, the daughter of Robert and Susan Pollack of East Northport, L.I., was married yesterday to Ivan Jay Dolowich, the son of Richard and Leslie Dolowich of Hauppauge, L.I.
Rabbi William Berman officiated at the Crest Hollow Country Club in Woodbury, L.I.


Reagan Now: Traveling, Working, Clearing Brush
Nearly four years have passed since Ronald Reagan left the White House for retirement in Southern California, but his aura lingers.
When he stopped in unexpectedly for a hamburger the other day at the Hamburg Inn on a visit to Iowa City, the young restaurant patrons erupted with enthusiasm.
When he docked at Petersburg, a remote Alaskan fishing village, during a recent weeklong vacation on a private yacht with old friends, residents greeted Mr.
Reagan like a long-lost brother.


Transactions
WEEKEND Football  National Football League
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Rich Baldinger, offensive lineman.
Canadian Football League
BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Brian Smith, defensive back.


Angeles Mortgage Investment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NFL TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Los Angeles Rams
Marcus Dupree, injured for most of his early career, seems to be hitting the stride experts forecast for him years ago.
The 28-year-old Dupree rushed for 100 yards on 22 carries on Saturday night to lead the Rams to a 19-16 overtime victory at home over the Raiders.
Though his performance came against many players who might be in the World League next year, it was a satisfying accomplishment for one of the most publicized high school stars ever.
Dupree was written off eight years ago with a serious knee injury and signed with the Rams in 1990 as a free agent.
He had seen only limited duty the past two years.
What made his performance look even better was that the Raiders rushed for only 12 yards in 14 carries, and Eric Dickerson got only 1 yard in 5 carries.
Philadelphia Eagles
In 20 minutes of play, his longest stretch since a season-ending knee injury in last year's opener, Randall Cunningham completed 7 of 12 passes for 66 yards and ran 7 yards to set up Philadelphia's first touchdown in the Eagles' 27-17 home victory over Cincinnati.
Herschel Walker plunged the final yard for that touchdown, and Reggie White returned a fumble 7 yards for a second-period score that gave the Philadelphia a 13-0 head start.
The Eagles' defense, best in the National Football League last year, had three sacks, three fumble recoveries and one pass interception.
"I think I'm pretty much on schedule," said Cunningham, who bounced right up after getting smashed to the artificial turf one time by Cincinnati linebacker Ray Bentley.
"I'm where I want to be. I'm almost where I was at this time last preseason. I need a little more time to settle in the pocket and deliver the ball." Phoenix Cardinals
Timm Rosenbach, another quarterback returning from injury, threw first-half scoring passes of 53 yards to Ernie Jones and 23 yards to Johnny Bailey, the former Bears player, in St.
Louis's 20-17 victory over visiting Chicago.
Cards Coach Joe Bugel was happy with the victory and reserved his highest praise for Rosenbach, who tore a ligament in his right knee last Aug. 21.
Rosenbach connected on 7 of 9 passes for 118 yards and even raced downfield to throw a block on a run by Phoenix's Anthony Thompson.
"I loved that," said Bugel.
"It's contagious. He understands our philosophy. If you can run, it allows you to throw the ball. And if you throw the ball, you can run." Chicago Bears
After starting the exhibition season 0-2, Chicago Coach Mike Ditka has decided to go back to two-a-day practices this week.
"I need to see improvement," said Ditka, who would not use the 112-degree temperature -- an Aug. 15 record in Phoenix -- as an excuse. 'If we can't run effectively, we can't be good," said Ditka. "This is not a team that can play catch-up ball.
I need to see improvement." San Diego Chargers
Even though he was surprised to see that the San Diego playbook bore a striking resemblance to the one he left behind in Washington, quarterback Stan Humphries still wouldn't say whether he expects to be a starter when the Chargers open the season Sept. 6 against Kansas City.
Humphries, recently acquired from the Redskins, found that the Chargers' playbook under first-year Coach Bobby Ross shows the influence of his predecessor, Dan Henning, who based it on his experience as a Washington assistant.
"It's similar, and it's going to be a lot easier than to step into a system that you know nothing about," Humphries said.
But he added: "It's not fair to walk in here and say, 'Hey, the job's mine. Hand it to me.' " San Diego is looking for a replacement for John Friesz, who tore ligaments in his knee in an exhibition loss to Phoenix and is out for the season.
Minnesota Vikings
So far, the Minnesota defense that new Coach Dennis Green was so worried about has played two American Conference playoff teams from last year, outscored them by 54-3 and hasn't allowed a touchdown.
"We're playing with the attitude that it means something," said Vikings defensive tackle Brad Culpepper, who was credited with 1 1/2 sacks in Saturday night's 30-0 victory over Kansas City.
The victory followed Minnesota's 24-3 exhibition triumph over Buffalo, the A.F.C. champion.
David Bavaro recovered a fumble for a touchdown and had a 21-yard sack of Dave Krieg, who absorbed 6 of the 7 Minnesota sacks.
Tampa Bay Buccaneers
Quarterback Vinny Testaverde not only strengthened his grip on the starting job with his 9 of 11 for 119 yards against Atlanta Saturday night, he gave Coach Sam Wyche his first exhibition victory as coach at Tampa Bay.
The Bucs had blown a 17-point lead and fallen behind by 28-24 before Testaverde relieved Steve DeBerg amid a chorus of hometown boos.
He threw for touchdowns on all three series he led.
"This may have been a blessing for us," said Wyche after the 40-28 Buccaneers victory that was started by the rookie Craig Erickson.
Mike Pawlawski also saw action.
"You've got to have more than one guy who can go in there and win for you. It's not a controversy. It's a situation. We've got to make a decision. But we've got four guys who can play in this league." Houston Oilers
Houston 2, Dallas 0.
No, that isn't a score.
It's the way the 1992 exhibition series between the two Texas teams finished.
Bucky Richardson, the former Texas A&amp;M quarterback, threw a 22-yard pass to Wade Hopkins with 31 seconds left to give Houston a 17-16 victory over the host Cowboys on Saturday night.
The touchdown pass was Richardon's sixth completion in seven attempts and capped a 72-yard drive.
Dallas Cowboys
Dallas Coach Jimmy Johnson said he was more angered by his team's slow development than by its last minute defeat at the hands of Houston on Saturday.
Dallas, 1-2 in the preseason, was penalized 11 times for 65 yards, and Johnson criticized the Cowboys' sloppiness.
"We are making too many mistakes," he said.
"We have busted coverages. We're jumping offsides. We have motion penalites. We're a better football team than that and we've got to go to work. You can put up with it a couple of weeks ago and we put up with it a week ago, but it's not very long before we have to have things put together."


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Aug. 17: MONDAY
FPL Group Inc  Genuine Parts Co  Nerco Inc  Scientific Atlanta TUESDAY


Krisch American Inns Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chronicle
The differences between Republicans and Democrats are as evident in the restaurant arena as they are in the voting booth, or at least that is what the response to a special poll conducted recently in the Washington area indicates.
Of the 1,530 people who answered a special questionnaire appended to the regular Zagat survey of consumer assessments of restaurants, 72 percent said that Republicans were likely to spend more money dining out than were Democrats.


Close-Up: The Repbulican Convention


Welcome to Houston, the Birthplace of Astroturf
PEOPLE
Houston ranks 10th among metropolitan areas, with 3.7 million people.
Houston is the fourth largest city in United States with 1.6 million people, according to the 1990 census.
Residents pay no state or city personal income tax.
The Houston Independent School District, fifth largest in the nation, has 230 schools and almost 200,000 students.
Houstonians eat out more than residents of any other city in the nation, averaging 4.2 meals out per week.
The aveage meal costs $16.
HOW'S THE WEATHER?
The record high temperature in Houston during August is 107 degrees.
Average August Temperatures Chicago: 72 Washington: 74 New York City: 75 Los Angeles: 75 Houston: 83
The average humidity in Houston in August at 6 A.M. is 94 percent, at noon is 62 percent, at 6 P.M. is 64 percent.
August rainfall averages 3.66 inches with an annual rainfall averaging more than 48 inches. (New York City averages 43 inches per year.)
Harris County, home of Houston, has about 1,500 miles of wandering bayous.
The Harris County Mosquito Control District has an annual budget of $3 million.
IT'S COOL INSIDE
Houston considers itself the most air-conditioned city in the world.
About 94 percent of homes have air conditioning.
The 1.3 million customers in the Houston area use more than 52 billion kilowatt hours of electricity a year, as against 36 billion kilowatt hours for Con Edison's 3 million customers in New York.
UNDER THE DOME
Offically, it's the Harris County Domed Stadium, but most people know it as the Astrodome, or simply the Dome.
It opened in 1965.
The roof was built with 4,596 skylights, but the sun's glare was so harsh that outfielders regularly lost fly balls.
Officials experimented with orange baseballs and sunglasses in several shades, but finally the skylights were painted over.
Less sunlight meant that grass could not grow inside the Dome, which led to the development of Astroturf.
The Dome once contained a medieval-style chapel, a barber shop, a bowling alley, a two-story Presidential suite and the Tipsy Tavern, where the floor was tilted and beers sliding down the bar were stopped by a hidden magnet.
Those features were removed beginning in 1988.


No Choice, or Voice
What
political
sense does it make for the Republican National Convention in Houston to accept, as it will in a few hours, such a merciless platform position on abortion?
Notwithstanding a little last-minute bow to contrary views, the platform replays the G.O.P.'s harsh past positions.
For instance, "We believe the unborn child has a fundamental individual right to life which cannot be infringed." In other words, if there's a choice between saving the fetus or the mother, the mother must die.


Melinda Alcosser, Patrick Smith
Melinda Susan Alcosser, the daughter of Lois and Albert Alcosser of Weston, Conn., was married yesterday in Pound Ridge, N.Y., to Patrick William Smith, a son of June Lee Smith of Seattle and the late John Edwin Smith.
Rabbi Susan Einbender officiated at the Inn at Pound Ridge.
Ms.
Alcosser, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, is a percussionist and teacher of music at the Neighborhood Music School in New Haven.
She graduated from Antioch College.
Her father is an investment consultant at Bernard Herold &amp; Company, a stock brokerage in New York.
Her mother is a freelance writer.


Crime and Ethnic Tensions Rise as Queens Neighbors Change
An angry drunk approached the park bench in Corona, Queens, where Pedro and Aurea Lousa were treating some children to an Italian ice.
He threw an empty baby stroller against Mr.
Lousa's knees, narrowly missing the infant asleep in the 65-year-old bookkeeper's lap, and erupted in a loud racist rant.
Poking a finger in Mr.
Lousa's face, he shouted, "Have some manners, do you comprende?" Mr.
Lousa quietly asked the man to "be nice," but the tirade went on until the intruder's friends intervened.


Storage Equities Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


If You're Sick and Retired
For millions of retired Americans, life's journey has turned into a potholed path.
Pension funds designed to last a lifetime are going bust or being skimmed.
An estimated 4.5 million pensioners face the probability of having their retirement medical coverage reduced or abruptly terminated.
In a survey of 1,380 companies, two-thirds said they would be cutting medical benefits for retirees.
Hardest hit are employees who took early retirement and are not yet 65 and eligible for Medicare.
In one mammoth case, 40,000 nonunion employees are suing General Motors over a proposed cut in their medical benefits.
G.M., they say, promised them almost 100 percent coverage when they left.


Convention Summary
DON'T EXPECT A CORONATION
The Republican National Convention that opens in Houston today is not shaping up as the coronation ceremony President Bush had hoped for.
A New York Times/CBS News Poll shows him 17 percentage points behind the Democratic nominee, Gov.
Bill Clinton, and many prominent Republicans are staying away -- among them more than a third of the Republicans in Congress.
Some are uncomfortable with anti-abortion language and the largely right-wing list of speakers that has been lined up.
WANTED: THAT VISION THING
Mr.
Bush heads to Houston after an extraordinary media blitz: from Time to Newsweek to ABC News's "This Week." But his strategists acknowledge that for whatever reasons they have failed to persuade Americans that the President has a vision to jump-start the economy.
Only 23 percent of the voters in the Times/CBS Poll said he had specific ideas to reverse the downturn, while 48 percent said Mr.
Clinton did.
Republicans hope the Ronald Reagan aura will help Mr.
Bush's standing with voters when the 81-year-old former President delivers the opening address in prime time tonight.
BEYOND NOVEMBER: THE JOCKEYING FOR '96
Since Mr.
Bush is guaranteed the nomination, the big question is whether he can surpass his "kindler, gentler" acceptance speech of 1988, outdo Gov.
Bill Clinton and rescue his political career.
But some Republicans have their sights set farther ahead: the jockeying for 1996 has overshadowed Mr.
Bush's own campaign.
As crucial as the convention is to Mr.
Bush, it is almost as important to potential candidates four years from now -- Vice President Dan Quayle, Patrick J. Buchanan and Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp, to name just a few.


Wendy Siegel, Max Minkoff
Wendy Jane Siegel, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward P. Siegel of Colts Neck, N.J., was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Max Michael Minkoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Minkoff of Kingston, Pa.
Cantor Wayne Siet officiated at the Scanticon.


Tria S. Goodman, William T. Case
Tria S. Goodman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Goodman of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., was married there yesterday to William Taylor Case, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Case of Simsbury, Conn.
Rabbi Charles Feinberg performed the ceremony at Vassar Temple.


Leucadia National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
In the two national knockout team championships, the Vanderbilt and the Spingold, the four semifinalists usually come from the top 10 in the original seedings.
But in Toronto last month an unheralded squad, originally seeded 71st, reached the Spingold semifinal, probably the lowest-ranked team ever to reach that stage.
The players were Jeff Schuett of Riverwoods, Ill., Kerry Smith of Milwaukee, Sangarapil Mohan of Arlington Heights, Ill., Dick Bruno of Chicago, Nicholas Hartung of Long Island City, Queens, and Kenji Miyakuni of Japan.
In one of the matches played en route to the semifinal, Hartung and Mohan sat North-South on the diagramed deal and bid efficiently to six clubs.
The two-club response was forcing, using inverted minor raises, and the subsequent jump to four spades was a splinter, showing spade shortness.


No Choice, or Voice
What
political
sense does it make for the Republican National Convention in Houston to accept, as it will in a few hours, such a merciless platform position on abortion?
Notwithstanding a little last-minute bow to contrary views, the platform replays the G.O.P.'s harsh past positions.
For instance, "We believe the unborn child has a fundamental individual right to life which cannot be infringed." In other words, if there's a choice between saving the fetus or the mother, the mother must die.


Homecall Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Janine B. Rauch and Jevin S. Eagle
Janine Beth Rauch, the daughter of Arthur I. Rauch and Roxane S. Rauch, both of New York, was married in New York yesterday to Jevin Seth Eagle, a son of Denis A. Eagle and Henny D. Eagle, both of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Arthur Hertzberg performed the ceremony at the Rainbow Room.


Paying for a Peek Under Atlanta's Dome
The country's newest domed stadium, the Georgia Dome, had its sneak preview in Atlanta over the weekend, and more than 200,000 curious people paid $1 apiece to take a look.
The event, called Roam the Dome, included such accouterments as marching bands, floats and a test to see how much noise a full house could make.


Allou Health &amp; Beauty Care reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


DNX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
"Eight months ago when I came here, the big complaint was the homeless. Now, it is smoking." -- CAPT.
WILLIAM G. CAFARO, police supervisor at the Port Authority bus terminal.  [ B4:1. ]


Review/Music; Empty Chairs In Honor Of Cage
There they were on Friday evening, as at previous Summergarden concerts in the Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Sculpture Garden of the Museum of Modern Art this season: two straight-back wooden chairs at the front of the reserved-seat section, for the composer John Cage and his longtime friend and collaborator, the choreographer Merce Cunningham.
But of course, Cage had died of a stroke two days earlier, and Mr.
Cunningham, understandably, was nowhere to be found.
The entire Summergarden season, which started on July 3, has been devoted to relatively recent works by Cage in honor of his 80th birthday, to come on Sept. 5.
Summergarden's press representative, Sheila Porter, said Cage had found that the ordinary metal mesh seats in the garden bothered his back, so the special chairs were brought in.
And there they remained, in mute tribute.


Sports of The Times; That 'Sinful Business' Remains in Business
THE report last week that Emile Griffith lay "close to death" in a hospital in Queens because of kidney damage, while a Senate subcommittee was looking into the current evils of boxing, struck a curious and tragic historical note.
Griffith is the 54-year-old former world welterweight and middleweight champion.
Thirty years ago, he killed a man in the ring.
The opponent in that welterweight championship fight was Benny (Kid) Paret.
In the 12th round, Griffith caught Paret in the ropes and pummeled him with 17 straight right-hand blows.


Port Authority Helps Homeless Find an Exit
More than a decade after New York City started grappling with a surge in homelessness, a program by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to combine police enforcement with treatment has cleared out the authority's midtown bus terminal and started to wear away the building's image as a grim example of the link between bureaucratic failure and human pathos.
Only eight months after the program's start, social workers for Operation Alternative have handled 6,000 referrals for mental illness, drug and alcohol abuse and abject poverty.


Presstek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Linda Laubenstein, 45, Physician And Leader in Detection of AIDS
Linda J. Laubenstein, a Manhattan physician who in 1981 discovered some of the first mysterious cases of what became the worldwide AIDS epidemic, died on Saturday at her summer home in Chatham, Mass., on Cape Cod.
She was 45 years old.
Her family said an autopsy was pending.
She suffered from severe asthma and weakness from childhood polio, an illness that required three major operations and left her a paraplegic at the age of 5.


Television Coverage
Live Network Broadcasts ABC (Channel 7 in New York)
MONDAY 9:30 P.M. to 11 P.M.; TUESDAY AND WEDNESDAY 10 P.M. to 11 P.M.; THURSDAY 9 P.M. to 11 P.M.
CBS (Channel 2 in New York)
MONDAY 9:30 P.M. to 11 P.M.; TUESDAY 10 P.M. to 11 P.M.; WEDNESDAY 10 P.M. to 12:15 A.M.; THURSDAY 9 P.M. to 11 P.M.
NBC (Channel 4 in New York)
MONDAY-WEDNESDAY 10 P.M. to 11 P.M.; THURSDAY 9:30 P.M. through the last event of the night.
PBS (Channel 13 in New York)
MONDAY-THURSDAY 8 P.M. to the final gavel. (PBS's broadcasts Monday through Wednesday from 8 P.M. to 10 P.M. and Thursday from 8 P.M to 9:30 P.M. will be produced jointly with NBC.) Other Networks
UNIVISION (UHF Channel 41 in the New York area)
The Spanish-language network will broadcast the convention with simultaneous translation to Spanish.
MONDAY 10 to 11 P.M.; TUESDAY-WEDNESDAY 11 P.M. to midnight; THURSDAY 9:30 P.M. to the final gavel.
CABLE NEWS NETWORK (Channel varies by cable system)
MONDAY-TUESDAY 11 A.M. to 1 P.M.; MONDAY-THURSDAY 8 P.M. to 11 P.M.
C-SPAN (Channel varies by cable system)
MONDAY-THURSDAY Gavel-to-gavel coverage, or about 11 A.M to 1:30 P.M.
Monday and Tuesday, and 8 P.M. to 11 P.M.
Monday through Thursday.
COMEDY CENTRAL (Channel varies by cable system)
MONDAY-THURSDAY 9 P.M. to 11 P.M.
MTV (Channel varies by cable system)
MONDAY-THURSDAY Reports starting at 8 P.M.


Laredo, Tex., Braces for Free Trade
For the last 250 years, the economic rhythms in this town at Mexico's doorstep have been set by events on the other side of the Rio Grande.
But it is clear that few developments in Laredo's colorful history will prove more epochal than the removal of high tariffs that protected Mexican commerce from competitors in the North.
After it joined the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in 1987, Mexico slashed tariffs on American imports of shoes, apparel and soft drinks, to an average of 5 percent today from 80 percent.
Since then the Laredo economy -- dominated by warehousing, trucking and retailing businesses -- has been surging.


Forward, Back, Forward: Jets' Nagle Steps Up
Quarterback Browning Nagle tied together his two previous preseason performances in one neat package today and showed the Jets just what they can look forward to in the 1992 regular season if he is made the starting quarterback.
Nagle was accompanied by a menacing defense that shut out the Packers' offense and paved the way for the Jets' 24-7 victory over Green Bay before a crowd of 41,517 at Camp Randall Stadium on the campus of the University of Wisconsin.
The Jets improved their preseason record to 3-0.
The Packers are 1-1.


Envoys Cite Basis for U.N. Action
Any military intervention stemming from a confrontation between United Nations arms inspectors and Iraq is fully covered by the cease-fire agreement that ended the Persian Gulf war, diplomats at the United Nations said yesterday.
The last paragraph of the agreement empowers Security Council members to take "such action as may be required for the implementation of this resolution and to secure peace and security in the area."


Seles Is Also Quieted By a Crisp Navratilova
Monica Seles, minus her patented acoustics, shanked about every third shot here today.
Martina Navratilova, 17 years older, discarded Seles with such aplomb -- 6-4, 6-2 in 58 minutes at the Virgina Slims of Los Angeles -- there is gaining suspicion that the world's No. 1 female player needs to grunt to play well.
Navratilova hit dervish second-serve aces, lost a mere 11 points over all on her serve, never faced a break point and left with her 160th career tournament victory.
She either served maniacal spins to pull Seles wide or she froze her with flat ones to Seles's body.
Navratilova, who moved from No. 4 to No. 3 in the ranking, was so much like a crafty pitcher, she showed up at the post-match news conference with an elbow and wrist buried in ice.
Going Strong at 35


Bush Trails, to Varying Degrees, in 3 Polls
Three new nationwide polls before the Republican National Convention show Gov.
Bill Clinton's lead over President Bush to range from 17 to 23 percentage points, but the polls disagree whether that advantage has increased or eroded since the Democratic convention in July.
The Los Angeles Times Poll of 1,146 registered voters, taken Wednesday through Friday, showed Mr.
Clinton preferred by 56 percent and Mr.
Bush preferred by 33 percent.
That 23-point advantage represented a slight widening from the 20-point Democratic advantage in a Los Angeles Times poll at the end of the Democratic convention.


INSIDE
Trade Along the Border
The economic rhythm is changing in Laredo, Tex., as the city on the Rio Grande moves to take advantage of opportunities from the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Page D1.
Risk of Razing Missile Silos
South Dakota ranchers hid missiles in their pastures for 30 tense years.
Now, plans to blow up the silos have them worried.
Page A12.
Price Wins P.G.A.
Nick Price shot a one-under-par 70 on St.
Louis's Bellerive course to capture the P.G.A., his first major championship.
SportsMonday, C1


Cardiovascular Imaging reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Meredith Rush, Daniel Young
Meredith Hope Rush, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman E. Rush of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., was married yesterday to Daniel Jonathan Young, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James Young of Teaneck, N.J.
Rabbi David Feldman performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Fielder Hits the Century Mark Off Ryan
Tigers 6, Rangers 0
ARLINGTON, Tex., Aug. 16 (AP) -- Cecil Fielder homered off Nolan Ryan to become the first player in the majors to reach 100 runs batted in as the Detroit Tigers defeated the Texas Rangers, 6-0, tonight.
It was Detroit's first victory over Ryan since Aug. 13, 1979.
The Tigers had only five hits, but three of them were home runs.
The Tigers swept the three-game series and all six games this season at Arlington Stadium, where Texas has lost seven straight and 12 of 13.
Fielder's 27th home run, a 405-foot shot with two outs in the third inning, made him the first Detroit player to drive in 100 or more runs in three consecutive seasons since Hank Greenberg did it in four consecutive seasons from 1937-40.
Ryan left after walking four straight in the fifth.
He allowed all five Detroit runs in four and two-third innings, striking out five.
It was only the second-ever meeting between the 45-year-old Ryan and 39-year-old Frank Tanana, former teammates with the Angels in the 1970's and among the active leaders in most pitching categories.
Tanana (11-7) kept pace with Toronto's Dave Steib for a third-place tie in active victories with 231.
Ryan (5-6) is the leader at 319.
Royals 15, Orioles 2
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) -- Wally Joyner and Mike Macfarlane homered in the third inning and Kansas City added eight more runs in the fourth, routing Baltimore.
The Royals got 17 hits, including three each by Joyner, Macfarlane and Juan Samuel, in their highest-scoring game of the season.
Every Kansas City starter had scored by the end of the fourth inning, by which time it was 11-0.
Joyner finished with three runs batted in and George Brett drove in two runs with two hits.
Brett has 2,954 career hits and needs 46 more in 45 games to reach 3,000.
Brewers 1, Red Sox 0
MILWAUKEE (AP) -- Jaime Navarro pitched a three-hitter and outdueled Frank Viola, leading Milwaukee over Boston.
Navarro (13-8) struck out five and walked two in his second shutout and fourth complete game of the season.
Navarro, who has allowed 33 hits in 57 innings in eight starts since the All-Star Game break, did not allow a runner past second base.
Viola (10-9) is 0-4 against the Brewers in his last six starts since a 5-4 victory over them July 1, 1988.
Indians 4, Blue Jays 2 Blue Jays 6, Indians 2
CLEVELAND (AP) -- Dave Winfield homered, doubled and singled, driving in five runs, and Jack Morris beat Cleveland for the 31st time as Toronto gained a split of the doubleheader.
The Indians won the first game behind Paul Sorrento's homer.
Morris (15-5) benefited from an early six-run lead and improved to 31-10 lifetime against the Indians.
Winfield hit a two-run home run in the first inning, his 20th of the season and 426th of his career, tying him with Billy Williams for 20th on the career list.
Toronto finished Dave Otto (5-9) with four more in the second, one on Randy Knorr's first career home run and three when Winfield's bases-loaded double was misjudged by center fielder Kenny Lofton.
Mariners 8, Twins 7
SEATTLE (AP) -- Pinch-hitter Pete O'Brien singled home the winning run with two outs in the ninth inning and Seattle sent Minnesota to its ninth loss in 13 games.
The Twins blew a pair of four-run leads.
A day after Seattle beat Minnesota, 3-2, on pinch-hitter Dave Valle's single in the ninth off Mark Guthrie, O'Brien batted for Valle and gave the Mariners a victory with their final swing.
Rookie Jeff Nelson (1-4) got his first major league victory.
Shane Mack of the Twins extended his hitting streak to 21 games, second-longest in the major leagues this season, with a third-inning infield single.
A's 5, Angels 4
OAKLAND, Calif. (AP) -- Jose Canseco singled home the winning run with one out in the ninth inning and Oakland beat California for its 18th victory in 23 games.
The Athletics, who had committed only one error in their previous eight games, made four miscues in the first five innings.
Errors by first baseman Mark McGwire and pitcher Kelly Downs in the fifth inning enabled the Angels to score twice, tying the game at 4-4.
A's catcher Terry Steinbach was spiked above the thigh on a high slide by Luis Polonia, who was trying to score from third on a ball that hit in the dirt in the third inning.
Steinbach tagged him out, then left the game.
The two players exchanged harsh words after the play.


Financial Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cellular Telephone Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Banner? Try Sheet Of Rain
Two Sundays ago, David Cone called the coming two weeks "crucial" to the Mets' hopes of winning the division.
That was the day that Bobby Bonilla and Howard Johnson went on the disabled list.
Cone had just beaten the Cubs.
A visit to the division-leading Pirates was next on the schedule, followed by a return match with Pittsburgh the following week at Shea Stadium.
The Mets were five and one-half games out, and hoping.
Those two weeks are up.
They ended, almost mercifully, with a rainout yesterday afternoon at Shea on what was to have been Banner Day.
The rain was, perhaps, the nicest thing to happen to the Mets since that fateful Sunday.
Everything else went so badly that even Cone, the most talkative guy in the clubhouse, had to concede his own inability to sum up the slump.
"For once," Cone said, "I'm at a loss for words."


Father Accused of Injuring Baby
A 1-month-old Bronx boy was in "very critical" condition yesterday with a fractured skull and other injuries and his 20-year-old father under arrest in what the police termed a case of child abuse.
The infant, who was not identified by the police, was taken to Montefiore Medical Center Saturday evening by his mother and her sister.
The child had head injuries, a broken shoulder and internal bleeding, said a police spokesman, Officer Peter Friscia.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; Buyers Seek Distress Sales as Newspaper Prices Stay Low
THOUGH few newspapers are being bought and sold these days, prospective buyers with cash in hand are sensing that some real bargains are available from sellers who need -- not merely want -- to sell.
Make no mistake.
The vast majority of prospective sellers will not settle for the prices that newspapers currently bring and are hoping that an improved economy will restore newspaper prices to the glory days of the late 1980's.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
European Investment Bank, Adenauer, Luxembourg, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $1.5 billion. *
ITT Financial Corp., a unit of ITT Corp., New York, is offering $100 million of 5 percent senior notes due in 1995 at 99.50 to yield 5.182 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


After a Long Ascendancy, G.O.P. Seems to Falter
It is more than a quarter of a century now since the Republicans hit bottom with the humiliation of Barry Goldwater and people began saying they might never win another Presidential election.
Instead, the party of Lincoln has staged one of its greatest runs, piling up five victories while losing the White House only once, and then only when one of its members became the first President to resign.
Until a few months ago, Republicans seemed so invulnerable that some experts were saying the Democrats might never win another Presidential election.


AMONG THE ARABS, LITTLE ENTHUSIASM
Initial reactions in the Arab world to the possibility of United States air attacks on Iraq were overwhelmingly negative today, with several officials and experts warning that anything short of killing President Saddam Hussein would not substantially change Iraq.
Some Iraqi dissidents, who asked not to be further identified, said emphatically that military strikes against Iraq now could only "strengthen" the President.


Conceptronic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Sure, Politicians of a Different Strip
Is it genetic?
No one really knows if Republicans and Democrats are created by nature or nurture.
But as the Republican National Convention gets under way here, the evidence mounts that the differences between the parties go beyond philosophy and platform.


Jamie Kraemer, Edward Cassidy
Jamie Lyn Kraemer, the daughter of Joel P. Kraemer of Harding Township, N.J., and Ellen Chass of Fair Lawn, N.J., was married yesterday to Daniel Cassidy, a son of Edward Cassidy of Carmel, N.Y., and Mary Cassidy of Purdys, N.Y.
Judge Bernard Rudd of the Superior Court of New Jersey officiated at the Marriott at Glenpointe in Teaneck, N.J.


Crop Genetics International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Zaire's Name Change
To the Editor:
In an Aug. 6 news article on a debate in Zaire to change its name back to the Congo, you say President Mobutu Sese Seko chose Zaire as the country's name to rid it of its colonial legacy.
No mention is made that Zaire, from an African word meaning "river," was the name given to the Congo River by late-15th-century Europeans.
The country's official French name is Republique du Zaire.
The prevalent pronunciation separates "a" and "i" as in Aida.


Psychemedics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lund International Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Beth Rosenberg, Richard Rubin
Beth Lisa Rosenberg, a daughter of Irwin and Frances Rosenberg of Brooklyn, was married there yesterday to Richard Laurence Rubin, the son of Seymour and Shirley Rubin of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Nathaniel Steinberg performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.


Shermag reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Pishin Journal; From Pakistan, County Kerry Is a Lifetime Away
The Queen of Baluchistan, as she was called for many years, boasts roots not from these parched, scrub-dabbed deserts, but from the green cliffs above the Shannon River in a hamlet called Tarmons tucked away in Ireland's County Kerry.
Now, they just call her Mummy Jennifer.
"The word when I first came here -- that was 1948 --- was that the Queen gave my husband a London lady because he shot a tiger for her," recalled Jennifer Musa, her brogue rolling easily within the yard-thick mud walls of her rambling house.
"Well, that was what it was like then."


Allegations Against Slovak Are Baselesss
To the Editor:
In "After the Velvet Revolution" (Op-Ed, July 22), Josef Skvorecky distorts my past, which I described in "Paragraph: Polar Circle," published in 1991 in Slovakia.


Entangled in a Dispute, A Station Stays Empty
When Union Station opened here in 1914, 100,000 people gathered for a celebration with fireworks, speeches and a 21-gun salute.
President Woodrow Wilson called it the "Great Gate to the West."
And indeed, it was.
At the station's peak, more than 200 trains a day stopped there and thousands of people walked its corridors and dined in its elegant restaurants.
The station was the third biggest in the United States, after the old Penn Station and Grand Central Terminal in New York City; it was so big that a football game could have been played in its main section.


Chronicle
JANE and PETER FONDA visited their father's hometown on Saturday to see the house where he was born and to dedicate a stretch of road as the Henry Fonda Memorial Highway.
The acclaimed actor, who died in 1982, was born in the south-central Nebraska city of Grand Island in 1905.


Price Wins P.G.A. as Field Crumbles
Employing the solid shotmaking that is his trademark and finally making the clutch putts that have never been, Nick Price outlasted a host of faltering foes today to win the 74th P.G.A.
Championship by three strokes.
The 35-year-old Price shot a nearly mistake-free one-under-par 70 over the Bellerive Country Club course for a 72-hole total of six-under-par 278 that outpaced four others at 281: Nick Faldo, John Cook, Jim Gallagher Jr. and Gene Sauers, the third-round leader.


Fractured G.O.P. Meets as Public Voices Disfavor
Battered by political events and months of disorganization in President Bush's re-election drive, Republicans assembled here today for their national convention in a mood of striking uncertainty for a party that has held the White House for the last 12 years.
The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll outlines the daunting task of political rehabilitation that faces them.
Gov.
Bill Clinton, the Democratic nominee, retains a 17-point lead over Mr.
Bush.
Perhaps more important, the vast majority of American voters said there needed to be "real change" in the way things are going in this country, according to this survey.
Candidate for Change
Only 15 percent said that re-electing Mr.
Bush would bring that change, compared with 63 percent who saw that possibility under a Clinton Presidency.


Players International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bush Is Asking Allies to Support Air Action to Protect Iraq Shiites
President Bush is seeking allied support for military action in southern Iraq to protect Shiite Muslims there from air attacks by Baghdad, American and allied officials said today.
The action would be similar to the allied intervention in northern Iraq in 1991 to help protect Iraqi Kurds.
The plan seeks to uphold the humane treatment of Iraqi citizens, as required by United Nations Security Council Resolution No. 688, approved at the end of the Persian Gulf war.
But it holds the potential of deepening United States involvement in Iraq and turning loose dissident guerrilla forces that sought to overthrow the Government of President Saddam Hussein after his army was routed in Kuwait.


Arleen Einsiedler, Jeffrey Levin
Arleen Linda Einsiedler, the daughter of Samuel and Edith Einsiedler of Yonkers, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Steven Levin, a son of Morton and Eileen Levin of Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
Rabbi Andre Ungar officiated at Temple Emanuel in Woodcliff Lake.


Ms. Helbraun, Joshua Blackman
Elizabeth Helbraun, a daughter of Phyllis and Morton Helbraun of Monsey, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Joshua David Blackman, a son of Sandra Blackman of Rumson, N.J., and the late Jerome Blackman.
Rabbi Samuel Barth officiated at the home of the bride's parents.


125-Pound Woman vs. a 442-Pound Fish
During the recent United States Atlantic Tuna Tournament, an annual competition almost half a century old, GAYLEE ROBINSON hooked into a giant blue fin about 20 miles off Portsmouth, N.H.
She brought it to gaff in a remarkably swift 25 minutes and a later dockside weighing determined that the tuna, at 442 pounds, was 317 pounds heavier than the rod-and-reel operator.


Ag-Bag International Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-6  BUSH DENIES SEEKING IRAQI CLASH


Advice Doesn't Help Hillegas
The no-hitter was gone, so was the shutout, and now Shawn Hillegas needed a perfect pitch to George Bell in the sixth inning to simply keep the game between the Yankees and White Sox tied.
Matt Nokes flashed a sign and Hillegas did not acknowledge it.
He flashed it again and Hillegas did not react.
So Nokes jogged to the mound and the pitching coach, Mark Connor, emerged from the dugout to help eliminate the obvious confusion.


No Action Is Expected On Rates
Most monetary specialists believe that the Federal Reserve, ever-mindful of its reputation for independence, will shun further cuts in interest rates when its policy-making Open Market Committee meets on Tuesday for the first time in seven weeks.
New action that could reduce the lending rate for overnight banks loans and eventually even the discount rate is considered highly unlikely during the Republican National Convention, despite a recovery that is among the weakest on record.


Treasury to Auction Bills
Treasury financings are confined to the bill market this week, beginning with today's regular auction of new three- and six-month bills and followed on Thursday by an auction of new one-year bills.
By late on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.05 percent; the six-month, 3.14 percent, and the one-year, 3.24 percent.


Play It Again, Broadway
New York City is a summer music festival, as multicultural at the city itself, and all for free.
There are dozens upon dozens of outdoor performances all over town, and the calendar grows longer every year.
Some of the performers are world famous companies, like the Metropolitan Opera and the New York Philharmonic, in world famous settings, like Central Park.
Others are the not-so-famous, like the long-running Sunday concerts by the George Seuffert band in the George Seuffert bandshell, in Queens.


Acting Police Boss: Turning Grand Visions Into Reality
If Raymond W. Kelly has a public image at all, it is the one that flashes from time to time at those news conferences with the Mayor and the Police Commissioner in front of a hospital or crime scene, always from just off to the side.
He stands with his hands held tightly in front of him, his shoulders squared, his eyes unblinking, compact like a fighter ready to spring, but somehow at ease in his corner.
In his background role, Mr.
Kelly directed a department staffing analysis that formed the basis for putting 5,000 new officers on patrol as part of Mayor David N. Dinkins's Safe Streets, Safe City plan.
When disturbances broke out in Washington Heights last month, with the Commissioner away, it was Mr.
Kelly who drove himself street by street through the neighborhood where cars were burning and angry crowds were hurling bottles at police officers.
Putting Theory Into Practice


Play It Again, Broadway
New York City is a summer music festival, as multicultural at the city itself, and all for free.
There are dozens upon dozens of outdoor performances all over town, and the calendar grows longer every year.
Some of the performers are world famous companies, like the Metropolitan Opera and the New York Philharmonic, in world famous settings, like Central Park.
Others are the not-so-famous, like the long-running Sunday concerts by the George Seuffert band in the George Seuffert bandshell, in Queens.


GV Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Barbara Kazdin, Michael Adler
Barbara Kazdin, a developmental specialist at Schneider Children's Hospital in New Hyde Park, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael Robert Adler, a senior manager of management consulting at Price Waterhouse in New York.
Rabbi Arnold Marans officiated at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.


Essay; Saddam to the Rescue
George Bush always told us he would come out fighting at the Republican Convention, but he never said against whom.
It turns out his confrontation may be with his old poll-booster, Saddam Hussein.
If Iraq's dictator decides to deny America's President a televised fireworks display in Baghdad, Saddam would conduct a shell game with documents, allowing U.N. inspections of sanitized ministry buildings.
By backing down, he would make Mr.
Bush appear a strong leader.


August Surprise?
The timing is unfortunate.
United Nations arms inspectors want access to Iraq's Ministry of Military Industrialization to search for weapons of mass destruction.
If they are denied access, American officials say the U.S. will bomb Iraq.
It's unclear what impels such an abrupt turn to confrontation.
The Administration has yet to explain what new information is so critical that it compels preparing for air strikes.


Lynn Ladetsky, Marc Supcoff
Dr.
Lynn Ladetsky, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Ladetsky of Valley Stream, L.I., was married yesterday to Marc Howard Supcoff, a son of Barbara Supcoff-Heide of Long Beach, L.I., and the late Carl S. Supcoff.
Rabbi Jacob Chiger officiated at Temple Israel of Long Beach.


Today's Schedule
Order of events and speakers as provided by the Republican Party, which declined to include specific times.
8 P.M. (Eastern time) Call to order, Richard N. Bond, Republican national chairman.
* Presentation of colors.
* Pledge of Allegiance.
* National anthem by Tanya Tucker.
* Mayor Jay Kim of Diamond Bar, Calif., a candidate for United States House.
*
Representative Guy Vander Jagt of Michigan, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee.
* Sarah Flores, assistant county supervisor, Los Angeles County, Calif.
*
Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee.
* Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen of Florida.
* Kay Bailey Hutchison, Texas State Treasurer and temporary convention chairwoman.
* Senator Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming.
* Carla A. Hills, United States trade representative.
* Gov. Jim Edgar of Illinois.
* Gov. Carroll A. Campbell Jr. of South Carolina.
* Entertainment by Tanya Tucker
* Senator John McCain of Arizona.
*
Condoleezza Rice, Stanford University, former special assistant to the President for national security affairs.
* Patrick J. Buchanan.
* Former Senator Paul A. Laxalt of Nevada.
* Former President Ronald Reagan


Job Loss in Pact Is Seen as Small
The North American Free Trade Agreement is a potent new source of anxiety for workers rattled by recession and high unemployment in the United States.
But economists have reached a consensus that the negative effects of freer trade with Mexico on jobs, though painful, will almost certainly be smaller than many now fear.
If ratified, the pact will gradually phase out most United States tariffs on imports from low-wage Mexico, while knocking down roadblocks to American investment below the Rio Grande.
"People are very, very concerned about losing jobs," said Victor M. Munoz, an A.F.L.-C.I.O. organizer in California and Texas.
"It's the biggest topic."


Washington State Plans Tightest Child-Labor Law
At the drive-up window at the McDonald's restaurant in this Seattle suburb, 17-year-old Brandon MacRae is showing grace under pressure.
He greets customers with a bright "Welcome to McDonald's" and deftly fills their orders while keeping an eye on hash browns sizzling in a nearby fryer.
To his bosses, Mr.
MacRae is a model employee.
But to state labor officials, Mr.
MacRae is an overworked teen-ager whose 30-hour workweek may cut into school time this fall.
For this reason, state labor officials plan to adopt regulations that would create the nation's strictest child labor law.


Unit Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Coaching Tidbits, Just Ask Chuck Daly
In an interview last week, CHUCK DALY, the Dream Team coach who has come home to his real-world job as the Nets' new head coach, commented on several left-over issues, including MAGIC JOHNSON's level of play in the Olympics, and whether an American Olympic team made up of college players would have won the gold medal.
Daly said Johnson gave no clue as to whether he would end his retirement and play for the Los Angeles Lakers next season.
When asked about Johnson's performance, Daly said: "I didn't see any noticeable changes in Magic's play, comparing him to how he used to play before he retired. Whether he could play a full N.B.A. schedule or not would be a personal and medical decision. But in the weeks we were together, he looked good."


Marion Ames, Reform Advocate For New York Court System, 74
Marion P. Ames, a major force for court reform in New York State for 35 years and a leader in many other public causes, died on Friday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 74 years old and lived in Rye, N.Y.
She died after an operation for spinal bone cancer, her family said.


Medical Marketing Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Politics of Apology
To the Editor:
After Mary Matalin's "sniveling hypocrite" press release attack on Gov.
Bill Clinton and her half-hearted apology embarrassed the Bush campaign, you quoted an unnamed Republican senator wistfully remembering Lee Atwater, the President's negative campaign tactician in 1988 (news article, Aug. 4).
"Lee didn't have to issue any apologies," he said.


Conwest Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


How Government Mismanaged Public Housing
To the Editor:
Re "Volatile Mix in Housing: Elderly and Mentally Ill" (front page, Aug. 3): The problem is not limited only to public housing since similar admission requirements pertain to "publicly assisted housing" (Section 236 and other Housing and Urban Development supervised programs).


Children in the Mist


To Critics, 'New' Ukraine Is Just Like 'Old' Ukraine
A year after declaring independence in the aftermath of the failed coup against Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Ukraine is successfully constructing the institutions of a sovereign state, everything from a Foreign Ministry to a gold reserve for a delayed but inevitable new national currency.
The gloss of sovereignty is everywhere, like the yellow and blue Ukrainian flag.
Soldiers of the Ukrainian Army are slowly getting their new cap badges of a golden trident set into blue enamel, replacing the Soviet red star.
Lenin's huge empty pedestal, overlooking the former Square of the October Revolution (now Independence Square), is hidden by a billboard for the Innovation Commercial Bank of Ukraine.


Miss Cunningham, R. J. Wilson
Laurie Elizabeth Cunningham, the daughter of Anne and James Cunningham of Suffern, N.Y., was married yesterday to Russell Joseph Wilson, the son of Iris and Lee Wilson of Suffern.
Rabbi Louis Frishman performed the ceremony at the Woodcliff Lake (N.J.) Hilton.


Comverse Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Global Ocean Carriers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
None


Germans Love the Mark More As United Europe Gets Closer
Haunted by Nazism since World War II, Germany has had few proud symbols on which to base its sense of nationhood.
One has been its very successful soccer team.
But perhaps the most powerful emblem of the country's resurgence from ruin has been the Deutsche mark, long Europe's strongest and most stable currency.
"After Hitler, we could hardly be proud of our flag," said Gunter Grosche, a senior official at the Finance Ministry.
"The only thing to be proud of was our reconstruction, and the great symbol of this has been the mark."


Family Feud No Game for Police or Neighborhood
POLICE officers often learn the hard way the truth of Tolstoy's famous line: "Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way."
Family quarrels are among the most ticklish matters the police are asked to handle.
Each squabble is unpredictable in its own way, and the rules can shift in a flash.


Pirates' Knuckler Finds A Way to Cool Off Braves
Pirates 4, Braves 2
PITTSBURGH, Aug. 16 (AP) -- Tim Wakefield continued to baffle National League hitters with his 46-mile-an-hour knuckleball, stopping the surging Atlanta Braves on seven hits in the Pittsburgh Pirates' 4-2 victory today.
The Braves had scored 22 runs -- 14 in the first two innings -- in winning the first two games of the four-game matchup of N.L. division leaders, only to be checked on four singles by Wakefield (3-0) until scoring twice in the ninth inning.
Wakefield, who combines a fall-off-the-table knuckler with a batting practice-like 70 m.p.h. fastball, has worked at least eight innings in each of his four major league starts.
He has allowed just 10 hits and three runs in 17 innings in his last two starts, including a no-decision against the Mets last Monday.
Wakefield, one of only three knuckleballers in the majors, has propped up Pittsburgh's starting pitching with Zane Smith ineffective because of tendinitis in his pitching shoulder.
Wakefield has surrendered just 23 hits and five earned runs in 34 innings for a 1.32 earned run average.
The Pirates got a run-scoring single from Jose Lind off John Smoltz (14-8) in the second inning, then punished Atlanta's bullpen for three runs in the eighth to win for the 13th time in 16 games and the fifth time in 11 games against Atlanta.
Cardinals 5, Expos 2
MONTREAL (AP) -- Lee Smith moved into second place on the career saves list, and Tracy Woodson drove in four runs as St.
Louis beat Montreal for its fourth victory in five games.
The Cardinals also established a major league record by playing their 16th consecutive errorless game.
The previous record had been set by the 1975 Cincinnati Reds.
Donovan Osborne (9-6) pitched three-hit ball for seven innings in his first start since July 26, sending the Expos to their second straight loss after a seven-game winning streak.
Woodson added his first home run since Sept. 26, 1988.
Smith's perfect ninth gave him 342 saves, breaking a tie with Rollie Fingers, who was recently inducted into the Hall of Fame.
Boston's Jeff Reardon, the career leader, has 352.
St.
Louis played the game under protest, complaining that scoreboard lighting bothered Cardinals batters.
Said Expos outfielder Larry Walker: "Are they crybabies or what? Everybody has to play with it."
Reds 12, Padres 2
CINCINNATI (AP) -- Barry Larkin had four hits and drove in two runs as Cincinnati blunted San Diego's charge on second place in the N.L.
West.
The Reds won the last two in the three-game series, leaving the Padres in third place, three games behind Cincinnati and five behind Atlanta.
Cincinnati closed within four and a half games of the Braves by beating Bruce Hurst (12-7), who had won his previous four decisions since July 16.
The Reds, who had 15 hits, scored three runs in the second and three more in the fifth off Hurst.
He lasted just four and one-third innings and was chased after Darnell Coles's two-run double made it 6-2.
Larkin is 12 for 17 (.706) in his last four games.
Cubs 1, Astros 0
CHICAGO (AP) -- Greg Maddux pitched a four-hitter for his second shutout of the season as Chicago beat Houston.
Maddux (15-9) struck out three and walked one in reaching the 15-victory mark for the fifth straight season.
It was his seventh complete game and 11th career shutout.
Rookie Brian Williams (4-4) gave up eight hits and four walks in six-plus innings.
He kept working out of trouble after the Cubs scored a run in the first inning and stranded 12 runners in the first seven innings.
Chicago loaded the bases in the first on walks to Ryne Sandberg and Andre Dawson around a Mark Grace single.
Sandberg scored when Derrick May grounded into a force play.
Giants 2, Dodgers 1
LOS ANGELES (AP) -- Robby Thompson drove in the go-ahead run with a squeeze bunt in the eighth inning as San Francisco beat Los Angeles.
It was the third straight one-run victory for the Giants, who on Monday can sweep a four-game road series from the Dodgers for the first time in the 103-year rivalry.
The Dodgers lead the majors in one-run losses with 31.
John Burkett (10-6) won his fourth consecutive start, allowing five hits in seven innings with three strikeouts and two walks.
He has given up just two earned runs in 32 2/3 innings over his last four starts.
Rod Beck got three outs for his 12th save, his third in three days.


He Skated on the Ice, Then Fell Through It
At the funeral mass for John Kordic in Edmonton last Friday, the program passed out to mourners showed a black-and-white picture of the young hockey player when he played for the Montreal Canadiens in 1986.
He was smiling dreamily and holding the Stanley Cup with another man.
Inside the program, a prayer of St.
Francis of Assisi said, in part: "When there is hatred, let me sow love. . . . Where there is despair, hope. . . . Where there is sadness, joy."


Noel Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stocks Rise in Tokyo
Stocks ended the day higher, but off the peak of earlier in the day.
The Nikkei average of 225 stocks closed up 109.3 points, or 0.74 percent to 14,929.55.
It had been up 219.19 at midday, and peaked up 302.59 at 15,122.84 in late morning.
Volume and enthusiasm remained low in the absence of fresh economic factors, brokers said.


CF Income Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gabriela Shelley, David Kravitz
Dr.
Gabriela Shelley, the daughter of Sucher Shelley and Dr.
Lore Shelley of San Francisco, was married yesterday to David Kravitz, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin L. Kravitz of Havre de Grace, Md.
Rabbi Elan Adler officiated at the Jewish Community Center in Norwalk, Conn.


New Woman To Clarify Its Identity
A WOMEN'S magazine that focuses on relationships is seeking to renew its own relationship with advertisers and agencies.
Yet complicating that task is one of Madison Avenue's most vexatious verities: relationships between media and buyers of advertising can be as difficult as those between any quarrelsome couple.
New Woman, which competes in the saturated contemporary segment of the women's magazine market, is introducing a campaign that seeks to clarify its somewhat blurry identity.
Though aimed predominantly at the ad trade, the print advertisements, created by Wills &amp; Evans Inc. in New York, New Woman's new agency, will also be exposed to potential readers, primarily women in their 30's with jobs, families and some sort of significant others.


Epigen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gallery of History Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CAPX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Concert; Delivering Early Music In Both Name and Spirit
In the mid-1970's, when the early-music movement was still focusing on early music, it seemed as if the rich Elizabethan consort repertory was likely to benefit from the kind of intensive research that the movement's advocates promised.
There was a flurry of recording activity, Renaissance bands proliferated and composers like Dowland, Byrd, Cutting and Holborne had their moments in the sun.
And then the attention of the early-music world drifted toward the Classical and Romantic eras, leaving a handful of stalwart lutanists, gambists and singers to keep the faith.
Perhaps Fretwork, a British consort of viols, is proof that there is hope for the Renaissance repertory.
The ensemble was formed in 1986, at roughly the same time Roger Norrington was transferring his affections from Schutz to Mozart and Beethoven.
In recent years, it has made several excellent recordings for the Virgin Classics label.
And on Tuesday afternoon, it made its New York debut at the Frick Collection with a fascinating, beautifully played program mostly devoted to the Elizabethans.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Steinhauer Victorious  Sherri Steinhauer made her first victory in seven years on the Ladies Professional Golf Association Tour a big one, shooting a two-under 70 yesterday in Winnipeg, Manitoba, for a two-stroke triumph in the du Maurier Classic, the last major on the women's tour.
The 29-year-old Steinhauer, who held at least a share of first place for two of the first three rounds, took a one-shot advantage into the final 18 holes and expanded it on the 6,317-yard St.
Charles course.
She birdied the first two holes, and second-place Judy Dickinson bogeyed No. 3, giving Steinhauer a four-stroke lead.
Dickinson got within a stroke of the leader by the 13th hole, but Steinhauer regained a three-shot cushion by No. 15 and held on for the victory, finishing at 11-under 277. (AP) Archer Wins Senior Event: George Archer won the first Bruno's Classic in Birmingham, Ala., by one stroke.
Archer shot a two-over 74 and finished at eight-under-par 208 on the 6,992-yard Greystone Golf Club courseto win $105,000.
Jack Kiefer and Rocky Thompson were second. (AP) AUTO RACING  Mansell Clinches Title  Nigel Mansell of Britain clinched the coveted world Formula One championship yesterday, driving his Williams-Renault to a second-place finish in the Hungarian Grand Prix in Budapest.
Ayrton Senna, the defending champion from Brazil, won the race, completing 77 laps around the twisting 2.466-mile circuit in his McLaren-Honda in 1 hour 46 minutes 19.216 seconds for an average speed of 107.157 miles an hour.
Mansell finished 40.139 seconds behind Senna for second place.
With five events remaining, the 39-year-old Mansell has 92 points.
Riccardo Patrese of Italy, his closest challenger, has 40. (AP) Gant Wins Spark Plug: Harry Gant stretched his mileage to the limit to win the Champion Spark Plug 400 at Michigan International Speedway in Brooklyn.
The 52-year-old Gant topped off his gas tank just before the halfway point in the race, during what turned out to be the final caution period of the 200-lap race.
Gant's Oldsmobile Cutlass crossed the finish line 4.94 seconds ahead of Darrell Waltrip.
Davey Allison finished fifth but was still hurting from injuries received in a crash on July 19 as well as from the emotional burden of his younger brother Clifford's death in a crash on the same track last Thursday. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  World Record Broken  Moses Kiptanui of Kenya set a world record in the 3,000 meters yesterday, covering the distance in 7 minutes 28.96 seconds at the Weltklasse meet in Cologne, Germany.
The previous mark in the non-Olympic event was held by Said Aouita of Morocco, who ran 7:29.45 three years ago, also in Cologne.
Kiptanui, the 3,000 steeplechase world champion, ran unchallenged for the last three laps, building a huge lead over two other Kenyans.
Paul Bitok was second in 7:33.28, followed by Yobes Ondieki in 7:34.18. (AP) Olympian Sets Record: Lynn Jennings, a bronze medalist in the 10,000-meter run in Barcelona, won the women's division of the Falmouth Road Race in Massachusetts yesterday, breaking Joan Benoit-Samuelson's record.
Jennings covered the 7.1-mile course in 36 minutes 13 seconds, eclipsing the mark of 36:17 established by Benoit-Samuelson in 1985.
For the men, Benson Masya of Kenya completed the distance in 31:52, one second faster than Alberto Salazar ran it in 1982. (AP)


If You're Sick and Retired
For millions of retired Americans, life's journey has turned into a potholed path.
Pension funds designed to last a lifetime are going bust or being skimmed.
An estimated 4.5 million pensioners face the probability of having their retirement medical coverage reduced or abruptly terminated.
In a survey of 1,380 companies, two-thirds said they would be cutting medical benefits for retirees.
Hardest hit are employees who took early retirement and are not yet 65 and eligible for Medicare.
In one mammoth case, 40,000 nonunion employees are suing General Motors over a proposed cut in their medical benefits.
G.M., they say, promised them almost 100 percent coverage when they left.


Galtaco reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Noise Cam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Flexsteel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


G.O.P.'s Chief Remakes Himself in Atwater Mold
The trouble with Rich Bond these days is the trouble with his party.
As he gaveled the Republican National Convention to order this morning, the 42-year-old party chairman was a mirror for many of the identity problems the Republicans are experiencing as they head into the fall campaign.


The Computer Gets Hit With a Counterpunch
Don't expect the furor raised at the Barcelona Olympics over the computerized scoring of amateur boxing to subside.
Jim Fox, who is executive director of United States Amateur Boxing, will suggest that the system be overhauled when his organization's board of governors meets in Cocoa Beach, Fla., next month.


Vessel Puts 150 Asian Migrants Ashore in Haiti
At least 150 Asians, apparently trying to reach the United States illegally by boat, landed on the southern coast of Haiti over the weekend, officials in Port-au-Prince said today.
In Washington, immigration experts said that the passengers, who were put ashore in small boats or swam to the beach at Jacmel, are probably mainland Chinese who paid Taiwanese smugglers to bring them to American territory.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Signed Ricky Greene, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed Tim McIntosh, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Dave Nilsson, catcher, from Denver of the American Association.


U.N. Official Pleads for Help for Besieged Bosnians
A senior United Nations official warned today that 200,000 to 300,000 people could die in Bosnia and Herzegovina this winter from epidemics and exposure if relief agencies did not immediately step up deliveries of food and clothing and inoculate children in the war-ravaged country.
Jose-Maria Mendiluce of Spain, special envoy here for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said in an interview that the current airlift to Sarajevo and the convoys to other besieged cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina are meeting only a fraction of the needs that will arise in just a few months.
Mr.
Mendiluce said Western governments have been slow to help, donating only 65 heavy trucks for a relief effort that he said requires 250.


Tiffany &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


K-III Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Video Industry Adding Pictures to the Sound Of Classical Music
A beautiful woman with a smoldering gaze stares down a haughty male in a bolero hat.
They are standing in what looks like a bullring, but that's not the odd part.
The man in the hat, Matthias Bamert, holds a conductor's baton, and the woman, the violinist Bettina Boller, is performing a torrid version of Maurice Ravel's "Tzigane."
The gypsy drama unfolds on Classic Visions, a line of experimental, MTV-influenced videos distributed by BMG Classics that are described as "music for the eyes and pictures for the ear." And if the execution walks a fine line line between the absurd and the sublime, it may represent the wave of the future for performing-arts videos, a small but growing segment of the video market that has begun to attract the attention of major recording companies.


Genesco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Lemke Hit in 10th Ends Pirate Magic
Braves 5, Pirates 4
PITTSBURGH, Aug. 17 (AP) -- Mark Lemke's two-out double in the 10th inning ended Pittsburgh's run of extra-inning victories as the Atlanta Braves beat the Pirates, 5-4, tonight for their third victory in the four-game series between National League division leaders.
David Justice, who broke out of a 1-for-16 slump by going 3 for 4 and scoring three times, doubled to greet Bob Patterson in the 10th.
Patterson got the next two hitters, but Lemke hit a ground-rule double over the left-center-field fence one pitch after a tape-measure drive to left field just went foul.


Information Management Tech reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Q&amp;A
New Food Allergies
Q.
Why do new food allergies sometimes develop late in life?
A.
The phenomenon is unusual, but it does happen, said Dr.
Dean Metcalfe, an allergist at the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md.
The occurrences usually have two things in common.


Aquanautics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ross Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Florence Flast, 71, Leader in Suit on U.S. Funds for Private Schools
Florence Flast, the chairwoman of the New York Committee on Public Education and Religious Liberty, died on Saturday at her home in Novato, Calif.
She was 71 years old and also had a home in Manhattan.
She died of cancer, said Blanche Lewis, the treasurer of the committee, which is known as Pearl, of which Mrs.
Flast was a national vice president.


A Few Words, Texas-Style, Before 'the Rubber Hits the Road'
This Republican National Convention being deep in the heart of Texas, speakers on the first night of the party's nominating session were trying to outdo each other with clever, folksy metaphors and sayings.
Just about everyone tried their hand at it, even the delegates.
One of the delegates loyal to Patrick J. Buchanan, Bill Dearing, a 28-year-old lawyer from Tennessee, said Mr.
Buchanan's rivals for the mantle of conservative leadership had "sold out like a bunch of kennel-fed dogs."


Unhumbled, Buchanan Backs Bush
Five months ago, Patrick J. Buchanan said President Bush was becoming "the Jimmy Carter of the Republican Party." Tonight, Mr.
Bush's standing had improved in Mr.
Buchanan's eyes: he was a "patriot and war hero."
In a tough, partisan endorsement at the Republican National Convention, the man whose relentless Republican primary challenge helped knock Mr.
Bush off stride was far from contrite.


CE Software Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Topics of The Times; A Death in Iran
Despite recurrent reports that Iran has become "moderate," persecution of members of the Bahai faith has intensified.
On March 17 a businessman named Bahman Samandari was summoned to the notorious Evin prison in Teheran, where he was secretly executed the next day.
His widow learned of his fate on April 5, when prison officials handed her what they said was a copy of his will -- but refused to tell where he was buried.


Sudden End to Testimony in C.I.A. Man's Trial
The presentation of testimony in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George ended suddenly today as the defense reversed itself and decided not to call as a witness Robert M. Gates, the current head of the Central Intelligence Agency.
The jury will begin deliberating Thursday in the case of Mr.
George, who is charged with lying to Congress and investigators about the agency's knowledge of the Iran-contra affair as it unraveled in the final months of 1986.
At the time, Mr.
Gates was Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, the No. 2 official in the agency and Mr.
George's immediate superior.


Petroleum Heat &amp; Power reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Profitable Insurer Gets Respect
While other large multiline insurance companies continue to stagger from real estate losses and weak markets, M. R. Greenberg's tightly run international empire, American International Group, last month reported results so characteristically positive that Wall Street once again greeted them with a yawn.
Many analysts take for granted that A.I.G., under Mr.
Greenberg, its chairman and chief executive, is the smartest and most successful large insurance company in America.
But on Wall Street, Mr. Greenberg is also something of a terror.


American Steel &amp; Wire Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Puritan Bennett reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pro Bono
*
Graham-Windham, New York, to Milton Samuels Advertising Agency Inc., New York, to handle the family crisis-intervention organization's account.


Executive Changes
AUTOMATIC DATA PROCESSING INC., Roseland, N.J., an independent computing service firm, named Arthur F. Weinbach executive vice president.
BALLY'S CASINO RESORT, Las Vegas, Nev., a unit of Bally Manufacturing Corp., named Darrell A. Luery president and chief operating officer.
CONVERGENT SOLUTIONS INC., Laurence Harbor, N.J., appointed Vincent Galano Sr., chairman of the board and chief financial officer of the company, to the additional responsibilities of president and chief executive officer.
DASSAULT SYSTEMES SERVICES, Paramus, N.J., a provider of engineering consulting and support services for software, named Ben R. Brewster president.
HELENE CURTIS, Chicago, a personal care company, named Jon Achenbaum director of marketing resources and strategic planning for the consumer products division.
NEW YORK GRAY LINE, New York, a motorcoach transportation, sightseeing and package tour company, appointed Charles Flateman president.


Automatic Data Processing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
The Pulse chart in the Metro Section yesterday about minority-owned businesses had an incorrect scale at its far right.
The scale was labeled correctly at the left side of the chart.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the trial of Alejandro Henriquez, who is charged with murdering a young woman and two girls in the Bronx, incorrectly described a note that was to be the subject of a handwriting expert's testimony.
The police say that Mr.
Henriquez gave the note to his nephew, not that it was found near one of the victims' bodies.


Deprenyl U.S.A. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Plans To Reduce Chip Funds
The General Accounting Office reported today that the Defense Department planned to reduce the money it provides to a consortium formed to regain American competitiveness in making computer chips, even though it is achieving most of its goals.
At issue is Sematech, a five-year-old consortium to improve American technology in semiconductor manufacturing, which has been receiving its money in equal parts from the Defense Department and 12 corporations in the computer industry.
Although the Defense Department has tried to cut its support of Sematech before, Congress has reinstated the financing.


Armanino Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


MariFarms Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.37
3.22
5.54
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.05
5.17
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.14
5.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.03
6.01
7.62
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.35
7.31
8.10
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.35
9.08
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.22
6.20
6.98
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Cheni Gold Mines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Child Abuse Is Ruled Out In Birth Case
Connecticut's highest court ruled today that a pregnant woman who injected cocaine into one of her veins as she was about to go into labor had not abused her baby, even though the child was born several hours later severely traumatized, pale and deprived of oxygen.
The State Supreme Court said in a unanimous ruling that state law gives no legal rights to the unborn and that child-welfare workers had erred in using the mother's actions before the birth in July 1989 to justify taking the baby away shortly after the birth.


BallistiVet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Micro General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lincoln's 'House Divided' Draft to Be Sold
The earliest known draft of Abraham Lincoln's "house divided" doctrine opposing slavery, written in Lincoln's hand, will be auctioned on Dec. 15 by Sotheby's in New York.
Selby Kiefer, a Sotheby's American manuscript specialist, said yesterday that the holograph, in brown ink on a single sheet of paper slightly bigger than 11 by 7 inches, has additional sentences and different wording and punctuation from the published versions of this address, one of the most provocative of Lincoln's career.
The autograph is expected to sell for $300,000 to $500,000.


Men, Will You Stand By Your Woman's Strike?; To Demand Our Due
To the Editor:
Regarding Nicky Marone's "If Women Just Stopped . . . " (Op-Ed, Aug. 2) and her call for a National Women's Strike Day, I say Yes!
After 15 years as an organization consultant specializing in diversity, I know a strike is what it will take.
Gender workshops, affirmative-action plans, mentoring programs -- all these activities leave white male managers feeling they have done their job addressing women's inequity in the workplace.
All they have really done is assuage men's guilt and raise women's expectations.
Those activities do not make systemic change.
And that is what is needed if things are going to be different.


CHRONICLE
WAYNE NEWTON, the entertainer who began his career as a child star and now epitomizes the modern Las Vegas headliner, has filed for bankruptcy.
Mr.
Newton's debts are estimated at $20 million, his lawyer in Las Vegas, Gerald M. Gordon, said.
Mr.
Gordon said the Chapter 11 reorganization petition was filed in United States Bankruptcy Court in Reno late Friday and "pretty much includes everything he has," which means his Arabian horse ranch, his mansion on the outskirts of Las Vegas and property on Lake Tahoe.


Two Killers Separated at Last by Freedom
Two murderers were bidding farewell at the gate of the Louisiana State Penitentiary at Angola, separated from the outside world by the dense thickets bordering the Mississippi and by a combined 54 years of prison time.
"I'm leaving you here, Bud," said Ron Wikberg, a lanky, sad-eyed man, newly freed after 23 years, his life term undone by a legal loophole he opened for himself.


L.J. McGinley, Fordham Ex-President, Dies at 86
The Very Rev.
Laurence J. McGinley, S.J., president of Fordham University from 1949 to 1963 and a major figure in the creation of the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, died on Saturday in Murray Weigel Hall, the infirmary for retired Jesuits at Fordham's campus at Rose Hill, in the Bronx.
He was 86 years old.
A spokeswoman for Fordham said the cause of death was old age.


Patterns
The Safari's Over
That big artificial tree is gone from the corner of 59th Street and Lexington Avenue, and the dark African-safari decor is gone from the interior of the Banana Republic store there.
The shop, which reopened Saturday after a two-and-a-half-month renovation, now has a sleek beige exterior with big, clear-glass windows and a clean modern interior to match.
The clothes, too, have lost their big-game-hunter look and are more geared to the American sportswear concept.
Beige limestone floors, rustic wooden tables, stone urns and black-upholstered chairs make an unobtrusive setting for the clothes.
The walls are hung with black and white photographs from Bruce Weber's new advertising campaign that shows casually dressed young men and women.
The street floor is devoted to men's wear and the lower level to women's, which now includes underwear as well as shirts, jeans, sweaters and skirts.


The Secret Formula: Price Kept Chin Up And His Head Down
John Daly's grip-it-and-rip-it reign as the P.G.A. champion has ended, and with it the notion that major-championship winners are as likely to come out of nowhere as anywhere else.
Replacing him is Nick Price, a respected veteran who has been everywhere professional golfers pay their dues.
Ironically, before his three-stroke victory on Sunday at the punishing Bellerive Country Club, Price was probably known best as the player whose withdrawal from the 1991 P.G.A.
Championship allowed Daly into the field at Crooked Stick.
Although the 35-year-old native of Zimbabwe had won more than $3 million in 10 seasons on the PGA Tour, he had only three victories until Sunday and a nagging reputation among insiders as a player who seemed constitutionally incapable of seizing the moment.


BUSH VOWS A TOUGH CAMPAIGN AS G.O.P. OPENS ITS CONVENTION
President Bush roared into his convention city tonight with a vow to revive his lagging re-election campaign, and Ronald Reagan bestowed his blessing as an anxious Republican National Convention began a search for its old electoral magic.
At a rally near the Astrodome, Mr.
Bush delivered a rousing attack on his Democratic opponents that suggested a bruising, hard-fought fall.
"For the next 78 days, we're going to go out and ask the people of America to answer a very simple question: Who do you trust to do what's right for the United States of America?"


U.S. Has the Heft to Act Outside U.N. Guidelines
The United States influence over the workings of the special commission to disarm Iraq is immense, diplomats here said today, and could at any time include unilateral military action by American forces.
"In theory, they should go through the Security Council first," a Western diplomat said of the American Government, "but in practice they probably don't have to."


Midwest Won't Keep Taking New York's Garbage Much Longer
To the Editor:
Having pushed Missouri and Kansas not to allow the unloading of one of the latest shipments of New York garbage in the Middle West, I wish New Yorkers to know that we in the Midwest are not unsympathetic to your dilemma as to where to put the garbage.
Yet after reviewing a report on where New York State garbage goes, I am concerned that it appears to make economic sense to continue shipping about four million tons a year of your garbage to our Midwestern landfills.
At best, interstate shipping of garbage will be a temporary solution filled with uncertainty.
Midwesterners will muster a continuous battle to stop this practice.
The flow will be interrupted occasionally, and East Coast communities can expect a few shipments to be returned unopened.


Versa Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 24


Men, Will You Stand By Your Woman's Strike?; Remember Lysistrata
To the Editor:
Nicky Marone's recommendation that women withhold work for a day to impose economic abstinence on the country harks back more than 2,000 years to a similar strategy for a different purpose ("If Women Just Stopped . . .," Op-Ed, Aug. 2).


Hot Angelenos Gaze Longingly at Beaches' Forbidden Waves
It is the season in Southern California when the mind turns to beaches and escape.
Teen-agers elude their parents' scrutiny, inner-city residents leave behind their mean streets, office workers let stress melt away under a layer of sun block, and millions of people flee the oppressive reign of heat and smog in the inland valleys.
For the last few days, however, the grim realities of modern life have not been so easily left behind with a quick trip to the sand and surf.
Since Saturday, swimming has been prohibited along a five-mile stretch of two of Los Angeles's most popular beaches, Venice and the neighboring Playa del Rey, because of dangerous levels of bacteria in the water.


Bill Walsh Goes Home Again to Coach Stanford
Morning, on the first day of practice.
The sun is up, there is still dew on the grass and Bill Walsh is watching things from a distance, looking at names and numbers on a piece of paper, strolling from one group of activity to the next, taking notes in his mind and then moving along, quietly.
Everything seems perfect.
The embrace of a new day, the feel of a new team, the start of a new challenge.


Addvantage Media reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reading Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Campaigns
*
A 100-foot-long sign welcoming visitors to New York on behalf of British Airways will appear on a pedestrian bridge on the Van Wyck Expressway near Kennedy International Airport, on the first outdoor advertising sign to be built on terminal property.
It was produced by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, and rented by Sky Sites Inc., New York.


Miscellany
*
Coors Brewing Co. said yesterday that it would have no comment on a countersuit filed Friday by Anheuser-Busch Inc. in the two beer brewers' battle over advertising.
The countersuit, which asked that Coors be prevented from using its famous Rocky Mountain water imagery in advertising for its brands, followed a suit Coors had filed against Anheuser over commercials for Anheuser's Natural Light that disparaged Coors Light.
A Federal District Court in New York is expected to rule tomorrow on Coors's suit.


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 24


Republicans Present Marilyn Quayle As a Self-Sacrificing 90's Supermom
In the Republican Party, Marilyn Quayle is seen as having one special gift: she is the Un-Hillary.
At a time when Republicans have portrayed Gov.
Bill Clinton's wife, Hillary, as a radical feminist in demure Talbot's clothing, Mrs.
Quayle is making a virtue of something she used to describe with occasional bitterness -- giving up her own legal career.


Kidder Picks 2 For Banking
After months of uncertainty, Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company yesterday named two longtime executives to run its investment banking operation after the abrupt departure in May of the division's former head, Scott C. Newquist.
Changes under the new co-heads, C. Edward Midgley and David M. McAuliffe, were already evident yesterday, as Kidder dismissed 14 professionals in its 365-member investment banking department, executives with the firm said.


Kushner-Locke Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Care Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Import Rice? Japan Thinks the Unthinkable
At a time when it is resisting international calls to open its market to imports of rice, Japan has an embarrassing problem -- a rice shortage.
The shortage, while not affecting consumers much, has more than doubled the prices being paid for rice by Japanese manufacturers of rice crackers, miso, sake and other foods and beverages.
And these companies, which have a much greater financial interest in the price of rice than consumers do, are beginning to think the once unthinkable: maybe imports should be allowed.


SportsTown Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Boston Pacific Medical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lexington Precision Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cambodia Pact Founders on Attacks and Distrust
Nearly a year after the United Nations brokered a peace accord intended to end Cambodia's decades of bloodshed and terror, the settlement is under threat of collapse because of the refusal of the Khmer Rouge to disarm their tens of thousands of rebel soldiers.
Some diplomats and Cambodians remain hopeful that the Maoist-inspired Khmer Rouge will begin at least a partial disarmament in time for elections next spring, but no one can be certain of the intentions of the secretive group.


Plants Defy Microbes With Immune Defense And Self-Mutilation
IN a culture obsessed with every ache and flutter of the human body, plant pathologists have long been consigned to the boondocks of biology, their work viewed as being of interest largely to farmers and forest rangers.
Now, however, that narrow view is changing, and researchers who study plant diseases and plants' astonishing defenses against attack are unexpectedly finding themselves in the scientific spotlight.
No longer is theirs a sedate profession and an oasis from the tumult of human biomedicine; instead, plant pathology has become one of the most kinetic specialties, the pace of discovery so swift that even mammalian geneticists are being forced to take note.


8 Households Get Anti-German Hate Mail
Eight Queens households, the German mission to the United Nations and several German enterprises in Manhattan have received anti-German hate mail over the last few days, with some of the letters containing bomb or death threats, the police said yesterday.
All of the letters, which the police are investigating as bias incidents, were postmarked from Rockland County and were apparently written by the same person, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
All of the letters also contained some form of drawing: either a stick figure without a head or a stick figure with blood dripping from its body, Officer McInnis said.


Study of Dioxin's Effect in Vietnam Is Hampered by Diplomatic Freeze
A 17-YEAR freeze in relations between Vietnam and the United States is hindering vital research into the long-term effects of Agent Orange and other sources of dioxin on both military and civilian populations, a New York scientist says.
"Where does this nasty stuff go, and how long does it persist?" said the scientist, Dr.
Arnold Schecter, a preventive-medicine specialist at the clinical campus of the State University of New York's Health Sciences Center in Binghamton.
His research into dioxin began in 1981, when toxic contamination was released in a transformer fire in a New York State office building in Binghamton.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Defense Department plans to cut money for Sematech, a Government-computer industry consortium formed to regain American competitiveness in making computer chips, which is achieving most of its goals, the G.A.O. said.  [ D1. ] Companies
Pfizer Inc. plans to sell a majority interest in its specialty minerals unit, which provided 5 percent of Pfizer's $6.95 billion in 1991 revenues, in a public stock offering.  [ D5. ]
Wang Laboratories class B shares lost more than half of their value, falling 87.5 cents, to 75 cents, in heavy trading, as rumors swirled that Wang might file for bankruptcy soon.  [ D4. ]
Kmart earnings rose only 3.1 percent, and Tiffany's tumbled 45.8 percent, but Toys 'R' Us had a 39.7 percent rise.  [ D4. ]
I.B.M. and Sears, Roebuck plan a joint venture to manage computer networks both for the giant retailer and customers.  [ D4. ]
Phar-Mor filed for bankruptcy protection and sued its auditor, Coopers &amp; Lybrand.
The discount drug chain has accused two former executives of massive fraud.  [ D5. ]
Chrysler appeared close to wrapping up a $6.8 billion loan agreement, which is crucial to its revitalization.
Only one of 152 banks, an unidentified one, was still declining to sign.  [ D5. ]
Home Depot plans to open a Recycling Depot in a joint venture with the British waste management concern Attwoods P.L.C.  [ D4. ]
Humana Inc. laid off 400 administrative employees because of low volume at its hospitals and health plans.  [ D4. ]
Ambase said Kohlberg &amp; Company had decided against leading a $200 million rescue of Ambase's troubled Carteret Savings Bank, based in Morristown, N.J.  [ D4. ] International
Some Japanese companies are asking that rice be imported.
The previously unthinkable position is being taken because Japan, which has resisted international calls to open its market to rice imports has a shortage that is driving up costs for makers of rice crackers, miso, sake and other foods, pitting them against Japanese rice farmers.  [ D1. ]
The Export-Import Bank of the United States plans to take over the operations of a private contractor.
The FCIA Management Company issues Federal insurance policies that protect exporters against losses if a foreign customer refuses to pay for goods.  [ D2. ]  Markets
Stock prices were mixed in light trading as market participants took a cautious view ahead of the Republican convention.
The Dow Jones average fell 4.05 points to 3,324.89, but advancing issues outnumbered declining ones by a ratio of 9 to 7.  [ D6. ]
The bond market fell as investors waited to see what kind of economic program the Republicans would outline.
The Tennessee Valley Authority issued $700 million in new 30-year bonds.  [ D13. ]
Copper futures settled sharply higher on technical factors and concern about Poland's deteriorating labor situation.  [ D14. ]  The dollar fell slightly.  [ D14. ] Today's Columns
The Islanders' new managers are hailing "the new ice age" in a marketing campaign that treats the troubled hockey team like a floundering consumer product.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D1. ]
The pharmaceutical industry is girding for attacks on the drug labeling practices of many multinational companies in Latin America, Africa and Asia.
Milt Freudenheim: Business and Health.  [ D2. ]
Interest rate futures have made a huge difference in the way financial markets function and perhaps in the way that the Government manages the Federal debt.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D6. ]


Israeli Archeologists Unearthing Treasures Of a Long-Lost City
Behind the gray tenements of this sweltering, sleepy town in the Jordan Valley, Israel's largest archeology project has unlocked the striking remains of a dazzling Roman and Byzantine city.
An earthquake that devastated the ancient town in A.D. 749 toppled and buried many of its ornate buildings and statuary, preserving them in an encasement of earth and rubble.
Now stripped of this cover, the collapsed structures are frozen in place like fallen toy building blocks, their outlines providing a blueprint for restoration work.


Kelley Oil Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Working in Public to Explain AIDS-Like Ills
The search for the cause of a mysterious AIDS-like illness is one of the rare occasions when the public witnesses scientists at work, drawing on their knowledge and technology to determine whether a newly recognized problem has important implications for the public's health.
But many of the scientists and public health officials involved in the search say they are uncomfortable about conducting their research under a spotlight, particularly when only the most preliminary and tentative findings are available for public discussions.
These investigators contend that the public knows very little about the scientific process.
They say that by holding public discussions like the meeting here Friday, scientists risk eroding public confidence by exposing the false leads and dead ends that are a standard but rarely acknowledged part of research.


U.S. Thinks Iraq Prepares For Big Push on the Shiites
The United States' proposal to protect Shiite Muslims in southern Iraq from air attacks by Baghdad comes as intelligence reports indicate that Saddam Hussein's Government is preparing to renew an air and ground offensive against the Shiites, Administration officials say.
Iraq recently sent combat planes to bases in the southern region and has also gathered ground forces there for a possible attack, Administration officials said.
One Government official said intelligence reports suggest that Iraq has been planning an attack against the Shiites, using several brigades, to be carried out in the coming weeks.
New Tack for U.S.
The Shiites, who make up about 60 percent of Iraq's estimated 20 million people, rose up against the Hussein Government after it was defeated in the Persian Gulf war.


Tipperary Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-6  U.N.
CANCELS INSPECTION IN IRAQ  U.N. inspectors in Baghdad canceled a visit to a military ministry considered off-limits by Iraq, abandoning for now a U.S. plan to demand access to sensitive sites.
A1  IRAQI AIR ATTACKS EXPECTED  A U.S. proposal to protect Shiites in southern Iraq from air attacks by Baghdad comes as intelligence reports indicate that Iraq is preparing to renew an offensive against the Shiites, the White House says.
A6  Iraq's official newspapers heaped scorn on President Bush.
A6  The U.S. heft in the U.N. could permit unilateral military action.
A6  CAMBODIA PEACE PACT IN DOUBT  Nearly a year after the U.N. brokered an accord to end Cambodia's decades of bloodshed, the settlement may collapse because of the refusal of the Khmer Rouge to disarm its soldiers.
A1  WINTER WARNING ON BOSNIA  A senior U.N. official warned that 200,000 to 300,000 people could die in Bosnia and Herzegovina this winter from epidemics and exposure if relief agencies did not immediately step up deliveries.
A3  WRONG PORT FOR 150 ASIANS  At least 150 Asians, apparently trying to reach the United States illegally, landed on the southern coast of Haiti.
A3  South Africa is reeling from the political repercussions of a rugby match.
A4  Buenos Aires Journal: A surgeon builds his dream clinic.
A4  The Convention A7-11  G.O.P.
CONVENTION BEGINS  President Bush roared into Houston with a vow to revive his re-election campaign, and Ronald Reagan bestowed his blessing as an anxious Republican National Convention began a search for its old electoral magic.
A1  BEDEVILED BY UNCERTAINTY  News analysis: George Bush arrived in Houston with the specter of a one-term Presidency and without the politically priceless air of inevitability that so enveloped Ronald Reagan in 1984.
A1  FIGHT OVER ABORTION AVERTED  The Bush campaign averted a convention-floor debate on the abortion issue by appealing for an image of unity.
Yet polls of delegates showed that few favored the rigid anti-abortion plank, and the Bush camp sought to place some distance between the President and the platform.
A10  G.O.P.
PUNCHING BAG: THE PRESS  Press bashing is an honored G.O.P. tradition, but this year, Republicans from President Bush on down are mounting an unusually bitter assault.
A7  A RARE STAR TURN FOR MRS.
QUAYLE  In 1988, Bush campaign aides tried to keep Marilyn Quayle in the background, fearing her fierce personality would overwhelm her husband's.
This year they are giving her unprecedented star billing for one major reason: Hillary Clinton.
A7  AH, YES, THEY REMEMBER IT WELL
Nostalgia swept the Astrodome as Ronald and Nancy Reagan entered, and Republicans recalled fond memories of the 1980's: Adolfo.
Ivan Boesky.
Cigarettes.
A7  Excerpts from the Republican Party's official platform.
A10  The party chairman, Richard Bond, should have identity problems.
A11  Campaign Watch: Confidence eludes G.O.P. officials on television.
A9  The Clinton campaign counters G.O.P. convention publicity.
A11  National A7-17  FREEDOM SEVERS PARTNERSHIP  For 15 years, two murderers doing time in a Louisiana prison produced the premier publication of prison muckraking, The Angolite magazine, in the process changing countless features of prison life.
Now one man is free to join his new wife, but he must leave behind his closest soulmate.
A1  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN UPHELD  A Federal district judge upheld an affirmative action plan for the City of Birmingham, Ala., that includes numerical hiring goals that were attacked by the Reagan and Bush Administrations.
A12  PUSH TO MOVE EXPLOSIVE CASE  The judge presiding over the retrial of a former Miami police officer accused in the 1989 deaths of two black men recommended that the case, which had been shifted to two other cities, be transferred again: back to the Florida capital.
A15  REVIEWING U.S.
ROLE IN 'IVAN' CASE  A Federal appeals court ordered a special inquiry into the Justice Department investigation of John Demjanjuk, who was stripped of his citizenship and sent to Israel to stand trial as "Ivan the Terrible." A16  1 BRIDGE, 1.5 MILLION BATS  Austin Journal: Thanks to a pest controller's acts of mercy and the welcoming niches of a bridge, this city is now home to the continent's largest urban colony of bats.
A12  Testimony in the Clair George trial ended without Robert Gates.
A17  Hot Californians flocked to the sand but dared not enter the surf.
A14  Metro Digest B1  INCINERATOR AGREEMENT  The Dinkins administration and the leadership of the City Council have agreed to go ahead with construction of a $550 million incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard while at the same time increasing New York City's recycling program.
A1  INSURING MINORITY WORK  Armed with a new study that shows minority-owned businesses still get a relatively small share of state contracts, New York State is resurrecting a program that requires contractors to reserve a proportion of state work for companies headed by women and minorites.
A1  Business Digest D1  Science C1-9  When childen become adults, sibling conflict may remain.
C1  Vietnam aftermath still hampers Agent Orange research.
C4  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Unearthing archeological treasures in Israel.
C11  Sports B6-13  Bonilla looks back, and ahead.
B7  White Sox beat Yankees, 4-3.
B7  Connors to play in U.S.
Open.
B9  O'Brien signs with Jets.
B7  Obituaries D19  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  The Republicans: unchanged.
What's still missing on M.I.A.'s.
Finally, help for Somalia.
Topics: A death in Iran.
Letters  Russell Baker: The way they were.
Richard Ben Cramer: Bush is down.
Now watch out.
Christopher Cox and Michael Horowitz: Congress
is
the problem.


Behind the Scenes, a Powerful Editor Lives, Breathes and Shapes His State
Mort Pye has arguably wielded more influence in New Jersey affairs over the last quarter-century than any other person, public or private.
But his name would not be recognized by the average reader of the newspaper he has edited since 1957, The Star-Ledger.
Mr.
Pye has taken pains to stay out of the spotlight, ducking interviews, almost never appearing on television, an editor who has confined his professional life to the newsroom and rarely ventured out of it.


Workin' on the Railroad
THE games go on.
Maxis, of Orinda, Calif., which turned urban planning into a computer game with Simcity and playing God into a similar diversion with Simearth, is at it again.
A-Train asks you to create a smoothly functioning railroad system.
Laying tracks and scheduling trains is not all there is to it.
With the railroad as the centerpiece, you buy land to build businesses, speculate in real estate and generally create a metropolis that could be the envy of any American mayor or, more likely, a mess too much like the real thing.


Men, Will You Stand By Your Woman's Strike?; Housework, Revalued
To the Editor:
Nicky Marone ("If Women Just Stopped . . .," Op-Ed, Aug. 2) has justified complaints about the undervaluation of women's contributions to the functioning of our economy, but her solution is shortsighted.
Women's contributions to overall production are much larger than their role in the actual workplace.
Women who work as housewives add an impressive, but statistically unrecognized, amount to the gross national product in meal preparation, care, teaching and hygiene, just to mention the most obvious services they render to the economy.


Universal Holding reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
ASEA BROWN BOVERI INC., Stamford, Conn., said its Gas Turbine Power division had received a contract, valued at approximately $133 million, from the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority for three gas turbines.
HORIZON GOLD CORP., Golden, Colo., a gold mining concern, said its board of directors had approved proposals to change the corporate name to Horizon Resources Corp. and to conduct a reverse stock split to give investors one share for every eight outstanding shares.


Will Replay Be Back in an Instant?
How soon before the clamor starts for the return of instant-replay review in the National Football League?
"One game," said Jim Nantz, one of CBS's football announcers, during the network's annual pro football seminar yesterday.


INSIDE
Drug Use, Not Child Abuse
Connecticut's highest court ruled a pregnant woman who injected cocaine as she was near labor had not abused her baby.
Page B1.
A Rice Shortage?
In Japan?
At a time when it is resisting calls to open its market to imports of rice, Japan has an embarrassing problem -- a rice shortage.
Page D1.
Backtracking in 'Ivan' Case
A Federal appeals court ordered a special inquiry into the Justice Department's "Ivan the Terrible" investigation.
Page A16.
News Unions Still Undecided
The Daily News's board embraced a proposal to acquire the bankrupt paper, but a decision hinges on the unions, which are divided.
Page B1.
Dodger Pitches No-Hitter
Kevin Gross of the Dodgers pitched the first no-hitter of the season last night as Los Angeles defeated the San Francisco Giants, 2-0.
Page B7.


Hathaway Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


PACT ON GARBAGE IN NEW YORK CITY
The Dinkins administration and the leadership of the City Council have agreed to go ahead with construction of a $550 million incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard and at the same time accelerate New York City's recycling program.
The two elements are at the core of a compromise to deal with the city's growing problem of garbage disposal -- a subject that has caused a long and bitter debate.


Today's Schedule
Order of of events and speakers for the evening session as provided by the Republican Party, which declined to include specific times. 8 P.M.
Call to order, Richard N. Bond, Republican national chairman. *
Presentation of colors by the Houston Police Department. *
Pledge of Allegiance led by Charlie Korsmo, actor. *
National anthem sung by Cara Stewart, consultant with the Disability Awareness Programs. *
Invocation by Rabbi Issac Neuman of Champaign, Ill. *
Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, House minority leader. *
Gov.
Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin. *
Education Secretary Lamar Alexander, former Governor of Tennessee. *
Commerce Secretary Barbara Hackman Franklin. *
William K. Reilly, Administrator of Environmental Protection Agency. *
Gov.
John Engler of Michigan. *
Louis W. Sullivan, Secretary of Health and Human Services. *
James D. Watkins, Secretary of Education. *
Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts *
Gaddi Vasquez, supervisor in Orange County, Calif. *
The Rev.
Keith Butler, City Councilman in Detroit. *
Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, House Republican whip. *
Jack F. Kemp, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. *
Catalina Villalpando, United States Treasurer. *
Keynote address by Senator Phil Gramm of Texas. *
Other speakers, with order to be announced: Moe Bandy, Americana Productions; Representative Gary Franks of Connecticut, Mayor Louise Gardner of Jefferson City, Mo.


A Vulnerable Incumbent  A Limping Bush Arrives at the Convention Without Reagan's 1984 Aura of Inevitability
Seemingly invincible only a year ago, George Bush returned to his adopted home town today haunted by the specter of a one-term Presidency.
Incumbency bestows manifold blessings on a President, and Presidents seeking re-election usually come to conventions with their themes set and their tactics fixed.
The odds are stacked in their favor.
But not always, and not this year, no matter how full of fight this President seemed today as he made his first appearance before the gathered party faithful.


Books of The Times; How One Tragedy Illuminates a Host of Issues
Before and After  By Rosellen Brown  354 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.
The event that divides everything into a "before and after" in Rosellen Brown's gripping new novel is a murder, the gory murder of a teen-age girl named Martha Taverner.
She has been found in a snowy field, her skull bashed in.
The chief suspect is Ben and Carolyn Reiser's 17-year-old son, Jacob, who was seen with her an hour before her death and has mysteriously disappeared.


No Defense, Few Runs, No Chance for Perez
Buck Showalter, the Yankee manager, was sick before the game and then was ejected for arguing in the first inning.
Melido Perez, the Yankeee starter, was neither ill nor removed as he pitched a complete game against the Chicago White Sox.
But Perez might have been feeling a bit queasier after his losing streak and his unfortunate season continued tonight in Comiskey Park.
The Yankees, who have not supported Perez with much offense this season, added a twist to further torture their best pitcher.
They gave away a few runs with shoddy defense and enabled the White Sox to post a 4-3 victory.


Don't Blame Sandinistas for Nicaragua Ills
To the Editor:
In "Nicaragua's Government Astir as Police and Ex-Troops Trade Fire" (news article, July 23), you state that the incident "pitted two elements controlled by the opposition Sandinista Front against each other."
Further, the struggle "seemed to reflect differences . . . that have rent the former guerrilla force since it lost power in elections in February 1990." Finally, the two Ortega brothers "seem to be following contradictory lines on the use of violence." Former President Daniel Ortega Saavedra "has seemed to encourage disgruntled Sandinistas to take up arms," while Gen.
Humberto Ortega "has sharply condemned such actions."


CHRONICLE
After just five months in retirement, FREDDIE MOORE, the jazz drummer, got itchy fingers.
He will come out on Saturday night for a one-night-only stand for his 92d birthday party at his old club, Red Blazer Too, on West 46th Street.
Mr.
Moore, who began his musical career some 80 years ago when he joined a minstrel show, has played drums for just about everybody in Dixieland, including Ma Rainey, Bessie Smith, King Oliver, Louis Armstrong and Eubie Blake.


Wang Stock Drops Again, To 75 Cents
Shares of Wang Laboratories continued to fall yesterday in heavy trading as rumors swirled that its fourth- quarter earnings report would be further delayed, that its financial relationship with I.B.M. was souring and that it might file for bankruptcy soon.
The company's class B shares lost more than half their value, falling 87.5 cents, to 75 cents, in extremely heavy trading on the American Stock Exchange.
The close represented a new low for the company and came in the wake of another low of $1.625 set on Friday.


Business and Health; Assessing Labels On Drugs Abroad
THE pharmaceutical industry is girding for a new round of attacks on the drug labeling practices of many multinational companies in Latin America, Africa and Asia.
The Congressional Office of Technological Assessment has just completed a five-year study of drug labeling in third world countries by 18 large American companies.
The findings will be reported to Congress later this year.
In a separate study, three California investigators examined the products of dozens of American and foreign drug makers.
They compared the warnings required on labels in the United States and Britain with those used on the same products in third world countries.
They found labels in the third world were often sketchy and sometimes missing references to harmful side effects.


Perceptronics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Alton H. Slagle, Reporter, 61
Alton H. Slagle, a reporter for The Daily News in New York, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan.
His sister, Jo Stone, also of Manhattan, said he died after a brief illness.
The Daily News reported that he had worked for the paper until the day before he was hospitalized two weeks ago.


Market Place; A Market Made In Hedger Heaven
RICHARD SANDOR remembers why many said interest rate futures contracts were a foolish idea.
"The criticism was that interest rates don't fluctuate enough, and so who needs to hedge?"
Mr.
Sandor, as much as anyone, can be deemed to be the father of interest rate futures, which have been trading for 15 years and now dominate the futures markets as perhaps the most successful financial product ever introduced.
The actual birthday will be Saturday, but the Chicago Board of Trade will stage its celebration on Friday, mindful that traders value their weekends.


It's War, Party Says, And the Press Is the Enemy
When George W. Bush hit the talk show circuit this morning, he had no interest in defending his father, the President, against Gov.
Bill Clinton.
He reserved his fire for another target: the press.
"What isn't right is impact journalism," he told Harry Smith on the CBS News program "This Morning," "where the press tries to use their position to hurt my dad, whether it be to hurt my dad through his kids or to hurt my dad through unbelievable allegations."


Comnet Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Saturday about efforts by the First City Bancorporation of Texas to raise money misstated the company's closing stock price on Friday.
It was $1.25.


Not Much of a Honeymoon, but Bonilla Still Wed to Mets
The honeymoon lasted less than a season, less than a few months, actually.
Willie Randolph suspected it would end up that way.
He watched Bobby Bonilla last winter.
He saw Bonilla flash his famous "Bobby Bo" smile, heard him talk about how happy he was to come home.
And he read the contract figures -- five years, $29 million dollars -- and immediately knew what kind of expectations they brought.
The question was, did Bobby Bonilla know too?


NMR of America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Table for One, Please


Moving of Courts Planned in Brooklyn
Faced with a shortage of court space in Brooklyn so severe that one magistrate holds hearings in a press room, the Federal Government is planning to move the courthouse to the landmark post office in downtown Brooklyn and build a 415-foot tower there.
The plan, according to court officials, would provide relief for an overburdened system by doubling the space available to the courts of the Eastern District of New York and consolidating an array of Federal justice agencies in one place.


2-Party Democracy Comes Screaming to Nassau
TALL wood panels line the grand meeting room of the Nassau County Board of Supervisors, suggesting an air of seriousness.
But it is only a suggestion, for democracy here carries its share of theater, if not circus.
Consider the morning George Glasel, an 83-year-old with cancer, hijacked a standing-room-only crowd from matters of sludge to the threshold of wonder.


Corrections
An obituary on Friday about Samuel A. Hausman, an industrialist and a philanthropist, omitted the name of a survivor.
She is his sister, Anne Herrmann of Fairfield, Conn.


Giants' Front Wall Gets Some Bolstering
The air was chilly and the rain incessant, but the Giants' offense found some sunshine today.
William Roberts and Jumbo Elliott returned to practice after long medical absences, and Jeff Hostetler, despite a sore elbow, threw a few passes early in practice.
This was also the first day after Coach Ray Handley ended the "permanent" shuffle of three of his five starting offensive linemen.
So instead of playing right guard, a position he disliked, Roberts went back to left guard, which he has always enjoyed.
Elliott reclaimed his job at left tackle.
Doug Riesenberg, who had filled in there, moved to right tackle, where he played last year.


Observer; The Way They Were
Convention memoirs: 1956-1992.
The nastiest convention: Chicago, 1968, Democrats naturally.
If you'd seen war combat it was probably tame.
If you hadn't, the onslaught of Mayor Daley's unleashed cops against defenseless political romantics was an astonishing spectacle.
Dangerous if you were in it.
Everybody seemed fair game for a skull clubbing, or at least arrest.
Television showed gendarmes hauling John Chancellor of NBC off the convention floor.
"This is John Chancellor, somewhere in custody," he said.
Delegates entering the hall passed through battalions of Chicago cops using their pistol butts to nail up "We Love Mayor Daley" placards.


Cunard Cites U.S. Charts in QE2 Accident
The lawyer for the Cunard Line today blamed the Federal Government for the grounding of the Queen Elizabeth 2, calling its failure to chart a 1,300-foot-long, 325-feet-wide ledge in Vineyard Sound "an aberration." But he stopped short of saying the company would file suit.
"The fact that there were rocks nobody knew about, that's why we are here today," Harry A. Gotimer, Cunard's lawyer, said in a break in the accident hearings that are being conducted by the National Transportation Safety Board and the Coast Guard.


The Economic Environment


American Chestnut Could Still Win Its Battle
PLANT pathologists hope they are on their way to one of their greatest victories, the resurrection of the magnificent American chestnut tree, a cousin of the oak and by some estimates far more beautiful.
The chestnut was long one of the dominant and most economically important hardwood trees on the Eastern Seaboard, its range extending from Maine to Alabama and west to the Mississippi.
The chestnut grew quickly and flourished in thin, rocky soil that was inhospitable to many other trees, and its wood was exceptionally resistant to rot.


Toys 'R' Us reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Classical Music in Review
Bonhoeffer Tribute  Union Theological Seminary
Last year, the Union Theological Seminary commissioned three composers to write works in honor of Dietrich Bonhoeffer, the German theologian and resistance figure who was executed in 1945 after participating in a plot to assassinate Hitler.
On Sunday afternoon in the seminary's James Memorial Chapel, the three works were given their world premieres under the collective title "Altar Triptych for Bonhoeffer."
The concert celebrated Bonhoeffer both as a symbol of moral fortitude and for his connections with the seminary.
He studied there in the early 1930's and returned briefly in 1939, before deciding that it was his responsibility to work in Germany.
There he took the dangerous position that "only those who cry out for the Jews may also sing Gregorian chant." Now the seminary is raising $2 million to endow a Bonhoeffer Chair in Theology and Ethics.


Sports of The Times; A Jewel Of a Jockey Named Smith
MIKE SMITH, one of the best-kept secrets in sports, sits on a park bench in the fenced-in yard where the jockeys relax outside their cottage at Saratoga Race Course and watches Julie Krone playing table tennis a few feet away.
Like a talent scout rating the talent, Mike Smith considers Mike Smith and reports: "He's very humble. But he can get mean at times."
One of those times may be Saturday, when Mike Smith hops up onto the back of the 3-year-old colt Furiously, who can get mean at times, too.
And if they both get mean enough, and run fast enough, they may pull off the coup of the racing season: victory in the 123d Travers Stakes, the pinnacle of the Saratoga season, the landmark race worth $1 million and a giant stride toward the championship of the classic division of racing.


Review/Music; Accepting Richard Strauss on His Terms
Standing to the side of music history, Richard Strauss is noticed out of the corner of one's eye.
He makes us uncomfortable for a number of reasons.
While 20th-century listeners seek historical coherence from a chaos of styles, and try to reconcile the sheer beauty of the music with the immoralities attached to it, Strauss holds up a mirror to our own confusions.
After the first of two weekends at Bard College called "Richard Strauss and His World," he remains as elusive a target as ever.
As gifted as any other musician of our time, Strauss greeted the 20th century at the head of music's avant-garde, practicing a harmonic language that moved relentlessly away from old ideas of consonance and dissonance.
Yet after "Elektra" (1909) came "Der Rosenkavalier" (1911) with its apparent allusions to the past and its virtual abandonment of revolution.


Iraqis Snarl at Bush: 'War Maniac' and 'Scorpion'
Iraq's official newspapers heaped scorn and insults on President Bush today, describing him variously as a "war maniac," "scorpion" and "criminal."
The tone of the press continued to suggest that Iraq scored a triumph a few weeks ago when it refused to allow international inspectors to enter the building of the Iraqi Agriculture Ministry.


Hadson Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dorothy Rodgers Is Dead at 83; Writer, Inventor and Decorator
Dorothy Rodgers, a writer, interior decorator and inventor and the widow of the composer Richard Rodgers, died at her home in Manhattan yesterday.
She was 83 years old.
She died of emphysema, said her daughters, Mary Rodgers Guettel of Manhattan and Linda Rodgers Emory of Katonah, N.Y.


Whitehall Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Navy Account Is Won by BBDO
BBDO New York said yesterday that it had retained the United States Navy account, with billings estimated at $19 million, after a mandated review.
The review, which occurs every five years, included Bozell New York ; Grey Advertising in New York; Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson in Boston; Ogilvy &amp; Mather, Houston, and Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York.


Management Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Year to April 30


Claire's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Circle Fine Art Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


National Medical Waste Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Marketing a Hockey Team As a New, Improved Product
An ambitious marketing campaign to reverse the fortunes of the New York Islanders, sponsored by the troubled hockey club's new management team, treats the franchise as if it were a foundering product and its long-suffering fans as if they were disaffected consumers.
To get fans back into the Nassau Coliseum, where the Islanders play the home opener of the 1992-93 season on Oct. 17 against the New York Rangers, a print and direct-mail advertising effort by Slater Hanft Martin Inc. will metaphorically label the team as "new and improved!" The campaign, which begins today with a print advertisement in Newsday, heralds what it calls "the new ice age."


U.S. Wants Mafia Leader Out of L.I. Trash Business
Charging that a reputed Mafia leader, Salvatore Avellino Jr., has dominated the private garbage-collection industry on Long Island for years, Federal prosecutors are trying to bar him from the industry.
The prosecutors, who described Mr.
Avellino as a leader of the Lucchese crime family, are asking the court to block him from participating in any activities "connected with the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste."


Corrections
Because of a transcription error, a front-page article on Wednesday about Kurds in Iraq described a group that won five seats in the Kurdish legislature incorrectly.
Members of the group are of Assyrian Christian descent.


Keeping Teen-Agers Smokeless; Perth Amboy Moves to Combat Cigarette Sales to Minors
One in five teen-agers nationwide is a regular smoker, a statistic that spurred this town to do more than lecture its youth about the dangers of tobacco.
As a first step, a neighborhood group sent young people out on the street to demonstrate how easy it is to find stores willing to violate state law and sell tobacco to someone under 18.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a sports article Sunday about minority-group hiring practices rendered a statement by Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, incorrectly.
The commissioner said: "Here we are, 17 years after Frank Robinson became the first black manager in the major leagues, and today, in 1992, we have only three minority managers in the major leagues, only three black assistant general managers in the major leagues and not one black general manager in the major leagues. That is unacceptable."


Park-Ohio Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Atrix Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Finally, Help for Somalia
High marks to President Bush, and to whoever nudged his pen, for ordering the Pentagon to airlift food to millions of starving people in Somalia.
What one U.S. aid official calls "the world's worst humanitarian disaster" has been caused by devastating drought and a senseless clan war that forced two million farmers from the land.
Besides the airlift, Washington will fly in 500 armed United Nations guards and seek a Security Council resolution authorizing "additional measures" to assure arrival of humanitarian relief.
The Bush Administration should have done this months ago.
Distribution has been the main problem in getting food aid to the interior and to the capital, Mogadishu, the scene of savage street warfare.
Human rights groups charge that the U.S. was dragging its feet, fearful of an election-year quagmire in the Horn of Africa; the Administration says it has long been ready to move but was waiting for the U.N. to take the lead.


William M. Cruickshank, Education Professor, 77
William M. Cruickshank, an expert on special education and mental disabilities and professor emeritus at the University of Michigan, died on Thursday at the University of Michigan Hospital in Ann Arbor.
He was 77 years old.
His family said he died from heart disease.


Pfizer Selling Off Control Of Specialty Minerals Unit
Announcing the latest in a series of strategic divestitures representing more than $1 billion in total sales, Pfizer Inc. said yesterday that it would sell a majority interest in its specialty minerals unit in a public stock offering.
Pfizer, the big New York-based diversified health-care company, said it would establish a new company, Minerals Technologies Inc., which would be headed by Jean-Paul Valles.
The minerals unit now transformed into the new company, which had $359 million, or 5 percent of Pfizer's $6.95 billion in 1991 revenues, already reports to Mr.
Valles, a Pfizer vice chairman.


Bonds Fall as Convention Opens
The bond market fell yesterday as investors waited to see what kind of economic program the Republicans would outline at their convention in Houston.
But the pause in the market, with the resulting rise in yields, has not discouraged big borrowers from continuing to lower their interest costs by recalling old debt at higher rates and issuing new notes or bonds at much lower rates.
Even with the decline yesterday, the yield on the 30-year bond is still lower than it was in Janaury.


PLM International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


G.O.P. Leaders on TV Can't Hide Nervousness
Appearing on "Meet the Press" Sunday morning, Senator Bob Dole may have been doing his best to put a positive spin on the President's re-election campaign.
But he wasn't making it look easy.
The voters "don't dislike George Bush," he insisted.
"They're just uneasy with George Bush." Nevertheless, Mr.
Dole volunteered reassuringly, the President still had a lock on some regions.
"He'll carry Russell, Kan.," the Republican Senator said, referring to his own hometown.


Snapple Narrows Agency Choices
The Snapple Beverage Corporation in Valley Stream, L.I., yesterday identified the finalist agencies in the review of its estimated $15 million account.
Jude Hammerle, Snapple's director of consumer marketing, confirmed a report this week in Adweek that the initial 10 contenders had been narrowed to the incumbent, the Marketing Communications Corporation, Essex, Conn., and to Bozell New York and Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York.
A decision is expected by the first week in September, he added.


Bridge
The most disastrous opening lead ever made in a world championship took place in Buenos Aires 31 years ago.
The occasion was the Bermuda Bowl, and the man in the spotlight was the late Eugenio Chiaradia of Italy, known as the Professor.
He was a notable theorist, who created the Neapolitan bidding system that helped his country win a string of world championships.
On this deal he held the West cards, playing against France.
In one room his teammate, Pietro Forquet, had failed in three no-trump after West had made an inspired lead of a heart.
The contract could have been made double-dummy, by maneuvering an endplay against West, but South naturally tried to make use of dummy's diamonds and wound up losing three heart tricks and two diamonds.


Excerpts Of Address By Reagan To G.O.P.
Following are excerpts from remarks
by former President Ronald Reagan to
the Republican National Convention last night as recorded and transcribed by The New York Times.
To hear them talk, you'd never know that the nightmare of nuclear annihilation has been lifted from our sleep.
You'd never know that our standard of living remains the highest in the world.
You'd never know that our air is cleaner than it was 20 years ago.
You'd never know that we remain the one nation the rest of the world looks to for leadership.


Steam Exposes Fifth Avenue to Asbestos
A 30-foot-high plume of contaminated steam billowing from an underground pipe in Manhattan exposed 12 people on East 33d Street to asbestos yesterday, coated the fronts of several buildings and forced the closing of Fifth Avenue near the Empire State Building for much of the day.
Repair crews were not allowed to lift three manhole covers and look at the damaged pipe until the asbestos had been cleaned up, a process that was still going on last night.
City officials said the first eight samples of air taken in the area contained more asbestos than the 1 percent allowed by law.
"The eight came back in the vicinity of 15 percent," said Ian Michaels, a spokesman for the city Department of Environmental Protection.


The Republicans: Unchanged
The platform that the Republican Convention adopted yesterday in Houston rings with partisan passion, but as a document to promote President Bush's campaign for re-election it lands with a disappointing thud.
Americans everywhere are grumbling over economic stagnation and long for new ideas.
This platform supplies a ritualistic roster of old ones -- dogma that's not only tired but also discredited.
By comparison, the 1992 Democratic program floats, lighter than air, on some utopian assumptions about growth.
But at least it's a program.


Men, Will You Stand By Your Woman's Strike?
To the Editor:
In "If Women Just Stopped . . ." (Op-Ed, Aug. 2), Nicky Marone suggests that women consider a national work stoppage to "draw attention to the persistent devaluation of their labor and the appalling trivialization of their needs in the workplace." Ms.
Marone acknowledges "some women might not support an action that could so alienate their employers."
Sure, many employees, both male and female, consider their financial security before participating in confrontational negotiations with their employers.
But what Ms.
Marone is suggesting is a social strike -- where one gender goes on strike to make a social point and where the consequences are quite likely to escalate beyond the financial realm.


With Just One Bank Holdout, Chrysler Loan Appears Near
With only one of 152 banks still declining to sign a $6.8 billion loan agreement, the Chrysler Corporation appeared to be very close today to wrapping up the arrangement, which is crucial to its revitalization.
An executive with the auto maker, who spoke on condition of anonymity, declined to identify the lone holdout bank.
In recent weeks, Chrysler solicited the help of Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, to persuade German central bankers to use their influence on German banks that were holding out.


Buenos Aires Journal; The Famous Dr. Favaloro Builds His Dream Clinic
Nearly 25 years ago, an obscure Argentine surgeon working in the prestigious Cleveland Clinic opened the chest cavity of a man from DeKalb, Ill., and performed what many consider a landmark operation in heart surgery: a coronary bypass.
Though not the first bypass performed, it was the first in the clinic's program to develop the procedure.
And within two years it had revolutionized heart medicine, heart specialists say.


G.O.P. Avoids an Open Debate on Abortion
The Bush campaign managed to avoid an open debate on the abortion issue at the Republican convention today by appealing to the loyalty of leaders of pivotal state delegations who themselves favor abortion rights.
Polls of delegates show that only a few favor the rigid position on abortion taken in the party's platform, and the Bush camp took pains to place some distance between the President and the platform.


Classical Music in Review
'Turandot'  New York City Opera New York State Theater
The New York City Opera's production of "Turandot," Puccini's last and most lavish work, has undergone some interesting alterations over the years.
The production, which returned to the house on Saturday evening, dates from 1975, when its principal attraction was Beni Montresor's Impressionistic sets and costumes with their peculiar juxtapositions of bright and pastel colors and of antique Orientalism and modernistic splotchiness.
In 1983, the company added a musical twist, switching from the standard shortened version of the finale composed by Franco Alfano after Puccini's death to Alfano's longer, original ending.
And last year City Opera decided that the entire piece needed a transfusion but not a complete rebuild.
Retaining Mr.
Montresor's sets and costumes, the company brought in Jonathan Eaton to restage the piece, and Shi Zheng Chen to give it fresh, ritualistically stylized choreography.
Most of the opera is seen through a scrim, and Jeff Davis's subtle lighting gives it an appropriately hazy, mythical atmosphere.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  Staten Island Little Leaguers Ousted
Chad Williams hit a three-run homer in the bottom of the sixth inning yesterday to give Ingomar of Pittsburgh an 11-8 victory over South Shore of Staten Island in the Eastern Little League tournament at Bristol, Conn.
The loss knocks Staten Island out of the double-elimination tournament.
Staten Island had tied the game at 8 on Darren Heal's three-run homer in the top of the sixth.
Pittsburgh advances to tomorrow's semifinals against the winner of today's game between Pawtucket, R.I., and Newark, Del. (AP)
TENNIS  Quick Work for Samara and Lackey
Top-seeded Tina Samara of Laurel Hollow, L.I., and second-seeded Carter Lackey of McLean, Va., scored straight-set victories in opening-round women's action yesterday in the United States National Amateur championships at Kiamesha Lake, N.Y.
The 18-year-old Samara paced the advance into the quarterfinals with a 6-4, 6-4 victory over Rachel Epstein.
Lackey, 17, swept the final four games for a 6-2, 7-5 triumph over Dana Adams.
Rain Washes Out Day of Volvo Competition: Upsets have come to be expected at the Volvo International tournament in New Haven, and yesterdayy there were plenty of people upset by a full day of rain.
Many fans tried to wait out the rain, but tournament officials finally postponed the matches after a five-hour delay.
In all, seven singles matches in the main draw and four doubles matches were postponed.
The postponements mean that all first-round singles matches must be played today, or else players will have to play two matches a day. (AP)
DIVING  Veterans Retain U.S. Platform Titles
Two Olympic medalists, Scott Donie and Mary Ellen Clark, won their second United States platform titles Sunday in the 1992 National Diving Championships at the Woodlands, Tex.
Both divers are from Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Clark, who won a bronze medal in Barcelona, topped Olympic silver medalist Joy Burkholder.
Donie, an Olympic silver medalist, beat Pat Evans.(AP)


International Telecharge reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Strober Organization Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


MORE ON THE CONVENTION
Showcasing Marilyn Quayle
In a contrast with 1988, Bush campaign aides are giving Marilyn Quayle star billing, hoping to highlight the difference between her and Hillary Clinton: both are lawyers, but Mrs.
Quayle sacrificed her career for her family.
Page A7.
Party Chief Tries New Tack
Like the Republican Party he guides, Richard Bond seems to be having identity problems.
For years a nonideological tactician, he is trying to be a fire-breathing spokesman for the party's political wing.
Page A11.


Irish Linnet Is a Winner Again But Irish Actress Falls to Third
Leo O'Brien didn't quite pull it off for the second year in a row, but he came close: Irish Actress and Irish Linnet, who swept both divisions of the Yaddo Stakes for the Austin Delaney stable last year, just missed doing it today.
Irish Actress ran third in the first division of the race, Irish Linnet won the second half.


Trottier Is Back With the Islanders
Bryan Trottier, with six Stanley Cup rings in his possession, stepped up to the microphone, looked at the audience of about 300 that included many of his friends and former teammates, took a deep breath and declared, "I'm back."
The tone of Trottier's voice indicated that a heavy burden had been removed from his broad shoulders.
He is back with the Islanders two years after he left in disenchantment, but Trottier won't be in his familiar No. 19 uniform, taking face-offs, bumping people off the puck and attempting to lead the Islanders to a fifth Stanley Cup triumph.


More Speed From an Intel Chip
THE Intel Corporation, which makes the microprocessors that are the core of tens of millions of PC-compatible personal computers, has delayed its introduction of a next-generation microprocessor until next year.
The chip, code-named the P5, is intended to be the successor to Intel's popular i386 and i486 processors.
Intel softened the disappointing news last week by introducing the fastest version yet of its i486 chip.
The new i486 DX2-66 chip uses Intel's so-called clock-doubling technology to achieve speeds of 66 megahertz, or 66 million cycles a second.
The previous speed record for Intel's i486 chip was 50 megahertz.


An Affirmative-Action Plan For Birmingham Is Upheld
After more than a decade of litigation, a Federal district judge has upheld an affirmative action plan for the City of Birmingham, Ala., including numerical hiring goals that were attacked by the Reagan Administration and by white city employees.
The Birmingham case, one of the nation's most celebrated courtroom tests of affirmative action, involves firefighters, police officers and other city employees.
It has attracted attention around the country and has already been reviewed once by the United States Supreme Court.
The High Court ruling in 1989, which allowed the reopening of job bias cases in a number of cities, was considered a major setback by civil rights advocates.


Tommy Nutter, Savile Row Tailor, 49
Tommy Nutter, a Savile Row tailor who described his clothes as a "cross between the big-shouldered 'Miami Vice' look and the authentic Savile Row," died yesterday in the Cromwell Hospital in London.
He was 49 years old.
He died from complications from AIDS, said Peter Brown, a friend who lives in New York.


Today's Television
Live Network Broadcasts ABC (Channel 7 in New York) 10 P.M. to 11 P.M.
CBS (Channel 2 in New York) 10 P.M.to 11 P.M.
NBC (Channel 4 in New York) 10 P.M. to 11 P.M.
PBS (Channel 13 in New York) 8 P.M. to the final gavel.
Other Networks UNIVISION (UHF Channel 41 in the New York area) 11 P.M. to midnight.
CABLE NEWS NETWORK (Channel varies by cable system) 11 A.M. to 1 P.M.
C-SPAN (Channel varies by cable system) Gavel-to-gavel coverage, or about 11 A.M to 1:30 P.M. and 8 P.M. to 11 P.M.
COMEDY CENTRAL (Channel varies by cable system) 9 P.M. to 11 P.M.
MTV (Channel varies by cable system) Reports at 8 P.M.


Clinton Team Challenges G.O.P. In Effort to 'Set Record Straight'
Aides to Gov.
Bill Clinton began a campaign of long-distance retaliation today, issuing sharp challenges to the Republicans to provide a counterpoint to the convention in Houston.
George Stephanopoulos, communications director for the Clinton campaign, told reporters here that President Bush should dismiss two prominent Republicans -- United States Treasurer Catalina V. Villalpando and Robert A. Mosbacher, President Bush's campaign chairman -- because both referred Sunday to Mr.
Clinton's personal life.


Daily News Unions Still Divided on Buyer
The board of The Daily News yesterday embraced Conrad M. Black's proposal to acquire the bankrupt paper, but which prospective buyer will ultimately get The News remains an open question because the paper's unions -- who are essential to any purchase -- remain very much divided.
"The unions at the end of the day hold the whip hand," said Martin E. Moleska, an investment banker at Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates, which represents Mr.
Black, owner of The Daily Telegraph in London.


Patlex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Marriott Easing Check-In
The Marriott hotel chain plans to start phasing out guests' traditional first stop at the front desk to sign a registration form or offer a credit card.
Instead, the 233-hotel chain said it would take down their credit card numbers and other information when customers made reservations over the phone.
Within five months, the company plans to have key racks behind the front desks at almost all locations.
And by the end of 1993, hotel staff at most Marriotts will hand guests their keys near the front door as they arrive.
Customers who pay cash, or do not make a reservation, will still have to visit the front desk to check in.


CHRONICLE
Skirmishes at NBC News have escalated into a war of words.
On Thursday, the network announced that ARTHUR KENT, the correspondent who became famous for his live reports during the Persian Gulf War, and a producer, JOE ALICASTRO, had been suspended without pay for refusing an assignment in Zagreb, the capital of Croatia.
The suspensions, on Thursday, coincided with the news that an ABC News producer, David Kaplan, had been shot to death in Sarajevo.
In a letter distributed to colleagues in front of NBC headquarters in Rockefeller Center yesterday, Mr.
Kent sharply criticized the network's leadership.
Accusing the management of "incivility," "brute stupidity" and "unworthiness of command," he threatened to continue his fight "in the streets, over the airwaves and through the legal system."


REPUBLICANS IN HOUSTON: THE HOUSTON THING
There they go again.
The memories came back in a rush.
Adolfo.
Ivan Boesky.
Greed.
Junk bonds.
Ketchup as a vegetable.
Designer freebees.
The Evil Empire.
Power lunches.
Brown suits.
Yellow ties.
"Cats." Cat naps.
With the return of Ronald and Nancy Reagan, nostalgia swept the hall.


Kmart's Net Up by 3.1%; Tiffany Falls
Reflecting weak confidence among bargain hunters and affluent shoppers alike, the Kmart Corporation, the nation's second-largest retailer, behind Wal-Mart Stores Inc., reported a limp 3.1 percent increase in second-quarter earnings yesterday, and Tiffany &amp; Company reported a 45.8 percent plunge in profits.
But Toys "R" Us, which sells more than 25 percent of the stuffed animals, video games, dolls and other toys sold in America, defied the depressing trend in retail earnings in the second quarter, when its profits skyrocketed 39.7 percent.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  AGREEING TO PROCEED ON INCINERATOR
The Dinkins administration and the leadership of the City Council have agreed to go ahead with construction of a $550 million incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard while at the same time increasing New York City's troubled recycling program.
Those are the central elements of a compromise plan to deal with the city's growing problem of garbage disposal -- a subject that has caused a long and bitter debate.
A1.
A NEW PLACE TO HOLD COURT
Faced with a shortage of court space in Brooklyn so severe that one magistrate holds hearings in a press room, the Federal Government is planning to move the courthouse to the two landmark post office buildings in downtown Brooklyn and build a 415-foot tower there.
B3. 30 FEET OF STEAM AND TROUBLE
A 30-foot-high plume of contaminated steam billowing from an underground pipe in Manhattan exposed 12 people on East 33d Street to asbestos, dumped asbestos on the fronts of several buildings and forced the closing of Fifth Avenue near the Empire State Building for much of the day.
B3.
AN ARREST AND AN INQUIRY
A top police official directed the department's Internal Affairs Division to investigate the circumstances surrounding the arrest last week of a Brooklyn van driver who suffered an injury while in police custody.
B3.
REGION  FIGHTING BIAS IN BUSINESS
Armed with a new study that shows minority-owned businesses still get a relatively small share of state contracts, New York State is returning to a system of requiring contractors to reserve a certain proportion of state work for companies headed by women and minorities, state officials said.
In effect, the state is returning to a program it suspended in 1989 after the Supreme Court ruled that a similar program in Virginia violated the constitutional rights of white contractors to equal protection under the law.
A1.
CRACKDOWN ON WASTE INDUSTRY
Charging that a reputed Mafia leader has dominated the private garbage-collection industry on Long Island for many years, Federal prosecutors are trying to bar him from the industry.
The prosecutors, who described Salvatore Avellino Jr. as a leader of the Lucchese crime family, are asking the court to block him from participating in any activities "connected with the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste." B5.
A MAN OF (HIDDEN) INFLUENCE
Mort Pye has arguably wielded more sustained influence in New Jersey affairs over the last quarter-century than any other person, public or private.
But his name would not be recognized by the average reader of the newspaper he has edited since 1957, The Star-Ledger.
But as a tub-thumper for New Jersey and -- not incidentally -- The Star- Ledger, he has had few peers.
B5.
Report on nursing home deaths.
B4.
Dispute over a prison guard's cross.
B4.
Our Towns by Diana Jean Schemo B5  Chronicle B4


Days Inns Says It Is in Review
Days Inns of America said yesterday that it had placed its account, with billings estimated at $8.5 million, in a review as part of a companywide review of all operations.
In a telephone interview, Brian Feldman, a spokesman for the lodging chain at Hospitality Franchise Systems in Parsippany, N.J., confirmed reports of the review this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
He said it followed the appointment of John Russell as president and chief operating officer at Days Inns.


NEGOTIATIONS END AT BELL ATLANTIC
Bell Atlantic, the regional telephone company that owns New Jersey Bell, said its contract talks with unions representing nearly 52,000 employees had broken off last night, but a midnight strike deadline passed with no indication of a walkout.
Another regional Bell company, U S West, which serves nearly 13 million customers in the Mountain States and the Pacific Northwest, reached a tentative agreement with its major unions late Sunday night.


Revenue Issue By Mississippi
A $177.5 million financing by the Mississippi Higher Education Authority was tentatively priced yesterday to yield a maximum 6.60 percent for a student loan revenue bond due in 2006 through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
A large portion of the financing, series C bonds, consists of bonds that may be subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax.
Yields in this portion range from 5 percent in 1995 to 5.25 percent in 1997, 6.30 percent in 2003 and 6.60 percent in 2006.


U.N. Calls Off Inspections Of Iraqi Military Ministry
Acting at the last minute, United Nations inspectors in Baghdad canceled a visit today to a military ministry considered off-limits by Iraq, apparently abandoning for now a United States plan to demand access to sensitive sites.
American officials had said over the weekend that Washington and its allies might renew bombing raids on Baghdad if inspections were blocked.


Review/Fashion; A New, and Simpler, Galanos
Sweater dressing from James Galanos?
The master of intricate dressmaking has taken a walk on the casual side.
Instead of nifty little dresses clinging to the body and baring long stretches of leg, he is now advocating pants in chalk-striped gray flannel, like the men wear, and says that's the way he believes women should dress for dinner.
Instead of intricate blouses gleaming with tucks and glitter, he slides a throwaway style under his jackets.
Oh, he provides a scarf to add some softness, but it is stitched down around the neck so the wearer doesn't have to be a Houdini to tie it.


Austin Journal; In Texas Capital, a Growing Constituency for Bats
One day last fall in McAllen, on the Mexican border, Timothy Hanks found himself with a pickup truck full of bats he had extracted from the dark recesses of a school stadium, and an idea that had never really been tried before: to relocate them.
Mr.
Hanks pointed his truck north and didn't stop driving until, 350 miles later, he hit the high-rise downtown of the state's capital city by the Colorado River.


Jets Deepen Pocket as O'Brien Signs and Joins Camp
Ken O'Brien appeared out of the mist today to fog the Jets' quarterback situation.
The player who has been the Jets' starter at the position for the last eight seasons walked into camp a month late on a rainy day, signed a two-year contract reported to be worth $3.5 million and claimed that he was still the starting quarterback, "unless I'm told otherwise."


Flags, Anthems and Rugby: A Volatile Mix for South Africa
In other countries, sporting events have results.
In South Africa, they have repercussions.
The repercussions of last Saturday's rugby match between South Africa and New Zealand, at which thousands of flag-waving white fans overwhelmed a silent tribute to victims of violence by erupting into the national anthem of the apartheid era, have shaken other news from the front pages of the South African papers, monopolized the radio talk shows, and drawn the country's political notables into a new frenzy of recrimination.


By Design; Sensible Shoes
Some of the most fashionable feet in the country are wearing orthopedic shoes.
Birkenstocks, those German-made sandals designed for comfort rather than beauty, have been seen treading city streets and rural lanes on men and women clad in blue jeans, flowery summer dresses and everything in between.
Among their devotees are Marc Jacobs, Andre Leon Talley, Harrison Ford and Cybill Shepherd.
Birkenstock is an 80-year-old company that originally made orthopedic appliances.
The shoes and sandals, known for their firm, contoured footbeds, have been available in the United States since 1967 and had their first fling with fame in the early 70's.
With fashion looking to that decade for inspiration, it was probably inevitable that Birkenstocks would be rediscovered.
Even Madonna has been seen sporting them.


Turner Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Classical Music in Review
'Il Re Pastore'  Alice Tully Hall
In prospect, "Il Re Pastore" shaped up as a particularly attractive entry in Lincoln Center's Festival of Mozart Operas in Concert.
The 19-year-old Mozart brought just the right sensibility to Metastasio's charming, didactic tale of a highborn shepherd, Aminta, who chooses his beloved Elisa over his rightful throne.
The drama stood to lose little in concert.
It was probably staged only lightly, if at all, to begin with, and could easily seem stiff in an uninspired production.
And though the performance on Saturday evening had lost Arleen Auger to ill health, it gained Joyce Guyer, remembered for her success as Aminta last summer in Mark Lamos's delightful production of the work at the Glimmerglass Opera in Cooperstown, N.Y.
Here, as there, Ms.
Guyer started shakily, sailing sharp on several pitches and confusing the harmonies in her first aria.
But she quickly gained her stride and carried the role beautifully.
Her piping soprano contrasted appealingly with the plush, veiled tone of Janet Williams as Elisa, though the two meshed superbly in their duet.
Ms.
Williams sounded raw on a few vibratoless notes, but blossomed in the coloratura.


It's Early, But Coslet Likes How Jets Look
It took 26 years to repeat the feat, but the Jets finally have captured their first three preseason games.
So?


Hold the Shuffleboard Court. Connors to Play in U.S. Open.
It seems like only a month ago that Jimmy Connors, the 39-year-old surprise semifinalist at the 1991 United States Open, declared himself unfit for five-set marathons and swore off any future grand slams.
But yesterday Connors explained away his first-round losses at this year's French Open and Wimbledon as products of inaccurate preparation and vowed to be ready when the Open begins Aug. 31 at the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows, Queens.


No Headline
This fellow they've nominated claims he's the new Thomas Jefferson.
Well, let me tell you something.
I knew Thomas Jefferson.
He was a friend of mine.
And Governor, you're no Thomas Jefferson. -- RONALD REAGAN  [ A1:6. ]


Washington R.E.I.T.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New York Reviving Quota Regulations For Minority Firms
Armed with a new study that shows minority-owned businesses still get a relatively small share of state contracts, New York State is resurrecting a program that requires contractors to reserve a certain proportion of state work for companies headed by women and members of minority groups, state officials said.
In effect, the state is returning to a program it suspended in 1989 after the United States Supreme Court ruled that a similar program in Virginia violated the constitutional rights of white contractors to equal protection under the law.
The court left open the possibility that local governments could restore the programs if they compiled evidence of discrimination.
Voluntary Compliance
New York State officials say the new study demonstrates a pattern of discrimination based on statistics.
It also includes the testimony of minority contractors who say they are excluded from the process.


Gene Study Sees No Tie To Spread of Languages
A NEW analysis of genetic patterns among modern Europeans has failed to support, but does not disprove, either of two competing theories on how Indo-European languages like English, French and German spread across Europe thousands of years ago, researchers at the State University of New York at Stony Brook say.
The conventional theory holds that the Indo-European languages were imposed on the early inhabitants of Europe by the conquerors who swept out of the steppes of what is now the southern Ukraine beginning about 6,500 years ago.
A competing view says that the languages were spread by early farmers as they moved, century by century, in search of new lands, starting in the Middle East about 9,000 years ago.


TIS Mortgage Investment Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


EQK Green Acres L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Convention Summary
DIRECTING THE SPOTLIGHT TO REAGAN
With rousing chants of "four more years," the Republicans opened their 35th national convention in Houston yesterday, determined to invigorate President Bush's campaign.
But in building its case for seizing the nation's immediate future, the Bush campaign turned to a symbol of the past, shining the spotlight on Ronald Reagan, the former President whose political invincibility in 1984 has so far eluded Mr.
Bush.
At a rally near the convention hall, Mr.
Bush vowed to revive his lagging campaign.
MANAGING TO AVOID A MESSY FIGHT ON ABORTION
A potentially divisive floor discussion on the abortion issue was averted when the Bush campaign appealed to state leaders who themselves favor abortion rights.
The delegates approved the party platform, despite polls indicating only a tiny percentage of them agree with the platform's rigid opposition to legalized abortion.
The Republicans seem to feel safer discussing foreign policy and spent much of the day lauding Mr.
Bush's achievements abroad.
SWEETHEART OF THE PARTY: DEFINITELY NOT THE PRESS
Senior Republican officials continued to criticize the press, blaming reporters, in part, for the President's low standing in the polls.
On another front, the Bush campaign is using Marilyn quayle - who is making a virtue of giving up her own professional ambitions - as a generational foil to Hillary Clinton.
From Little Rock, Ark., aides to Gov.
Bill Clintonfired long-distance salvoes toward Houston, calling for the President to dismiss two prominent Republicans who raised questions on Sunday about Mr.
Clinton's personal life.


Fisher Business Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Astronomy's New Era Is Born in Poverty
DESPITE America's historical and continuing lead in inventing new types of telescopes and other advanced instruments, astronomers charge that the failure of the Federal Government to provide dependable financial support has put American astronomy at a serious disadvantage in the competition with its counterparts in Europe and Japan.
Federal financing has flagged, they say, just as a stream of new telescopes and telescope-enhancing devices are ready to be exploited.
Scientists expect the instruments to mark a new era of astronomy, vastly improving the ability of ground-based telescopes to peer through the distorting veil of the earth's atmosphere and increasing human understanding of the cosmos.
Yet some American astronomers, including senior professionals as well as young postdoctoral researchers, are even leaving this country for better professional opportunities in Europe.


Troubled Marriage? Sibling Relations May Be at Fault
ALTHOUGH Laura Massaro has not spoken to her brother for long stretches of her adult life, she cannot seem to escape his influence.
Their longstanding feud, she said, stems from the fact that he still wants to guide and protect her, as big brothers are wont to do.
But she is now 30 -- he's 31 -- and his well-meaning attempts to direct her life now feel like interference rather than a helping hand.


Cablevision Buys Islanders, and the Torrey Era Ends
The New York Islanders' management has been reshaped with an announcement by the chairman of Cablevision that he has bought 99 percent of the franchise and with the replacement of General Manager Bill Torrey, who had guided the team since its inception 20 years ago.
The agreement to purchase the club from John Pickett was completed over the weekend by Chuck Dolan, chairman of Cablevision Systems, which owns 50 percent of SportsChannel, the pay-TV system that has carried Islanders games for years.


Police Order Inquiry Into Brooklyn Driver's Injury
A top police official yesterday directed the department's Internal Affairs Division to investigate the arrest last week of a Brooklyn van driver who suffered a serious neck injury while in police custody.
The incident, which occurred last Tuesday in the 63d Precinct and left Robert Ealneish, 26 years old, in critical condition at Kings County Hospital, was already being investigated by the Brooklyn District Attorney's office and investigators of the Civilian Complaint Review Board.
The case has also resulted in several demonstrations by van drivers and others.


Public Disclosures From the Private Life of Woody Allen
The public dispute between two of New York's most famously private people grew uglier and more public yesterday, as more details emerged about the breakup of the 12-year relationship between the film maker Woody Allen and his frequent leading lady, Mia Farrow.
The first came from Mr.
Allen himself, when he released a statement that he is in love with Ms.
Farrow's 21-year-old daughter, Soon-Yi Farrow Previn, a Korean by birth whom the actress had adopted with her second husband, Andre Previn.


Excerpts From the Republican Party's Platform: A New Call for Unity
Following are excerpts from the platform adopted by the Republican National Convention.
PREAMBLE
Abraham Lincoln, our first Republican President, expressed the philosophy that inspires Republicans to this day: "The legitimate object of Government is to do for a community of people whatever they need to have done, but cannot do at all, or cannot so well do, for themselves in their separate and individual capacities. But in all that people can individually do as well for themselves, Government ought not to interfere."
. . .
America had its rendezvous with destiny in 1980.
Faced with crisis at home and abroad, Americans turned to Republican leadership in the White House.
Presidents Reagan and Bush turned our Nation away from the path of over-taxation, hyper-regulation, and mega-government.
Instead, we moved in a new direction.
We cut taxes, reduced red tape, put people above bureaucracy.
And so we vanquished the idea of the almighty state as the supervisor of our daily lives.
In choosing hope over fear, Americans raised a beacon, reminding the world that we are a shining city on a hill, the last best hope for man on earth.
. . .
We believe in a President who represents the national interest, not just the aggregation of well-connected special interests; a President who brings unity to the American purpose. . . .
UNITING OUR FAMILY


Chess
The normal course of things is to play a good position well and a difficult position badly, but the English grandmaster Michael Adams got it backward in his first game with the German grandmaster Eric Lobron in the final of the Swift Rapid Chess Challenge Tournament in Brussels.
Adams groped around after getting a slight advantage in the opening, but he did not hit his winning stride until he was faced with challenging defensive problems.
Lobron evened things by winning a second game, both with 25 minutes for each player for all moves, but then Adams took the $50,000 first prize by winning the two five-minute tiebreak games.
Lobron was awarded second prize, $25,000, in the 32-entrant world-class field, which fought under the knockout system.


Kmart Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 29


What's Still Missing on M.I.A.'s
The reason for all the theories that American prisoners of war remain alive in Indochina, almost two decades after the end of the Vietnam War, now becomes painfully clear.
From 1973 on, official Washington misrepresented what it knew and shrugged off new leads, betraying its obligations to the families of the missing and to the public at large.
Even now, as a Senate select committee pursues its careful investigations, the White House has yet to offer any explanation or apology for the deceptions of Administrations past.
The Vietnam syndrome cannot be declared properly buried until the executive branch itself sets the record straight on those missing in action, the M.I.A.'s.


Why We Still Need Competing Exit Polls
To the Editor:
You are right to note the dramatic differences that occur from subtle questionnaire variations in public opinion polls ("Numbers Are No Problem for Pollsters. Words Are," The Week in Review, Aug. 9).
You are also correct that the safeguard against inaccurate findings is the number of different polling organizations polling.
This safeguard does not exist in this year's exit polling.
Where once each television network conducted its own polls, now there is only one.
The single exit poll conducted on behalf of the four networks is also subscribed to by many newspapers, including The New York Times.
Election Day voter polls can give us so much information on who voted for whom and why, but now there is no way to judge the accuracy of the results.


I.B.M.-Sears Joint Venture Is Seen
I.B.M. will announce today that it will set up a joint venture with Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company to manage computer networks both for the giant retailer and other corporate customers, according to industry sources.
The I.B.M. deal with Sears represents a big move for the computer maker's fast-growing services business.
Revenues from services, which include computer tasks farmed out to I.B.M. by other companies, grew 42 percent for I.B.M. during the first half of 1992.


Canstar Sports reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Licon International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ACTV Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEW MOVE ADVISED IN OFFICER'S TRIAL
The judge presiding over the retrial of a former Miami police officer accused in the 1989 deaths of two black men today urged that the case, which has already been shifted from Miami to Orlando to Tallahassee and back to Orlando, be transferred yet again: back to Florida's capital.
In a bit of judicial maneuvering, the judge's recommendation left in effect an order by a Tallahassee judge barring the trial there, but it has the effect of spurring prosecutors to appeal that order.


Court Orders Inquiry Into Extradition of Man as 'Ivan the Terrible'
John Demjanjuk won a round today in a long battle for his freedom when a Federal appeals court in Ohio took the unusual step of ordering a special inquiry into the Justice Department investigation that led to his being stripped of his citizenship and sent to Israel to stand trial as "Ivan the Terrible."
In its order, a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, appointed Thomas A. Wiseman Jr., a Federal district judge in Nashville, as a special master to investigate the case.
Earlier this summer the same court reopened Mr.
Demjanjuk's appeal of his extradition to Israel.
Questioning of Prosecutors
The court directed Judge Wiseman to question four former prosecutors from the Justice Department's Nazi-hunting unit who helped prepare the Government's denaturalization case against Mr.
Demjanjuk, the Ukrainian-born auto worker.
The order also gave the judge broad discretion to assemble any other evidence he deemed relevant and then report back to the court, which would consider his findings in its eventual ruling.


Topics of The Times; Oh, Happy Summer
It has been 27 years since New York has known so cool a summer, 27 years since a light blanket felt good on an August night.
True, those who blossom in the heat may be weeping and so, perhaps, may be ice cream vendors and lemonade purveyors.
But, oh, the difference to the rest of us.


U.S. Unit Taking Over Its Insurance Contractor
Going against an international trend toward the sale of state-owned enterprises to private investors, a Federal agency is taking over the operations of a private contractor.
Negotiations with the private insurance company that controls the contractor are nearly complete, people involved in the talks said today.


Biosys's Pest Killers Go Underground
Like the products it nurtures, wormlike nematodes that survive by invading insects that live in the soil, Biosys Inc. plans to flourish in a niche.
Biosys is content to let other biotechnology companies pursue the more than $4 billion spent worldwide each year on synthetic chemicals and biological agents to fight insects above the ground, where nematodes quickly perish.
A big slice of the $1.8 billion spent to control soil-dwelling pests would do fine, thank you, at least as a start.


Accounts
*
The Economist, New York, to Graf Bertel Advertising, New York, to handle the magazine's corporate advertising account previously at Tolson &amp; Co.
Advertising Inc., New York.
Billings were not disclosed. *
New York Power Authority to Frierson Mee &amp; Herman, New York, for a national economic development campaign previously handled in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


2 Companies Join in Selling Medications
Combining forces in the heartburn sweepstakes and the nicotine patch wars, SmithKline Beecham and Marion Merrell Dow announced a partnership yesterday to develop and sell nonprescription drugs.
SmithKline has already applied for Food and Drug Administration approval for a less potent version of Tagamet, its billion-dollar-a-year anti-ulcer drug.
It would jump into the crowded market for over-the-counter heartburn remedies, which includes Mylanta, marketed by the Johnson &amp; Johnson-Merck Consumer Pharmaceuticals Company, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer's Maalox, Procter &amp; Gamble's Pepto-Bismol and SmithKline's own Tums.


UNDER THE DOME: Barbara Bush; Barbara Bush, the Un-Secret Weapon
The White House's keenest public relations expert was giving a lesson in the fine art of lowering expectations.
"I mean, it's nothing, and now I am getting really nervous," the expert, Barbara Bush, said last week when asked about her speech on family values to the Republican National Convention on Wednesday night.
She added roguishly, "If I could invent some new family value I may come up with one."


Dell Computer Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 2


U.S. Lawyers Offer to Delay Trial of Clifford and Altman
To avoid conflict with New York prosecutors, Justice Department lawyers told a Federal judge today that they would defer their case against Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman until the Manhattan District Attorney's office completed its bank fraud case against them.
But at a hearing today, United States District Judge Joyce Hens Green did not accept the Justice Department's proposal to sort out the trial dates for Mr.
Clifford and Mr.
Altman.
Judge Green has set a trial on the Federal case in Washington for Oct. 26, although a judge in New York has scheduled the trial on the state charges to begin on Oct. 22.


Market Place; The Alarm Bells At Todd Shipyards
EVERY business has its own unmistakable alarm bell that signals trouble.
At restaurants, it's rats in the kitchen; at banks, unruly crowds fighting to get in the door.
At publicly traded companies, no alarm is more piercing than a battle between management and the directors' audit committee, the closest thing to an internal watchdog.
That warning was hard to miss in June at the Todd Shipyards Corporation, when, after a prolonged dispute with management, the entire audit committee resigned to protest management practices, particularly what some directors felt were lavish salaries and perks for senior executives.


Corrections
A listing of Republican convention events and speakers yesterday misidentified a member of the Bush Cabinet.
James D. Watkins is Secretary of Energy, not Education.


Bush May Promise to Keep Baker As Manager of Economic Policy
To try to rebuild his credibility on economic matters, President Bush and his speech-writing team have discussed a proposal to have the President promise Thursday night to keep James A. Baker 3d at the White House after the election to manage economic policy, Administration officials said here today.
Mr.
Baker, whose resignation as Secretary of State and appointment as Mr.
Bush's chief of staff and campaign coordinator become effective Sunday, is said to be resisting the idea as gimmicky and too confining.


METRO DIGEST
FEWER APARTMENTS FOR THE HOMELESS
Attributing an array of new problems in New York City's housing projects on a program to set aside thousands of apartments for homeless families, Housing Authority officials say they plan to sharply reduce the number of apartments given to the homeless in the future.
The shift in policy has created a division between the Housing Authority and other officials of the Dinkins Administration who are scrambling to find homes for thousands of families each year and say they are counting on the Authority to provide apartments.
A1.
TRYING TO JUMP START A HOUSING PLAN
A coalition of community housing advocates went to Federal court to try to get the Newark Housing Authority to make good on its promise to build hundreds of units of low-income housing.
The promise, made three years ago, is backed by millions of Federal dollars.
But the only housing built so far blew down in a 1989 storm.
B5.
NEW YORK CITY  THE COST OF AN INCINERATOR
Mayor Dinkins and Council Speaker Vallone have carefully put together a garbage management plan that they believe has a chance -- if only a slim one -- of making it through a skeptical and hostile City Council.
But everyone involved in the debate agrees that neither official can survive the fight over an incinerator in the Brooklyn Navy Yard without suffering politically, though history may judge them more kindly.
B3.
A WAR OF WORDS OVER AIDS
The unrelenting squabble over AIDS instruction between Schools Chancellor Fernandez and a majority of the Board of Education flared again over the wording of a pledge that outside AIDS lecturers will have to sign.
While the Chancellor was on vacation in Florida, at least four members of the board indicated their disapproval of his wording and scheduled a meeting to draft their own wording.
B3.
REGION  RULING REVEALS A HARSH TRUTH
In Connecticut, the unborn have no rights.
That principle may be inherent in the state's liberal abortion-rights laws, but the State Supreme Court has now stripped away any illusion.
In a decision on Monday, it said that if an individual's legal rights only begin at the moment of birth, then the state was wrong to have taken a child from a mother who had injected drugs into her system only hours before the delivery.
News analysis, B5.
A PENSION AND A PROMISE
The white Teaneck police officer who fatally shot a black teen-ager will get a disability pension on the condition that he never works as a police officer in New Jersey again.
B5.
ARGUING FOR A TIMELY TRIAL
A television news program on kidnapping is no reason to delay the trial of the New Jersey man charged in the fatal abduction of a top Exxon executive, Federal prosecutors say.
B6.
Optimism on Connecticut agriculture.
B5.
UConn credit union fails.
B6.
About New York by Douglas Martin B2  Chronicle B6


Corrections
An article on Monday about Republicans who decided not to attend their party's convention in Houston misstated the position of former Gov.
Kay Orr of Nebraska on abortion.
She has a long record of opposition to legal abortions.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  ALLIES AGREE ON IRAQ PLAN
Britain and France agreed to a United States proposal to defend Iraq's Shiite Muslims against air attack.
No official word has yet come from the Bush Administration.
A1
A U.N. inspector said Iraq willingly handed over arms documents.
A6  THE 'BEIRUT OF BOSNIA'
The name Mostar means "bridge town," but there are few bridges, monuments or homes left in this Bosnian city where shelling continues, although few targets remain.
Many say the devastation is worse than in Sarajevo.
A1  U.N.
AIRLIFT SUSPENDED
The U.N. suspended its airlift to Sarajevo after an official said that two incidents that threatened land and air shipments of relief supplies appeared to be the work of Muslims and Croats.
A12
Croats forced Bosnian men onto buses as military conscripts.  A12
Britain offered to send up to 1,800 troops to protect aid to Bosnia.
A12  SOMALIA RELIEF PLANES LAND
American planes landed in Mombasa, Kenya, carrying the first of tons of food destined for Somalia, which has been devastated by war and drought.
A3  SUDANESE YOUTHS DISAPPEAR
More than 1,000 Sudanese youths disappeared from a Kenyan refugee amp, apparently taken back to Sudan to fight in the civil war there, aid workers said.
A5  MAKING MOPEDS, NOT MUNITIONS
The Bolshevik factory and many others like it, once part of the Soviet Union's military-industrial complex, are undergoing the pains of conversion to serve consumers.
A8  HALFWAY AROUND THE WORLD
A long ordeal, halfway around the world in a fishing boat, brought 151 exhausted Chinese refugees to Haiti, providing the first evidence of a lucrative business of trafficking in illegal immigrants.
A3  UNEASE ON THE WEST BANK
Settlers in Karnei Shomron on the West Bank are uneasy these days as they see Government support pulled out from under them after years of backing from the Likud Party.
A9  The Convention A13-17  HEAVY FIRE FROM THE G.O.P.
The Republican Party pressed its withering attack on the Democratic ticket.
Speaker after speaker at the convention in Houston portrayed Governor Clinton as an extreme liberal who would coddle criminals and break the economy with higher taxes and increased Government spending.
A1  BUSH AND BAKER
As part of an effort to rebuild the President's credibility on domestic affairs, he and his advisers have discussed the idea of having him promise in his speech tomorrow night that he will keep James A. Baker 3d at the White House after the November election to manage economic policy, Administration officials said.
A1  WAR UNDER THE DOME
News analysis: A cultural war is being waged within the Republican ranks.
It pits conservatism with a snarl against conservatism with a smile.
A13  BETWEEN TWO WORLDS
Journalists and politicians have long hopped back and forth between political work and the work of journalism.
But the line between the two fields is now so blurred as to produce a whole new set of questions about fairness and ethics.
A14  ONE KEEN P.R.
EXPERT
The political sophistication of Barbara Bush, who is often described as the Republicans' secret weapon, is becoming the worst-kept secret of the 1992 campaign.
A15  WHERE THE RACE IS NECK-AND-NECK
In Iowa City, all the bombast of the Presidential race is mercifully left behind each morning when Forrest Nelson turns on the computer monitor of the Iowa Political Stock Market to watch the overnight investments of a silent minority who are putting their money where the politicians' mouths are.
A17  The Houston Thing: Diversity night at the convention.
A13  Oh, yeah, about those words: They weren't Lincoln's.
A13  How the convention is playing in the Clinton camp.
A17  National A18-19, D20  STORM OVER MIAMI
The human rights organization Americas Watch accused Miami's most powerful Cuban-American political and business leaders of creating a climate of political repression and intellectual intolerance reminiscent of some Latin American regimes.
A18  A KILLING AND THE CONSTITUTION
A Federal appeals court ruled that the First Amendment did not protect Soldier of Fortune magazine from liability in the murder of a man whose killers were hired through an advertisement in the magazine's classified section.
A18  HOT TUBS TIED TO BIRTH DEFECTS
A large study found that women who use hot tubs or saunas during early pregnancy are at perhaps triple the risk of bearing babies with brain defects or spina bifida.
A19  BLAZE THREATENS SEVERAL TOWNS
A fire raged out of control for a third day in the Sierra Nevada foothills of Northern California, leaving behind 5,500 scorched acres and posing a threat to a number of small communities.
D20  Robbers killed four employees at a Tulsa restaurant.
A18  Education Page B7  In a study, economists find a measure of education's earning value.
It takes more than love of children to run an effecive Head Start program.
Campus Journal: Liberty University may be endangered, religious or not.
Metro Digest B1  CUTTING SPACE TO HOMELESS
Blaming an array of new problems in New York City's housing projects on a program to set aside thousands of apartments for homeless families, Housing Authority officials say they plan to sharply reduce the number of apartments given to the homeless in the future.
A1  Business Digest D1  Living Section C1-10  Health Page C12  Sports B8-14  Obituaries D21  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials  Don't shoot down Iraqi aircraft.
The politics of exclusion.
A police escort to shop.
Topics: What Lincoln never said.
Letters  Michael Lind: Buchanan, conservatism's ugly face.
Anthony H. Cordesman: How to hit Iraq.
Michael Scammell: The disaster that didn't happen.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.54
5.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.10
5.12
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.18
5.15
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.97
6.03
7.58
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.32
7.35
8.08
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.35
9.08
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.23
6.22
6.98
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Wang Files for Bankruptcy; 5,000 Jobs to Be Cut
Wang Laboratories Inc., which once dominated the office world with word processors, filed for bankruptcy court protection from its creditors yesterday, having lost its way as computers broadened their role in the workplace.
Rumors of a bankruptcy have battered Wang's stock recently.
On the American Stock Exchange yesterday, the value of Wang's stock was halved, with the class B shares falling 37.5 cents each, to 37.5 cents.
Within the last year, the stock had traded as high as $7.50 a share.


Ousted Thai Leader Now Political Front-Runner
The scandal-tainted Thai Prime Minister ousted in a coup in 1991 has re-emerged as a front-runner to lead Thailand's next civilian government, a political rebirth that has dismayed many in the country's new democracy movement.
In a political system in which office-seekers are often compared to "ching chok," or chameleons, and yesterday's enemy is today's devoted ally, perhaps no one has changed colors so dramatically as Chatichai Choonhavan, the 70-year-old former Prime Minister.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Housing starts slumped 2.8 percent in July, even though mortgage rates are at the lowest level in two decades.
The Commerce Department also revised downward data for May and June, meaning housing had become a drag on the economy's lackluster recovery, instead of pacing it.  [ Page D1. ]
How can George Bush cast off the economic albatross?
Three possibilities are to pursue a supply-side approach, try Ross Perot's no-hostage approach to eradicating the budget deficit or to dust off Keynesian intervention.
Peter Passell: Economic Watch.  [ D1. ]


Simpler Screening For Down Risks
A simple blood test could double the detection rate for Down syndrome if offered routinely to all pregnant women, according to a report in the current issue ofThe British Medical Journal.
Similar findings by scientists in the United States are to be reported in the New England Journal of Medicine.
The risk of Down syndrome, one of the most common genetic causes of mental retardation, rises sharply with maternal age.
Amniocentesis, the definitive test, carries a 1 percent risk of miscarriage and is usually recommended only for women in their mid-30's or older.


So What Do the Guidance Counselors Know?
To the Editor:
Yes, tales of putdowns of young blacks and Latinos pursuing baccalaureate and graduate studies abound (front page, Aug. 4).
The discouragement comes from within the educational system itself.
And it begins early.
Research shows that while black children enter first grade with the same enthusiasm as their white counterparts, by third and fourth grade their confidence has been undermined by teachers disinclined to believe in the kids' abilities.


Flatley Is Signed To Islander Pact
One day after being named general manager of the Islanders, Don Maloney made his first front-office move by signing the team's captain, Patrick Flatley, to a multiyear contract yesterday.
No other terms were announced.
Flatley, a 28-year-old right wing, has spent his eight seasons in the National Hockey League with the Islanders, who drafted him in the first round in 1982.
He has the longest tenure among Islander players, although his 1991-92 season was interrupted for 42 games after he broke his right thumb in a game against Philadelphia on Dec. 19.


Utah Shows Death Penalty's Racism
To the Editor:
"Utah Man's Life Hinges on Issue of Racial Bias" (news article, July 19) incorrectly characterizes William Andrews, an African-American, as a torturer for his role in the burglary of a hi-fi store and murder by his accomplice of three people.


Review/Opera; Mozart's 'Lucio Silla' in Concert
"Lucio Silla," presented as part of Lincoln Center's Mozart Operas in Concert festival on Monday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, has much in common with "Mitridate," the work that opened the series last week.
Both were composed for the Teatro Regio Ducale in Milan, "Mitridate" in 1770, "Lucio Silla" two years later.
They show two sides of an ancient historical coin: At the end of "Mitridate," Mithridates VII (135 to 65 B.C.) fights to preserve the shards of the city of Pontus against a Roman assault.
Lucius Sylla (138 to 78 B.C.) was a Roman adversary with whom he had concluded a treaty.
History, of course, was not Mozart's principal concern in these adolescent works.
Both are in the opera seria style, and in the best seria tradition they show that even tyrants can be transformed into paragons of fair-mindedness and moral rectitude, usually in the last five minutes of a long work.
Not incidentally, the path to enlightenment is illuminated by a parade of virtuosically florid arias that explore rage and rapture, with occasional moments of tender reflection.
If "Mitridate" was the 14-year-old Mozart's audition piece, "Lucio Silla" confirmed the impression it made.


Arson Goes Unreported in New York
To the Editor:
In the Aug. 4 chart on New York City's decreasing crime rate, which accompanies your news analysis on Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown's resignation, there is no mention of the crime of structural arson or the deliberate burning of vehicles.


Food Notes
Lip-Smacking Fare
The Lipstick Cafe, at the north end of the lobby in the pink oval "lipstick" building, at 885 Third Avenue (53d Street), is a new oasis for breakfast and lunch, and also offers a small but inviting and reasonably priced selection of items to take out.
Among them are what may be the best jelly doughnuts in town -- buttery, nicely browned puffs enclosing rich blackberry jam.
A similar pastry comes with a fresh apple filling.
The breakfast pastries, priced from 80 cents to $1.50, also include croissants, pain au chocolat, raisin-studded snail buns and muffins.
Sandwiches, about $4 each, include tomato and mozzarella on a skinny baguette.
Soups are $2 a portion, and side dishes like the spicy seven-grain salad are $1 to $1.50.
A galette, something like an open-faced calzone with savory fillings, which change daily, is $4.
Fancy pastries like berry-cheese tarts are mostly $4 a serving.
Besides the usual beverages, there is a deliciously refreshing cooler made with pineapple juice, ginger and lemon grass ($1.50).


A Market for Playing the 2 Candidates
All the daily claptrap of the American Presidential contest -- slogan and sleaze, spouses' spin and poll takers' posturing -- are mercifully left behind each morning when Forrest Nelson turns on the computer monitor of the Iowa Political Stock Market to watch the overnight investments of a silent minority who are putting their money where the politicians' mouths are.
There are 550 investors and $34,000 in the market this week, and the beauty of its calm traffic in buying and selling Bush and Clinton securities is that the automated investment process pares away the hustings' blather factor.


Clinton's Plan Assailed
A study sponsored by the National Center for Policy Analysis, a research group that favors a reduced role for the Government in the economy, has asserted that the economic program proposed by Gov.
Bill Clinton would reduce private investment by $413 billion and cost the nation 747,000 jobs by 1996 if the Democratic nominee were to win the White House.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Activated Chris Hoiles, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Mark Parent, catcher, to Rochester of the International League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Agreed to a four-year working agreement with El Paso of the Texas League.


Hard Logic on Drugs Before Birth
Putting cocaine into a baby's bloodstream an hour after birth would be a "parental act" under Connecticut law and would bring down the full weight of the state's child-welfare authority.
But one hour before birth, it would be none of the state's business.


The Disaster That Didn't Happen
The big news from Russia -- one year after the abortive coup -- is that there is no news.
No news, that is to say, of the kind we had grown used to over the 83 years of Soviet rule.
No news of five-year plans and great leaps forward.
No purges, invasions, arrests or saber-rattling.
No longer do we have to study who was standing where during the May Day Parade to find out which leaders are in and which are out, or pore over speeches clotted with Marxist jargon.


Rescuers and Skeptics; Doubts Greet Unification Church at University of Bridgeport
In a city that often feels it has no friends, the financial rescue of the University of Bridgeport by an arm of the Unification Church has come, finally, almost as a relief.
Hardly anyone in Bridgeport is thrilled by the deal completed this month between the private university and the Professors World Peace Academy, an institute largely financed by the Unification Church.
And some here bitterly oppose it.
But on an 84-acre campus that otherwise would go dark, the academy promises to invest millions and bring in thousands of students, while guaranteeing academic freedom.


Don't Shoot Down Iraqi Aircraft
In the latest emerging showdown with Saddam Hussein, Washington and its allies are rashly planning to shoot down any Iraqi aircraft that try to repress rebellious Shiites in southern Iraq.
Such a policy would be legally untenable and politically unwise.
Some forceful action by the U.S. and its allies is clearly warranted if Mr.
Hussein continues to flout the Persian Gulf cease-fire accord by interfering with United Nations operations.
But the accord permits Iraq to fly all types of aircraft and sets no restrictions on their use.
Shooting them down would put the U.S. in the position of breaking an accord it is pledged to uphold.


The Pop Life; David Byrne Tries To Stop Making A Spectacle of Himself
When David Byrne and Talking Heads were at their most important, in the mid-1980's, their shows were about music and imagery.
Self-conscious spectacles, the concerts were forums for the band and Mr.
Byrne to create their own images.
Mr.
Byrne's large suits, a slide show that seemed to have nothing to do with the music, and the accouterments of home -- a library and a lamp, among other things -- were set out as if they were standard media iconography, and audiences would chew on them for meaning.
Things have changed.
Talking Heads has been put on hold, and Mr.
Byrne's solo records, "Rei Momo" and "Uh-Oh" (both on Sire), have departed radically from the Talking Heads style of minimal rock.
Mr.
Byrne instead drew on his interest in world music -- his record company, Luaka Bop, has released albums of Brazilian, Cuban and Indian performers -- and the product has been a charged international pop hybrid, employing all sorts of musicians, ranging from Latin to rock.


Wine Talk
RANDALL GRAHM, the sage of Santa Cruz, has observed, in his inimitable way, that we live in a caber- and chardocentric society.
That may come as news to more narrowly focused social critics than Mr.
Grahm, the owner of Bonny Doon Vineyards, the California winery, but no matter.
There is considerable evidence that, in the general disintegration of societal norms, even the grapes we know and love -- cabernet and chardonnay, pinot noir and merlot -- could be on the way out.
In terms of grapes, it's a brave new world.
Mourvedre, marsanne, viognier, sangiovese, nebbiolo, grenache, syrah, roussanne -- what are these grapes, anyway?
Where did they come from?
Should we accept them?
Do we have any choice?


Corrections
An article on Monday about a weekend of parties in the Hamptons held in connection with the HBO premier of "Citizen Cohn" erroneously listed Betty Friedan among the guests at a fund-raising coffee for Geraldine A. Ferraro, a Democratic candidate for the United States Senate.
Ms.
Friedan attended an HBO party during the weekend, but did not attend the Ferraro coffee.
Ms.
Friedan supports Elizabeth Holtzman, the New York City Comptroller, one of Ms.
Ferraro's rivals for the Democratic nomination.


British, French and U.S. Agree To Hit Iraqi Aircraft in the South
The Bush Administration, stepping up its confrontation with Saddam Hussein, won British and French agreement today for a plan to shoot down Iraqi military planes if they venture into a wide zone throughout the southern part of the country populated by Shiite Muslim dissidents.
The plan for the "no fly" zone below the 32d parallel, aimed at defending the Shiites in southern Iraq against air attack by the Iraqi military and at sharply curbing the authority of President Hussein, was described by a senior British official as ready to be put into effect in the next several days.


Striking Back, Woody Allen Denies Child Sex-Abuse Allegation
Woody Allen, who has fiercely guarded his privacy even as his movies made him one of New York's most-recognized celebrities, made an unusual off-screen public appearance yesterday, defending himself against child-abuse allegations and striking back at his longtime leading lady, Mia Farrow, and her lawyers.
At a news conference that even he, the master of the quintessentially thorny New York scene, seemed to acknowledge bordered on the bizarre, Mr.
Allen specifically denied sexually abusing the 7-year-old adopted daughter whose custody he is seeking.


London Offers to Back Convoys
Britain told the United Nations today that it was willing to send up to 1,800 ground troops to Bosnia and Herzegovina if they were needed to help escort United Nations convoys delivering food and medicine in the war-ravaged republic.
In offering the troops, Prime Minister John Major insisted that British soldiers would not become involved in the fighting among the warring militias, nor would they seek to play any role in forcing open land corridors to besieged towns.


UNDER THE DOME: On Stage; A 32-Year Congressman Joins The Attack on His Colleagues
A politician rarely does what he wants, but mostly he does what he must.
The House minority leader, Robert H. Michel, is 59 years old, and he has served in the House of Representatives for 32 years.
The Democrats have controlled the House for every one of those years.
But Mr.
Michel, an affable man, always got along with them, and was always known as someone who took pride in the institution he has made his life's work.


Convention Summary
TRYING TO BRIDGE A GULF
The Republican Party yesterday tried to bridge the gulf between hard-line and moderate conservatives.
To present itself as a party of diversity, the Republicans presented an array of speakers representing minorities, the disabled and abortion-rights advocates.
Barbara Bush, who speaks tonight, has been expressing her support for AIDS patients, unwed teen-agers and homosexuals.
Some party strategists said they would pursue a religious and cultural war with the Democrats.
STRESSING ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ISSUES
Yesterday's speakers stressed economic and social issues.
Republicans, coached by convention officials, portrayed Gov.
Bill Clinton as a radical liberal who would coddle criminals and break the economy with higher taxes and more government spending.
The Democrats struck back with television advertisements that harped on Mr.
Bush's reneging on his "no new taxes" pledge of the 1988 campaign.
Criticism was also aimed at former President Ronald Reagan, who scholars said misquoted Lincoln on Monday.
BUSH PREPS FOR HIS BIGGEST SPEECH
President Bush spent much of yesterday with advisers, crafting a speech for tomorrow night that he hoped would restore voters' confidence in him as an economic manager.
While the President's address will call for reducing taxes and controlling spending, his advisers so far have failed to find specific remedies the President can offer.
Advisers said that they were considering having Mr.
Bush announce that James A. Baker 3d would manage economic policy after the election.


Yanks Beat A's And Then Shrug
This is what happens when a team falls far out of contention.
It crawls out of a nail-biting situation, produces a torrent of offense and barely musters a shrug.
It beats one of the best teams in baseball and no one thinks of celebrating.
So the Yankees beat the vaunted Oakland A's, 7-3, last night at Yankee Stadium?
So Mel Hall made a brilliant diving catch?
So Scott Sanderson put together a solid start and Steve Farr salvaged a bullpen disaster?


Circle K reports earnings for Year to April 30


Pirates Master Padres, at Last
Pirates 5, Padres 1
Randy Tomlin continued his streaky season by checking San Diego on seven singles over eight innings and Barry Bonds drove in two runs in Pittsburgh's 5-1 decision tonight, the Pirates' first victory in seven games against the Padres this season.
Tomlin (12-7) has followed a seasonlong pattern of being awful one month and awesome the next, a streak he has continued by going 2-0 with a 1.80 e.r.a. in August.


Housing Starts Fell 2.8% in July
Despite the lowest mortgage rates since the early 1970's, the pace at which builders broke ground for new homes slumped 2.8 percent in July, the second straight decline, the Commerce Department reported today.
The somewhat unexpected skid, combined with downward revisions for both May and June, meant housing was not only no longer pacing the lackluster recovery, as it had until spring, but was becoming a drag.


Burritt InterFinancial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Croatia Said to Draft Bosnian Refugees Into Forces
The Croatian police have begun rounding up male Bosnian refugees, most of them Muslims, and shipping them back to Bosnia and Herzegovina for forced induction into military and militia units fighting Serbs, refugees say.
Mate Granic, a Croatian Vice President, acknowledged today that the sweeps violated the rights of those involved, but said they were necessary to head off a social explosion in this country, which still has tens of thousands of young men on active duty in the Croatian Army.


ON TELEVISION: The Media; Lines Blur as Politicians Take On Journalist Roles
Even the most astute viewer was probably at a loss to figure out what hat John H. Sununu was wearing today on television.
This morning, he was the former White House chief of staff turned lobbyist, praising President Bush and bashing Gov.
Bill Clinton on the ABC program "Good Morning America." Tonight he was transformed into talk show host, interviewing Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia on his CNN program, "Crossfire."


First of U.S. Relief Planes for Somalia Lands in Kenya
The first of 11 American military aircraft landed here today for the start of a two-month emergency airlift of food to Somalia.
American officials described the operation as the biggest relief effort by the American military in Africa and said the cost of the aid far exceeded that to Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Bank Funds And C.D.'s Fall Again
In what has become a painful weekly ritual for bank depositors, yields of bank money market accounts and those of certificates of deposit were down again in the latest period, which ended today.
According to data gathered by The Bank Rate Monitor, the greatest setback appeared to be in money market accounts, which reflect conditions in the short-term money market that find Treasury securities near historical lows.


McEnroe Sounds Off on Davis Cup Snubbing
John McEnroe dutifully polished off his first-round opponent at the Volvo International this afternoon and then, far from complacent, launched into a tirade against United States Davis Cup officials for not naming him to the team alongside singles players Jim Courier and Andre Agassi.
When the United States faces Sweden in the semifinals Sept. 25-27 at Minneapolis, McEnroe would prefer to be there in doubles competition, regardless of the partner team captain Tom Gorman selects for him.
McEnroe, who is ranked 17th, was under the impression that his inclusion on the 1992 team, for which he is 1-1 in doubles play with Rick Leach, represented a yearlong assignment.


Ever See a Cyclist Stop at a Red Light?
To the Editor:
Even though I, a daily bicyclist through Central Park, would benefit from banning motor vehicles in the park (letter, Aug. 4), the idea really does give me pause.


Nagle Isn't Shaking in His Cleats
Browning Nagle walked over to the tape machine in his sparsely decorated condominium and popped in a cassette of himself singing.
Sounding like a cross between Kenny Rogers and Lee Greenwood, Nagle sang love songs: Willie Nelson's hit "You Were Always on My Mind" and "Truly" by Lionel Richie.
With Ken O'Brien returning to practice on Wednesday to compete with the 24-year-old Nagle for the starting quarterback job, Nagle isn't about to start singing the blues.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; Scrambling For Time On the Air
Watching a Presidential campaign scramble for television air time is not a pretty picture.
Gov.
Bill Clinton's organization has resorted to all manner of genteel desperation to balance all the pretty red-white-and-blue pictures emanating from Houston.
Today's theme was discovery.


Iran-Contra Laid Bare
To the Editor:
In "Mr. Walsh, Pack Up Your Tent" (Op-Ed, Aug. 6), Terence Moran says "every prosecution is political." I don't agree, but if that is his approach he might recall that when the Iran-contra matter unfolded, Edwin Meese 3d was Attorney General.
It was Mr.
Meese and President Reagan who tried to do all they could to avoid a prosecution.


60-Minute Gourmet
QUICK herb sauces are a staple of summer cooking for both French and American cuisine.
At this time of year a vibrant sauce for fish, meat or vegetables can be prepared with just about any combination of fresh herbs in a well-balanced vinaigrette.
In classic French cuisine, many herb sauces, like sauce persil, are based on a seafood veloute, strained and then flavored with parsley.
A variation is made with butter and lemon juice.
Today's twist would simply call for a low-calorie mustard vinaigrette.


A Meal-in-a-Dish From 4 of the 5 Food Groups
FRUIT salsas have become more popular than brown gravy but sometimes the consistency of a sauce is needed to coat the ingredients of a dish.
That's the case with this meal-in-a-dish recipe that includes ingredients from four of the five food groups; only dairy is missing.
I've tried the recipe two ways.
In one version the sauce is made with nectarines and dried peaches; I prefer the one given here, where the fruitiness of the nectarines is given a sweet-hot edge with crystallized ginger.


Topics of The Times; What Lincoln Never Said
Ronald Reagan's stirring speech at the Republican Convention Monday night was stuffed with clever lines and oratorical gems that brought the delegates, cheering, to their feet.
But it also contained an egregious clunker.
The former President, or his speechwriters, evidently swallowed a spurious Lincoln quotation -- a decalogue of "cannots" concocted decades ago by a Presbyterian clergyman.
The Rev.
William J. H. Boetcker presented the thoughts as his own, written in the spirit of Lincoln.
But the qualification vanished as conservative groups snapped up his decalogue, which found its way into the Congressional Record and Look magazine.


Jets Are on Course While Giants Are Drifting
When the Jets and Giants meet on Saturday at Giants Stadium, will they be two ships passing in the night, one headed for dry land, the other steamrolling toward oblivion?
You look at the Jets and you see refreshing change.
The offense is interesting, the defense improving and the coach, Bruce Coslet, is steering a course and laying a foundation that is rock solid.


Hewlett Had Lower Profits In 3d Quarter
After seeming to defy the recession for more than a year, the Hewlett-Packard Company today reported lower earnings for its third fiscal quarter.
Hewlett-Packard earned $191 million, or 76 cents a share, in the quarter that ended July 31, down slightly from $192 million, or 76 cents a share, in the period a year earlier.
Revenue rose to $4 billion from $3.5 billion.


Miami Leaders Are Condemned By Rights Unit
A human rights organization that normally concerns itself with abuses in foreign dictatorships has accused this city's most powerful Cuban-American political and business leaders of creating a climate of political repression and intellectual intolerance like those in some Latin American regimes.
The accusations, which focus on the leaders' support for United States policy toward Cuba, have brought angry responses and threats of legal action from some in the Cuban exile establishment.


Akan Journal; This Man Has Dream: It's Downright Un-Japanese
Masanori Toyooka, a broad-shouldered man who studies the dying language of his ancestors and plays electronic jazz in a coffee shop in this wooded corner of Hokkaido, is searching for something rare in Japan: pride in being different.
In his case, it is pride in being a member of the Ainu, the indigenous people of Hokkaido, Japan's northernmost island, and his search has led him into the thick of one of the country's knottiest post-cold-war problems -- how to persuade Russia to return four rugged northern islands seized in the closing days of World War II.


Man, 29, Arrested In Jogging Assaults
A 29-year-old Manhattan man was arrested yesterday and charged with sexually assaulting three women as they jogged on the Lower East Side earlier this month, the police said.
In two of the cases, the man, Carlos Sanes of 601 East 12th Street, pulled down the women's running shorts and fondled the women, the police said.
A third woman said the suspect tried to sodomize her, the police said.
All three incidents occurred on a popular jogging trail east of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive, near 16th Street.


British Phone Giant Said to Plan Network
BT, the British telecommunications giant, is reportedly planning a global telephone network that will cost more than $1 billion and take 10 years to build.
The reported network would offer voice, video and data services in at least 20 cities in the United States, Europe and Asia.
But analysts and competitors said the project faced big obstacles.
They include snarling BT's own nascent Syncordia project, which involves leasing parts of other countries' networks and cutting red tape for clients in other countries.
"Outsourcing," or foisting all of a company's telecommunications management on companies like Syncordia for presumably fat fees, is something that both sellers and potential buyers of the service are still puzzling out.


Corrections
A map on Saturday locating the site of the grounding of the Queen Elizabeth 2 repeated a mistaken description of her Canadian itinerary that had appeared in a map on Aug. 10.
As a previous correction in this space reported last week, the luxury liner had been to Saint John, New Brunswick, and then to Halifax, Nova Scotia, before returning to American waters.
She had not gone on to Newfoundland.


Fearing Attack by All Sides, U.N. Halts Sarajevo Airlift
The United Nations suspended its airlift to the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina today, and officials voiced suspicions that the outgunned Muslim and Croatian forces in the area might be engaging in attacks in an effort to provoke Western military intervention.
Five days after the United Nations authorized the use of force to guarantee deliveries of food and medicine to civilians in Bosnia and Herzegovina, airborne and overland aid efforts have been challenged by forces in a conflict with a multitude of militias.


Spencer Byard, 84, Lawyer, Dies; Active With Library and Church
Spencer Byard, a lawyer long active in the affairs of two centuries-old Manhattan institutions, the New York Society Library and Trinity Church, died on Monday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 84 years old and lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He died of complications from cancer of the prostate, said his son, Paul Spencer Byard of Manhattan.


REPUBLICANS IN HOUSTON: For the Record; Reagan Put Words in Lincoln's Mouth
In his speech to the Republican National Convention on Monday night, former President Ronald Reagan said the Democrats don't understand the principles "so eloquently stated by Abraham Lincoln."
Correction.


COMPANY NEWS
ALLIED RESEARCH CORP., Baltimore, a producer of ammunition systems, said Mecar S.A., its wholly owned Belgian subsidiary, had received a $17 million contract.
BONJOUR GROUP, New York, signed a licensing agreement with Tracy Evans Ltd. to produce a line of sportswear for the Bonjour label.


No Headline
"I am not just going into an election, and President Mitterrand is not going into an election and we both feel very strongly about this particular issue." -- PRIME MINISTER JOHN MAJOR of Britain, on Iraqi Government moves against Shiite dissidents.  [ A6:1. ]


Banks Finally Give Chrysler A Crucial $6.8 Billion Loan
The Chrysler Corporation removed a big uncertainty from its balance sheet late Monday night when the last of 152 banks agreed to terms for a new $6.8 billion loan agreement with Chrysler's finance subsidiary.
The new loan replaces an agreement of the same size that was to expire in March.
The new loan will be more expensive for Chrysler, and a large chunk of it must be repaid rather quickly, but the agreement will assure Chrysler's dealers of a source of money to finance their vehicle inventories and a way for retail customers to finance purchases of new cars and trucks.


A Good Place to Have Fun And Double-Check Data
Orley Ashenfelter is no stranger to mixing work and pleasure.
While he directs Princeton's graduate program in industrial relations and edits the American Economic Association's premier scholarly journal, Mr.
Ashenfelter is better known in some quarters for his unorthodox statistical analyses of wine vintages -- an endeavor that at once gives him an excuse to tweak the egos of the pompous and to drink a lot of good Bordeaux.
It is no surprise, then, that Mr.
Ashenfelter chose to investigate the economics of education in the carnival of Twinsburg, Ohio.


Sports of The Times; That Quiet Moment for Larry Bird
IF, as has been said, it is the quiet moments, the moments out of the spotlight, that most define character, then this was one of them:
It was a few years ago, when Larry Bird was still healthy, still untroubled by the back problems that forced him yesterday, at age 35, to untie his basketball sneakers for the last time.
Bird, as usual, had come onto the court in Boston Garden two hours before the game, under the dim lights, to shoot alone for 45 minutes, working on his moves and priming his mind for the game ahead.
His only audience was the working men who put up the baskets and lay down the parquet floor.


14-Year President Of Sanitation Union Says He's Retiring
Edward Ostrowski, the head of the New York City sanitation workers union for the past 14 years, announced yesterday that he would retire at the end of the year.
Although less colorful than his blustery and combative predecessor, John J. DeLury, Mr.
Ostrowski was able to win privileges for his 6,500 members that allow them to receive roughly $5,000 a year extra in productivity pay for working on two-person trucks and to retire with a pension after 20 years.


JEWISH SETTLERS PONDERING FUTURE
Walking past faded wall posters of right-wing parties defeated in Israel's recent election, Moshe Weizman acknowledged that he felt queasy about his future in this settlement sprawling along a chain of rocky, tree-studded hills.
"I worry that I'll be left with nothing," Mr. Weizman said.


Classic Restaurant Meals Worth a Try at Home
RESTAURANT writers have big challenges in trying to stay on top of New York City's food scene.
In a competitive town where innovation is the currency of survival, it is risky to recommend a stellar dish in any one place, for a week later it may be completely altered or, worse, gone.
Hardly a week goes by without letters from diners who have rushed out to a restaurant to try a dish that I have praised, only to find that, for seasonal or other reasons, the roasted guinea hen with asparagus risotto has been supplanted by pheasant with wild mushrooms.
Even so, certain dishes -- sort of "The Fantasticks" of the culinary stage -- achieve staying power because of their unremitting appeal.


REPUBLICANS IN HOUSTON: The Houston Thing; Paging Any Blacks. Report to the Stage.
This was diversity night at the Republican National Convention, with a eclectic parade that included a rabbi, a governor who advocates abortion rights, the former pro quarterback Roger Staubach and the only black in the Bush cabinet, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Louis W. Sullivan.
Despite efforts to broaden the "big tent," it has not stretched over many blacks.
Convention planners had to reach back to two long-gone Bush Administration officials to balance the convention show.


Cato Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Dissidents Vow Protest And a Fast in China
The wife of a prominent imprisoned dissident applied to the Chinese Government today for permission to conduct a demonstration supporting her husband's demands for better treatment.
The dissident, Wang Juntao, was believed to be in the seventh day of a hunger strike.
Hou Xiaotian, the wife of Mr.
Wang, who is serving a 13-year term for his role in the Tiananmen Square democracy protests of 1989, said she would stage a sit-in with five other people in front of a court here.


Air Canada Sets Alliance With United
Air Canada, whose merger negotiations with rival Canadian Airlines International Ltd. have stalled, announced today an alliance with one of the largest American carriers, the United Airlines Corporation of Elk Grove, Ill.
"Together we are going to represent a very strong commercial force in North America," said Denis Couture, an Air Canada spokesman, from the company's Montreal headquarters.


Barbara Morgan, Photographer Of Modern Dance, Is Dead at 92
Barbara Morgan, the photographer whose portraits of Martha Graham captured the essence of that choreographer's art, died on Monday night at Phelps Memorial Hospital in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
She was 92 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Mrs.
Morgan was best known for her photographs of American modern dancers, among them Graham, Jose Limon, Doris Humphrey, Pearl Primus, Charles Weidman, Erick Hawkins and Merce Cunningham.
Her dance photographs were never intended for publicity or documentation.
Instead, she said in a 1980 interview, they were metaphors, created to catch the symbolic image that epitomized the dance or dancer.


Dayton Hudson Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


INSIDE
Sabotage Feared in Bosnia
The Sarajevo airlift was suspended after Muslims and Croats, rather than Serbs, were suspected of sabotaging relief efforts.
Page A12.
Bankruptcy for Wang Labs
Wang Laboratories, which dominated the office world with word processors until computers took over, filed for bankruptcy protection.
Page D1.
Halfway Around the World
When 151 Chinese men came ashore in Haiti, they had sailed for more than a month halfway around the world in a small fishing boat.
Page A3.
Larry Bird Calls It Quits
The Boston Celtic star who helped reinvigorate pro basketball in a legendary 13-year career retired because of a back problem.
Page B9.


Chain of Command


ARGENTINA LAGGING ON MISSILE PLEDGE
More than a year after President Carlos Saul Menem promised to end an Argentine armed forces program to build a medium-range ballistic missile, the Government has yet to destroy key components of the missile.
Officials here say that the solid-core first stage of 14 missiles that were produced in the secretive operation remain in storage at the Falda del Carmen development grounds near the central city of Cordoba, and that they have yet to come up with a plan for destroying them.


Excerpts From Keynote Address by Phil Gramm
Following are excerpts from remarks last night by Senator Phil Gramm of Texas at the Republican National Convention, as transcribed by The New York Times.
When you count up the number of nations liberated from Soviet tyranny -- when you total up the population freed from the Marxist yoke -- when you add up the puppet despots whose support from Moscow has now been yanked away, ours is the greatest victory in the history of freedom.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  A No-Hitter in Little League
Matt Wolski pitched a no-hitter yesterday to lead Nottingham of Hamilton Square, N.J. to a 4-0 victory over Manchester South of New Hampshire in the Eastern Little League tournament in Bristol, Conn.
Wolski struck out 11 and walked three in gaining his third no-hitter for Nottingham.
He has 23 strikeouts in 12 innings for Nottingham.
Nottingham, the only undefeated team left at the double-elimination tournament, will play in the final on Friday against the winner of today's game between Darlington of Pawtucket, R.I., and Ingomar of Pittsburgh.
Darlington was a 1-0 winner yesterday over Newark National, which was eliminated. (AP) TENNIS  Easy Outing for Connors
Jimmy Connors, relying on an arsenal of line-teasing groundstrokes, high-arching lobs and pinpoint passing shots, needed only 64 minutes last night to beat Dave DiLucia, 6-1, 6-2, in the first round of the United States Hardcourt tournamemnt in Indianapolis.
DiLucia, who at age 22 is 17 years younger than the 11th-seeded Connors, held serve to open the match.
From then on, it was all Connors. (AP) Top-Seeded Players Advance: Andrew Weiss of Great Falls, Va., and Tina Samara of Laurel Hollow, N.Y., the top-seeded players, each scored straight-set victories yesterday in the United States National Amateur championships at The Concord Resort Hotel in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y.
Weiss broke away with strong returns in the second set and beat Jordan Richman of New York, 6-4, 6-0, to advance to the third round.
Samara gained the women's semifinals with a 6-4, 6-2 decision over Kim Jennings of Wynnewood, Pa.
GOLF  Metropolitan Open Postponed
The opening round of the 78th Metropolitan Golf Association Open tournament was postponed yesterday because the Nassau Country Club course was unplayable after heavy rain pelted the area the last two days.
The M.G.A. pushed the tournament back a day, which means that it will start today at Glen Cove, L.I., and conclude on Friday with 18 holes each day.
The $75,000 tournament, sponsored by MetLife for the 12th consecutive year, attracted a record entry of 649 of the area's top professionals and amateurs, with 153 making the final field.
Woods Wins at Pinehurst: Tiger Woods of Cypress, Calif., continued his torrid summer pace yesterday, winning the 24th annual Insurance Youth Classic by nine shots at Pinehurst Country Club's No. 7 course in Pinehurst, N.C.
The 16-year-old Woods, who won his second consecutive United States Junior title earlier this month, took his second Youth crown with a closing 73. (AP) SWIMMING  2 Olympians Seeing Gold Again
Mike Barrowman won the 200-meter breast-stroke and a fellow Olympic champion, Angel Martino, took the 100 freestyle last night in the National Swimming Championships in Mission Viejo, Calif.
Barrowman, the Potomac, Md., resident who set a world record of 2 minutes 10.16 seconds in the event at the Barcelona Games two weeks ago, came from third place at the 100-meter mark last night to win in 2:13.52.
Martino, of Americus, Ga., who won a gold as a member of the United States 400-meter freestyle relay team, had to use a late surge of her own to pull away from Michelle Jesperson of Madison, Wis., winning the 100 freestyle in 56.06 seconds. (AP)


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about the sale of WNEW-AM misidentified one radio program.
It is "Milkman's Matinee," not "Milkman's Serenade."


Topics of The Times; The Republican Tic
No sooner do otherwise civil and grammatical Republicans get together at their Convention in Houston than they succumb to a collective tic: they drop the "ic." Republicans evidently think that using the noun "Democrat" as an adjective diminishes their opponents.
One California delegate assailed "the Democrat Congress." Another reviled "wrong-headed Democrat crime policies." An Oklahoma Congressman sniped at the "Democrat platform." And the Republican platform writers lunged for high-tech insult, instructing their computer program to automatically amputate the last syllable from every reference to "Democratic" in their 123-page document.


10-Year Career Encounters 9 Innings of Fame
The 19 photographs, all in frozen sequence, hung alongside Kevin Gross's locker, capturing history and a lot more.
The first photograph was a neatly framed straight-on shot of the 31-year-old Dodger right-hander.
There is as much fleeting panic as lasting joy in the face of the pitcher who had just completed the first no-hitter of the 1992 season.


A Police Escort to Shop
At least once a month, police officers pick up 68-year-old Pecola Jones in her apartment in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
She loves it.
And so do the other seniors from her building who sally forth for an afternoon of safe shopping with a police escort from the local precinct.
Their day out is part of an imaginative citywide program that seeks to mitigate the impact of urban crime on aging Americans who prefer to spend their autumn years at home.


Cases Stemming From Violence Pending
Two criminal cases that grew out of the Crown Heights disturbances of last summer are still pending in court.
The disturbances involved four nights of violence touched off by the death of a 7-year-old black child, Gavin Cato, who was struck by a runaway car driven by a Hasidic Jew, Yosef Lifsh, in Crown Heights on Aug. 19, 1991.
In one of the cases, a 17-year-old black youth, Lemerick Nelson Jr., was charged with the fatal stabbing of a Hasidic man, Yankel Rosenbaum, who was visiting from Australia.
The police said Mr.
Nelson fatally stabbed Mr.
Rosenbaum as black youths went on a rampage hours after the car driven by Mr.
Lifsh struck the 7-year-old child.


Learning the Business Side Of a Social-Service Venture
Anne Doerr watched for years as a stream of recovering addicts and alcoholics poured into Williamsport, Pa., the small-town home of the Little League World Series that has also become host to dozens of substance-abuse recovery programs.
Their arrival ignited racial tensions and strained social services, and, as director of the local Head Start preschool program, she wanted to help but she did not know how.
The answer came to her at a recent management-training course designed specifically for Head Start directors: begin a new program to help recovering addicts learn how to be better parents.


Angelica Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Executives
BLOCK INDUSTRIES, Wilmington, N.C., a men's apparel company, named Richard P. Thrush chief executive.
CYPRUS COPPER CO., Phoenix, a unit of Cyprus Minerals Co., named Jeffrey G. Clevenger senior vice president.


1,000 BOYS RETURN TO CAMP IN SUDAN
More than 1,000 Sudanese boys, part of a group who have trekked through three countries in four years under the direction of a rebel army, have disappeared from a Kenyan refugee camp, apparently spirited back to the Sudan by the rebels, United Nations officials say.
The missing boys were among 12,000 who walked into Kenya in June when their camp in rebel-held territory in the southern Sudan was in danger of being overrun by Government forces.


Why Haven't More Banks Failed?
Earlier this year, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation warned that 200 banks with combined assets of more than $80 billion would fail this year.
After seven months, however, only 70 banks with $20.9 billion of assets have failed, far below the rate the F.D.I.C. forecast.
But even as banking experts debate how much the slowdown stems from election-year politics and how much from the palliative effects of the lower interest rates that make even the weakest banks more profitable, the F.D.I.C. is warning that tougher new regulations that will take effect on Dec. 19 will result in a flurry of bank closings.


Capitalists Short of Capital, Russian Managers Privatize at a Time of Scarcity
The main office building of the Bolshevik factory, part of a huge military-industrial concern, is built from the shell of a former church.
On the wall outside is a plaque to the factory's true patron saint, Marshal Dmitri F. Ustinov.
Marshal Ustinov, who was Soviet Defense Minister when he died in 1984, was known as "Mr. Military-Industrial Complex." This factory, which he directed from 1938 to 1941, before Stalin named him Armaments Commissar in World War II, is his monument.


Report Cites Abuses of Child-Labor Law
One hundred and thirty children, including a 7-year-old, were found illegally employed in New York City factories during the first six months of the year, the State Labor Department reported yesterday.
That finding is an indication of an even greater problem of child-labor law violations throughout the state, said the department's director of labor standards, Richard J. Polsinello.


MORE ON THE CONVENTION
The Two Faces Of One Outlook
The Republicans may be fighting a "cultural war" against the Democrats, but there is also a cultural war being waged within the Republican ranks.
It pits conservatism with a snarl against conservatism with a smile.
News analysis, page A13.
Between Two Worlds
The frequency with which politicians and journalists now hop back and forth between two fields has raised questions on ethics.
Page A14.
Growing Asset for the G.O.P.
The political sophistication of Barbara Bush, who is often described as the Republicans' "secret weapon," is now a secret poorly kept.
Page A15.
The Market Speaks
A political "stock market" at the University of Iowa has the Bush-Clinton race neck-and-neck.
Page A17.
Erratrum
The President on the left did not say what the President on the right said he said.
Page A13.


The White House; Bush Aide Dismissed After Race-Tinged Dispute
A racially charged dispute between a black newspaper reporter and a press aide for the White House blossomed today into an embarrassment for President Bush's campaign.
The aide, Bobby Carr, switched from the White House staff to a job with the campaign last month, four days after an incident in Detroit in which he was accused of using a racial slur in reference to the reporter.


Today's Schedule
Order of of events and speakers from the Republican Party, which is not providing specific times.
8 P.M. (Eastern daylight time) Call to order by Richard N. Bond, Republican national chairman.
*
Presentation of colors by the Barbara Pierce Bush Elementary School, Houston, and the George Herbert Walker Bush Elementary School, Midland, Tex.
* Pledge of Allegiance by Lee Greenwood, country singer.
* National anthem by Wynonna Judd, country singer.
*
Invocation by Commissioner Ruth Osborne, national president of the Salvation Army Women's Organization.
* Assemblyman Jose Sosa of New Jersey.
* Gov. John Ashcroft of Missouri, chairman of the National Governors' Association.
* The Rev. Pat Robertson, president of the Christian Broadcasting Network.
* Kay James, associate director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy.
* Gov. George V. Voinovich of Ohio.
* Mary Fisher, founder of the Family AIDS Network.
* Marilyn Quayle.
* Entertainment by Wynonna Judd.
* Barbara Bush.
* Nomination of President Bush by Labor Secretary Lynn Martin.
* Seconding speech by Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky.
* Seconding speech by Gloria Gonzales-Roemer, delegate from Colorado.
* Seconding speech by Pat Saiki, administrator of the Small Business Administration.
* Seconding speech by J. C. Watts member of the Corporate Commission of Oklahoma.
*
Nomination of of Vice President Dan Quayle by William J. Bennett, former Secretary of Education and former director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy.
*
Seconding speeches by Donna Sims of Houston, single mother; Zora K. Brown, advocate for cancer patients and Charlene Haar, Senate candidate from South Dakota
* Roll-call of the states Today's Television
Live Network Broadcasts  ABC
(Channel 7 in New York)
10 P.M. to 11 P.M.  CBS
(Channel 2 in New York)
10 P.M. to 12:15 A.M.  NBC
(Channel 4 in New York)
10 P.M. to 11 P.M.  PBS
(Channel 13 in New York)
8 P.M. to the final gavel. Other Networks
UNIVISION
(UHF Channel 41 in the New York area)
11 P.M. to midnight.  CABLE NEWS NETWORK
(Channel varies by cable system)
8 P.M. to 11 P.M.  C-SPAN
(Channel varies by cable system)
Gavel-to-gavel coverage, or about 8 P.M. to 12:30 A.M.  COMEDY CENTRAL
(Channel varies by cable system)
9 P.M. to 11 P.M.  MTV
(Channel varies by cable system)
Report at 8 P.M.  CROSSWALKS
(Available on in New York City; channel varies by borough)
Gavel-to-gavel coverage, or about 8 P.M. to 12:30 A.M.


Critic's Notebook; The Republicans Play A Dissonant Tune
Watching the Republican National Convention is a split-screen experience.
It is like a concert for two orchestras whose conductors are not on speaking terms.
From the official side come easy-listening tunes scored for strings and trumpets.
From the network side comes a dissonant threnody.
Whichever channel viewers turned to on opening night, except perhaps C-Span, which sticks more to the podium proceedings, they learned of dissension and dismay in Republican ranks.
Not until Ronald Reagan's speech, at the end of the evening, was there harmony.
Anchors, reporters and observers agreed that the former President had struck an upbeat note.


Guaranteed to Have the Laugh of Your Life
Meet the Mets.
People, with self-confidence some seasons, self-deprecation others, used to sing the line at Shea Stadium or at their television sets.
Meet the Mets.
Greet the Mets.
In 1992, it's become a question rather than a slogan.
Meet the Mets?
Why?
And who has that much time?


Out of the Toolbox, Into the Kitchen
IT may not be long before chefs start wearing hard hats instead of toques.
Many of them are already using equipment -- electric drills, blowtorches and such -- usually associated with construction work instead of cooking.
"Yeah, the blowtorch works great," said Alfred Portale, the chef at the Gotham Bar and Grill in New York.
"It's the quickest, most direct way to glaze the top of a berry gratin or a creme brulee. You don't heat up the whole dessert when you just wave the torch over the top. You've got control."


Coalition Asks Court to Force Newark Housing Authority to Build
A coalition of community housing advocates went to Federal court today to ask for help in getting the Newark Housing Authority to make good on its promise to build hundreds of units of low-income housing.
The promise, made three years ago, is backed by millions of Federal dollars.
But the only housing built so far blew down in a 1989 storm.


Among Athletics, La Russa Ranks With Best of Them
If Ronald Reagan can say he knew Thomas Jefferson, then it might be said that Goose Gossage knew Connie Mack and every great manager to come down the major league pike.
Martin, Weaver, Howser, Mauch, you name them, Gossage has played for them or against them.


CHRONICLE
CHRIS EVERT will fly to New York from her home in Aspen, Colo., to receive a special tribute at the Women's Tennis Association's 16th annual awards ceremonies on Aug. 31.
The event will be a benefit for New York Special Olympics, the competition for people with physical or mental disabilities.
The award itself will be an eagle of Baccarat crystal symbolizing "The Wind Beneath My Wings."
GERARD SMITH, the executive director of the Women's Tennis Association, said the group's board wanted to honor Ms.
Evert "for her years of service to the game, especially off the court, where players don't win titles or applause for their contributions." This is the first time the association will make such a special tribute.
Ms.
Evert retired from tennis in 1989 at the age of 34.


A Birthday Celebration And a Messiaen Tribute
The Da Capo Chamber Players will celebrate Elliott Carter's 85th birthday and pay tribute to the late composer Olivier Messiaen during its 1992-93 season of three concerts, which will begin on Oct. 28.
For the opening concert, at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, the group will present two works of Nicholas Maw, "Persona VI" and "Ghost Dances," and works by Debussy and Brahms.
Sarah Rothenberg, Da Capo's pianist, is to join Mr.
Maw for a pre-concert conversation.
On Nov. 8 at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, the group is to be joined by the soprano Lucy Shelton and the organist Jon Gillock for an all-Messiaen program to include "Poemes Pour Mi" and the "Quartet for the End of Time."


New York's Welfare Centers: A Glimpse of the Recession's Human Toll


From AIDS to Peace, With a Chaplain's Help
THE REV.
ANN WILLIAMS, a chaplain at Lenox Hill Hospital, can tell stories to break your heart.
They come from 8 East, the AIDS ward.
There was the member of her own religion, Southern Baptist, who for most of a lifetime had wrestled with self-hatred growing from the condemnation rained on him by his pastor and family for his youthful peccadilloes.
Writing notes while on a respirator, he told her how they had burned his rock records.


Howe Gets Three Years on Probation
Steve Howe, the Yankee relief pitcher who has struggled for a decade with drug and alcohol problems, was sentenced today to a $1,000 fine and three years on probation for attempting to possess cocaine.
Howe, who is 34 years old, declined an opportunity to testify in United States District Court here before being sentenced by Magistrate Bart Erickson.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 14
Aug. 7
Aug. 16
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
6.9
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.2
3.0
Gasoline stocks
211.4
214.5
205.8
Distillate stocks
120.8
118.1
123.7
Crude imports, daily
7.4
6.0
7.0
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.8
2.2
Crude stocks
328.0
329.3
343.6
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
90.4
90.7
88.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Treasuries Regain Some Ground
The bond market rose modestly yesterday, wiping out most of Monday's losses on the 30-year bond and moving higher in other maturities.
But traders and analysts are still worried about some sudden surprise from the Republican National Convention and expect the market to be volatile for the rest of the week.
The day's economic data continued to paint a picture of an economy growing slowly, which is one of the main reasons prices of notes and bonds have advanced recently.


Voila! A Hudson Valley Red Is Born
IN Bordeaux, blending red wines is an old and high art.
In the Hudson Valley, the art of blending Bordeaux-style reds is young and needs tutoring.
That's why John Dyson, the owner of the valley's premier winery, brought his pal Bruno Prats, who owns Chateau Cos d'Estournel, a St.-Estephe jewel, to Millbrook for the eighth straight year, to help him blend the 1991 reds.
Mr.
Prats applied 25 years' experience to his three hours of tasting, analysis and recommendations in the cool, brick-vaulted barrel room at Millbrook Vineyards here in Dutchess County.
Mr.
Dyson and his wine maker, John Graziano, have blended reds only since 1984, the year of the estate's first commercial vintage.


N.F.L. Training Camp Report
Denver Broncos
Veteran quarterback Steve Pelluer, obtained from Kansas City under Plan B as a prospective backup to John Elway, was cut by the Broncos along with four other players.
Pelluer, an eight-year veteran, was the victim of the surprising promise shown by the second-year contender Shawn Moore, plus his own lackluster training camp performance and a $600,000 annual salary.
By waiving Pelluer, who did not play in the Broncos' 31-27 loss to the Dolphins in Berlin on Saturday, the Broncos will save $560,000 this season, according to The Rocky Mountain News.
Pelluer's departure leaves three quarterbacks in camp.
In addition to Elway, they are Moore, an 11th-round 1991 draft choice from Virginia who played on the practice squad last year and in the World League this spring, and rookie Tommy Maddox, this year's first-round draft choice from U.C.L.A., who had a rough outing in his professional debut in Berlin.
He threw three interceptions, fumbled once and was sacked six times.


M.D.'s Make Room for Others In Ranks of Psychoanalysts
Following in the footsteps of Freud's daughter, scores of nonphysicians are training to become psychoanalysts under the settlement of a lawsuit that promises to transform this most intensive form of psychotherapy.
Since the early years of the 20th century, physicians, specifically, psychiatrists, have dominated the practice of psychoanalysis in the United States.
For decades, the accredited training institutes of the American Psychoanalytic Association insisted that applicants have an M.D. degree before they could start training, and the institutes made only a few exceptions for academic researchers.


So What Do the Guidance Counselors Know?; Effects of 'Tracking'
To the Editor:
Before the numbers of minority graduate students can be increased (front page, Aug. 4), the number of minority students who attend college must increase.
Recognizing that student success in college is as important as admission, the real need is for rigorous college preparation for increased numbers of students bound for college.


Situation in Bosnia Isn't Like Holocaust
To the Editor:
One can only sympathize with Bosnian Muslim, Croat and Serb prisoners of war and the civilian populaces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but the comparison of the treatment of the prisoners of war held by those three sides and of the noncombatant refugees of the civil war in Bosnia with the death camps of World War II is a diminution of the genocide of Europe's Jews by the Nazis.


Judge Deals Blow to Rockefeller Campaign
A Federal judge dealt an all-but-final blow yesterday to Larry Rockefeller's Republican Senate candidacy, dismissing without a hearing a lawsuit in which supporters of his campaign argued that New York's complex election laws had unconstitutionally impeded their efforts to get him on the primary ballot.
Judge John S. Martin Jr. of Federal District Court in Manhattan ruled that the state's requirement of 10,000 valid petition signatures from registered Republicans was not unreasonable, and denied the campaign's request for hearings on the matter.
The suit had sought to have the required number of signatures reduced to 7,500.


Eating Well
LIFE'S a drag. And then you die.
The wording has been changed but the sentiment remains.
And fits the latest findings about the relationship between very low cholesterol levels and death from causes other than heart disease.
An article in The New York Times on Aug. 11 discussed a substantial body of evidence that shows a relationship between levels of total blood cholesterol under 160 and greater incidence of death from liver cancer, noncancerous lung disease, intracranial hemmorhage, suicide and alcoholism.
Between 10 and 14 percent of the population of the United States has a cholesterol level under 160.


Report Finds An Embattled Crown Hts.
With an edgy Crown Heights marking the anniversary of last summer's racially charged disturbances, a coalition of community leaders has taken a second look at the neighborhood and found a community suffering from high unemployment, AIDS, an overwhelming influx of immigrants and overtaxed city services.
The report, prepared by 40 educators, civic leaders and clergyman in an effort to examine the underlying causes of the disturbances, also called youth services in Crown Heights "grossly inadequate." A third of 235,000 residents of Crown Heights are under the age of 24.


The Politics of Exclusion
The Republican Party platform is warmly titled "The Vision Shared: Uniting Our Family, Our Country, Our World." The booklet bears a nostalgic photograph from the Ellis Island era: a family of three looks across New York Harbor at the Statue of Liberty, with the camera at their backs.
The Republican Party on display in Houston is far more exclusionist than these Ellis Island scenes would suggest.
It's clear from the number of women and blacks present that the party has made strides.
But on issue after issue -- abortion, gay rights and race -- the Republicans still have a long way to go before actions match their rhetoric.


U.S. Says a Cambodian Ring Created Fake P.O.W. Photos
Senior Defense Department officials say that they have exposed a ring of Cambodians who created and circulated at least six fraudulent photographs intended to represent American prisoners of war still alive in Southeast Asia.
"We have identified the people involved and talked to them," said an official who insisted on not being identified.
"We know how they extracted the pictures and processed them and sent them to a refugee camp in Thailand."


ON TELEVISION: Campaign Watch; Networks Focus on Shift to the Right
During Patrick J. Buchanan's speech on Monday night, CBS twice cut away to a big man on the convention floor who was wearing a sequined red cowboy hat.
The man was sweating and yelling "Pat, Pat, Pat!" He certainly seemed to be enjoying the speech.
In fact, he seemed to be enjoying it a little too much.
Ideally at a political convention the response of the delegates is supposed to cue the television audience.
Their enthusiasm is supposed to be inspiring, and their excitement infectious.


T.V.A. Bonds Selling Well
The Tennessee Valley Authority, which priced $700 million of a taxable 30-year bond issue on Monday through competitive bidding, has indicated that the sale is going well with buying dominated by institutional investors and reports of some overseas interest.
Salomon Brothers Inc., the issue's underwriter, said that proceeds from the offering would be used to pay off the last of the T.V.A. debt held by the Federal Financing Bank that was eligible for refinancing.
The bank is an arm of the Treasury.


Elcor Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
An English idea was imported to these shores a quarter of a century ago by Sam Stayman.
It could not be called the Stayman convention, since that would have caused great confusion, so it became known as Namyats, which is Stayman in reverse.
The idea is to use an opening bid of four in a minor suit artificially, to show a long, strong major suit.
A dramatic example is the diagramed deal from semifinal stage of the International Team Trials in Memphis in May.


G.O.P. Outdraws 'Murphy Brown'
Vice President Dan Quayle would probably be happy to hear that 11 million more Americans watched the Republican National Convention on Monday night than tuned in to watch the evening's episode of "Murphy Brown."
About 26.5 million Americans watched the convention on the three broadcast networks, ABC, NBC and CBS, and on PBS, according to Nielsen Media Research.
An additional 1.2 million households tuned in to the convention on CNN.


'Wasserella' Losing Some Of Its Talent
Robert B. McKeon suspects the painters will still have his new offices in a shambles when he hangs his shingle today at 10 East 50th Street.
But he and a secretary will christen the offices of Veritas Capital Inc., drop cloths or not, making Mr.
McKeon the latest in a string of defectors from Wasserstein, Perella &amp; Company, the investment banking boutique.
Mr.
McKeon's former boss, Bruce Wasserstein, will take on Mr.
McKeon's duties running a $1.1 billion merchant-banking fund.


Fred's Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Twins Study Shows School Is Sound Investment
Like cleaner air and safer streets, better education has become a must on every politician's wish list.
But in an era of shallow pockets, when an extra dollar for schools may mean a dollar less to keep the bridges from falling down, would more spending really pay off?
Just-completed research by two Princeton econometricians confirms that it probably would -- and handsomely.
More years in school, Orley Ashenfelter and Alan Kreuger conclude, may well be the key to salvaging the declining prospects of unskilled workers.


Accounts
*
Loehmann's, New York, to Lois/ U.S.A., New York, to handle the discount clothing retailer's $5 million account, previously at Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York.
A print campaign, carrying the theme "I'd rather be at Loehmann's," is scheduled to begin running today.
The advertisements will feature local references: in New York, for example, to the Yankees, and in Los Angeles to the film-industry book "You'll Never Eat Lunch in This Town Again." *
Marine Midland Bank Inc., Buffalo, to Rumrill-Hoyt Inc., Rochester, to handle the bank's advertising and marketing accounts, previously at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York.
In a review, Rumrill bested the incumbent and two other New York agencies: Backer Spielvogel Bates and Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore.
Billings were estimated to exceed $4 million.


Books of The Times; Words as a Shield Against the Nazis
The Journey  By Ida Fink Translated from the Polish by Joanna Weschler and Francine Prose. 259 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $20.
The Holocaust -- the Third Reich's genocidal policies that began more than a half-century ago -- is in the forefront of concern for human life again.
Declarations of ethnic cleansing in what was Yugoslavia, warfare in the Persian Gulf and tribal killings in Africa and who knows where else are being compared to the Holocaust, which caused the deaths of millions of Jews, political prisoners, gypsies, homosexuals and various others during World War II.
When civilians anywhere are being beaten, starved or bombed, it's hard to deny them the right to borrow the word Holocaust, with its record of concentration camps and gas chambers, even though the German death machine was far more systematic and slaughtered larger numbers of innocents than are killed in today's atrocities.
In fact and fiction, the story of the Holocaust continues to be told.
"The Journey," by Ida Fink, is one such unusual novel, singular in its details, yet universal in its memories.
Although intended as fiction, "The Journey" reads like fact; her previous book, "A Scrap of Time," was a short-story collection.
The author, who was born in Poland and now lives in Israel, lived in a ghetto through 1942 and then in hiding until the end of World War II.
Her autobiographical novel follows a small group of young Jewish women who learned to hide their identities from the Gestapo as well as from their blackmailing Polish countrymen.


On the Front Lines of the War Against Misery
Robert Brice arrived promptly for his appointment at the St.
Nicholas Income Maintenance Center on West 125th Street the other morning, joining dozens of others waiting to tell their tales of hardship to a welfare worker.
But before his turn came, Mr.
Brice fell asleep, only to wake up two hours later to the sound of his name echoing across the huge expanse of the third-floor room.
He gathered up his envelopes stuffed with documentation of the hard times that have befallen him and wearily made his way to the desk of Terry Cowell, a welfare worker who has been seeing a lot of Robert Brices these days.


AT LUNCH WITH: Charles Aznavour; A Story. A Passion. A Life of Song.
THE lunch is long and lazy, in the French style; a dozen friends on a terrace overlooking the sea, seven courses, good Bordeaux, Nat King Cole in the background.
But Charles Aznavour is having none of it.
Well, a bit of gateau.
And a little rose wine.
"I don't need it," he says of the meal.
"I don't have much of an appetite." Then he smiles.
"Except for life."


CHRONICLE
It's being billed as an English country wedding, but the event is sure to be more like a fashion extravaganza.
On Saturday, in a village church somewhere in Wiltshire, England, Matthew Gordon Summer, better known as STING, will wed TRUDIE STYLER, an actress and producer who has been his companion for the past decade.
For the occasion, GIANNI VERSACE, the Milanese designer, has created romantic outfits for the 40-year-old British rock star, his 35-year-old bride and Sting's five children, who will be attendants.


ON TELEVISION: The Ad Campaign; Clinton Tries a New Approach
ON THE SCREEN
In both of Bill Clinton's new 15-second commercials, black words on a white background appear to provide documentation of what the announcer is saying.
Certain passages are underlined in red.
TELEVISION SCRIPT 1
"And now a short break for the facts. On Nov., 1990, George Bush signed into law the second biggest tax increase in American history. Under Bill Clinton, Arkansas has the second lowest tax burden per person in the country. Those are the facts. Back to the show." ACCURACY
The bare facts are accurate, but the Bush organization quickly issued a rebuttal suggesting distortion.
The Republicans argued, among other points, that "the 1990 budget agreement was forced on the President by a Democratic Congress obsessed with spending." The Bush forces also contended that Arkansas's tax revenue is low only because Arkansas's citizens have been kept so poor under Bill Clinton." SCORECARD
The ad appears to break into regular programming for a news development rather than a political commercial.
It hits a nerve in the Bush campaign: Coming during the week of the national convention, it is a reminder of the no new taxes pledge President Bush made at the convention four years ago.
Patrick J. Buchanan used the "no new taxes" theme in his Republican primary challenge to Mr.Bush.
TELEVISION SCRIPT 2
"More facts. Under George Bush, America has had no growth in private-sector jobs and wages have fallen. This year, under Bill Clinton, Arkansas leads the nation in job growth. And incomes have grown at twice the national rate. Those are the facts. Back to the show." ACCURACY
The thurst of the commercial is true: fewer new jobs have been created in the Bush Administration than in any other Presidential term since World War II.
But the Bush campaign points out that the ad neglects to acknowledge that some jobs have been created.
The Republicans also say that using wage figures is misleading because wages are only one measure of compensation.
SCORECARD
The ad is effective in that it appears to authoritative, not purely a political commercial.
And it hits President Bush on an issue that is a cornerstone of his campaign, the importance of creating jobs.
This ad and it's companion commercial are being broadcast in Houston and Washington, and appear to be aimed primarily at generating new reports that will attract some attention away from the Republicans during their convention.


An Actor Analyzes An Enigma: Roy Cohn
He was a brilliant, amoral, feared lawyer whose public career as an aide to Senator Joseph R. McCarthy in the 1950's made him both celebrated and widely loathed.
"Roy Cohn is finally, ultimately, an enigmatic figure, a Chinese puzzle," said James Woods, the actor who plays Mr.
Cohn in a new Home Box Office film.
"I didn't necessarily want to portray him as an evil character, although the rational part of my mind knows that he probably was."


Farmer's Life for Agriculture Commissioner
John R. H. Blum, the new state Commissioner of Agriculture, is optimistic about the future of farming in Connecticut -- despite the fact that his own farm only occasionally makes a profit.
"Connecticut farming is expanding, not declining," he said.
A lawyer by training and a farmer by choice, Mr.
Blum and his wife, Jeanne, operate a 391-acre farm, called Fairfield Farms, here in the northwestern corner of Connecticut, raising pure-bred Angus cattle.


Fullback Sues School Over Her Injury
Tawana Hammond, her lawyer says, was just entering her senior year and was the fastest runner at Francis Scott Key High School, on the northwestern fringe of Baltimore's suburbs, when she tried out for the football team.
Three years later, she is missing half her pancreas, has amassed what her mother says are medical bills exceeding $200,000.
And she is suing the Carroll County Board of Education because, she contends, no one told her "of the potential risks of serious and disabling injury inherent in the sport," according to a lawsuit filed in the county's Circuit Court last week.


Shut Out in the Cold: Story of Mets' Summer
It could have been December, and Dodger Stadium could have been some elaborate, expensive Hollywood sound stage populated by a modest collection of unpaid extras.
The scene was that devoid of authentic energy.
The public-address announcer introduced the Mets and Dodgers, and the response was unanimous, amounting to no more than an apathetic rustle of applause.
The right-field bleachers were cordoned off, their emptiness perfectly preserved.
Expanses of the second and third decks were barren.


NEW YORK AGENCY CUTS APARTMENTS FOR THE HOMELESS
Attributing an array of new problems in New York City's housing projects to a program to set aside thousands of apartments for homeless families, Housing Authority officials say they plan to sharply reduce the number of apartments given to the homeless in the future.
The shift in policy has created a division between the Housing Authority and other officials of the Dinkins administration who are scrambling to find homes for thousands of families each year and say they are counting on the Authority to provide apartments.


Dell Computer Net Up 76.6% in 2d Quarter
The Dell Computer Corporation, unscathed by the pricing war that battered profits of most makers of personal computers, said today that its net income rose 76.6 percent in the second quarter.
The gain came at the expense of many smaller makers of personal computers such as Gateway, Zeos and ALR Research, whose low-price niche in the market was raided by Dell and Compaq Computer during the quarter.
Compaq touched off a wave of price-cutting in June that Dell and many other companies quickly matched or exceeded.


Voice for Quayle: A Single Mother
Move over, Tanya Tucker. Here comes Donna Sims.
Ms.
Sims, a single mother of three who wrote Vice President Dan Quayle to compliment his "Murphy Brown" speech, will deliver one of the three seconding speeches for Mr.
Quayle on Wednesday night.


A Bosnian City Is Now Rubble, and Riven by Hate
Probably no large town in Bosnia and Herzegovina has suffered as much physical damage as Mostar.
Serbian forces have blown up six major bridges, burned hundreds of homes and businesses and wrecked both of the principal religious centers, a modern Catholic cathedral and a stately 15th-century mosque.


REPUBLICANS IN HOUSTON: News Analysis; G.O.P. Is Flirting With the Dangers of Negativism
Richard N. Bond, the fiercely combative Republican chairman, says his party is fighting a "cultural war" with the Democrats.
But there is also a cultural war taking place within the Republican ranks here, a war that pits conservatism with a snarl against conservatism with a smile.
Both are on display in the Astrodome this week, and both will probably be on display throughout the campaign.
The question is, which will President Bush emphasize in his acceptance speech on Thursday night?
Which will he emphasize in his campaign oratory and in his television commercials?
And which, if either, will work?


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
My occasional trips into the city are always big events composed of small surprises.
Lately, I'm amazed at the amount of information I collect just walking up Fifth Avenue.
Every few steps, someone waves a handbill at me.
I don't mind.
I always take it to have enough reading material for the entire hour train ride back to Weston, Conn.
Not only the usual $5 manicure special, but a religious prophecy (one side in Russian), the truth about diamonds, an opportunity for a free facial or to learn Japanese.


Wording of AIDS Education Pledge Ignites Battle
The unrelenting squabble over AIDS instruction between Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and a majority of the Board of Education flared again yesterday over the form of a pledge that outside AIDS lecturers will have to sign.
Last May, the board, on a 4-3 vote, approved a resolution requiring that lessons about preventing AIDS always stress sexual abstinence more than other means of prevention, like condoms.


A Voyage Halfway Around the World Ends in Vain
When 151 Chinese men came ashore on Haiti's southwest coast before dawn on Sunday, startling residents at a beach resort, they had sailed for more than a month from port to port halfway around the world in a small fishing boat, an American immigration official said today.
Their ordeal was described by the official, Bruce J. Nicholl of the Immigration and Naturalization Service's anti-smuggling unit, as the first convincing evidence of a new pattern in a multi-million dollar business of trafficking illegal immigrants by gangs operating in Hong Kong and major American cities.


BBC Serves As Medium For Ghosts
As if Olympia &amp; York's financial problems were not already making enough waves in London, the developer's Canary Wharf Tower is disturbing television viewers -- specifically 100,000 residents in northern London.
And nothing, it seems, can be done to fix the faulty tower.
The difficulty with Britain's tallest building is that it is also one of the land's shiniest.
For some Londoners, the 812-foot tower blocks television reception altogether.


Buchanan, Conservatism's Ugly Face
"Politics," Henry Adams observed, "is the systematic organization of hatreds." In Houston, the country club Republicans supplied the organization and the Buchanan-Robertson brigades supplied the hatreds.
Even as the Democratic fringe was being shown the door by the party's new leadership, the G.O.P. was surrending to its own fringe, the San Jacinto Republicans.
San Jacinto is the marshy site near the convention center where, in 1836, Gen.
Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna managed to turn his overwhelming advantages over Sam Houston's small army of rebel Texans into a debacle.
Santa Anna's tactics -- take no prisoners, burn everything -- only reinforced Texan resistance to his reactionary authoritarianism.
There is a moral here worth considering, as the Republicans, scorching the earth as they go, march off into the fever swamps.
Santa Anna would find himself at home in the pantheon of Patrick J. Buchanan, an acknowledged fan of two 20th century Roman Catholic tyrants, Francisco Franco and Augusto Pinochet.


Guilty Pleas Are Entered In Car Ring
Thirteen people have pleaded guilty to Federal charges of running a luxury-car theft ring that maintained a Brooklyn warehouse where prospective purchasers could pick out a stolen Mercedes-Benz for delivery to the West African nation of Ghana.
Federal officials said the ring's kingpin was Albert Acheampong, the nephew of Gen.
Ignatius Acheampong, the Ghanaian head of state who was overthrown in 1972 and later executed.


Marketers Losing Reluctance to Join Fight Against AIDS
MAINSTREAM marketers are joining Arthur Ashe's fight against AIDS, in another small yet significant sign in Madison Avenue's continuing struggle over how to handle the impact and implications of the disease.
Mr.
Ashe, the tennis player who disclosed in April that he had AIDS, will play host to an all-star tournament on Aug. 30 at the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows, Queens.
Among the players expected at the exhibition, which will benefit the Arthur Ashe Foundation for the Defeat of AIDS, are Andre Agassi, Steffi Graff, John McEnroe and Pete Sampras.


Buchanan, Conservatism's Ugly Face
"Politics," Henry Adams observed, "is the systematic organization of hatreds." In Houston, the country club Republicans supplied the organization and the Buchanan-Robertson brigades supplied the hatreds.
Even as the Democratic fringe was being shown the door by the party's new leadership, the G.O.P. was surrending to its own fringe, the San Jacinto Republicans.
San Jacinto is the marshy site near the convention center where, in 1836, Gen.
Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna managed to turn his overwhelming advantages over Sam Houston's small army of rebel Texans into a debacle.
Santa Anna's tactics -- take no prisoners, burn everything -- only reinforced Texan resistance to his reactionary authoritarianism.
There is a moral here worth considering, as the Republicans, scorching the earth as they go, march off into the fever swamps.
Santa Anna would find himself at home in the pantheon of Patrick J. Buchanan, an acknowledged fan of two 20th century Roman Catholic tyrants, Francisco Franco and Augusto Pinochet.


Computer Dictionary: Back to Basics
Researchers here are entering the home stretch in what is probably the world's most costly and ambitious effort to develop a dictionary.
And few people are likely ever to read it.
The intended audience is computers.
The nine-year Electronic Dictionary Project, on which Japan's Government and industry are expected to spend more than $100 million, is developing a dictionary to help machines understand English and Japanese.
The main purpose is to help computers translate documents from one language to another.


Economic Watch; 3 Wishes: Ways for Bush to Prime Economy
With unemployment seemingly stuck near 8 percent and consumers guarding their paychecks as if each would be the last, is George Bush fated to play out the election campaign as Herbert Hoover to Bill Clinton's rendition of F.D.R.?
The White House has taken pains to scotch rumors that he would announce some dramatic initiative for jump-starting the economy.
And some economists hope they mean what they say, arguing that the present course is the best course for a stable, noninflationary economy.


Japan Announces Series of Steps To Try to Halt Stock Market Slide
With another steep drop in share prices deepening the sense of crisis in Japan's financial system, the Finance Minister announced a series of measures Tuesday aimed at halting the two-and-a-half-year stock market slide.
The action was taken after the closely watched Nikkei average of 225 stocks plunged 620.14 points on Tuesday, or 4.2 percent, to 14,309.41, its lowest level in more than six years.


Incinerator Plan Delicate For Dinkins and Vallone
Mayor David N. Dinkins and Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone have carefully crafted a garbage management plan so they can line up a majority of votes to get it through a hostile City Council, City Hall officials said yesterday.
Only a month ago, a majority of the Council said it was prepared to kill another garbage disposal plan that included a new incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, even though city and state experts say construction of such a plant is all but unavoidable as the city runs out of landfill space and other states restrict the exportation of garbage.


Three Credit-Data Concerns Settle Charges
Three credit information companies agreed to settle charges they violated the Fair Credit Reporting Act, the Federal Trade Commission announced yesterday.
Specifically, the commission said the three companies -- I.R.S.C.
Inc. of Fullerton, Calif.; CDB Infotek in Orange, Calif., and Inter-Fact Inc. in Maple Heights, Ohio -- failed to "adequately insure" their customers had a legally permissible reason for obtaining sensitive information.


REPUBLICANS ASSAIL CLINTON AS RADICAL AND BIG SPENDER AND ASSERT BUSH STRENGTHS
The Republicans pressed their lacerating attack on Gov.
Bill Clinton and the Democrats in Congress at their National Convention today, as speaker after speaker portrayed Mr.
Clinton as a radical liberal who would coddle criminals, disarm America and break the economy with higher taxes and more Government spending.
President Bush worked in his hotel room with his advisers to devise an acceptance speech intended to restore the credibility of the "read my lips" candidate's economic promises.
As if previewing his themes, Mr.
Bush promised in interviews to put new faces in his Cabinet in a second term, restore economic growth and take a tougher line with Congress.
An Image of Diversity
This produced a wave of reports across the Astrodome that the three men widely regarded as the architects of Mr.
Bush's unpopular economic policies -- Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady; the budget director, Richard G. Darman; and the chief White House economist, Michael J. Boskin -- would be offered as sacrifices after the election.


Situation in Bosnia Isn't Like Holocaust; Chetniks and Partisans
To the Editor:
"Refugees From Camps Tell of Agony and Terror" (news article, Aug. 7) inaccurately describes the origin of the name "Chetniks," which has been adopted by the most violent of the irregular Serb militias.


Campus Journal; Falwell's College Alters Mission to Keep It Alive
As the Rev.
Jerry Falwell makes his appearance this week at the Republican National Convention, the future of the college he founded to promote the ideals of the religious right is in some doubt.
Mr.
Falwell, the fundamentalist Baptist preacher and televangelist, opened Liberty Baptist College in 1971 here in central Virginia.
The college, now Liberty University, was to be an extension of his ministry, Thomas Road Baptist Church, with the stated purpose of "training young champions for Christ for world evangelization."


Some Foreigners Steal the Show in Salzburg
Gerard Mortier's mandate in this, his first summer as artistic director of the Salzburg Festival, was to cleanse the temple, to sweep out the remains of the Herbert von Karajan regime and to replace lifeless rituals -- as he likes to describe them -- with vibrant new art.
There has been plenty of innovation at Salzburg this summer (and some judicious conservatism, too).
But from the first, everyone perceived one production as the centerpiece of Mr.
Mortier's first season -- his calling card.
That production was Peter Sellars's staging of Olivier Messiaen's opera "St. Francois d'Assise" ("St. Francis of Assisi") which took place Monday night in the spacious confines of the Felsenreitschule.


Personal Health
These are children who don't seem to fit in, ones whom other children often label as "nerds," "geeks" or "weirdos," children who are often last to be chosen for a team or group, if they are chosen at all.
They have trouble making or keeping friends and tend to become loners or sometimes bullies.


So What Do the Guidance Counselors Know?; Raise Their Goals
To the Editor:
Although I'm a white male, I have great empathy for those quoted in your article on bias against minority students in their quest for higher education (front page, Aug. 4).
I've never forgotten the day 35 years ago when an eighth-grade guidance counselor urged me not to take college preparatory courses in high school because of my mediocre grades in grammar school.
Sometimes I still wonder about how much more limited the course of my life might have been had I followed his advice.


Soldier of Fortune Magazine Held Liable for Killer's Ad
In a case that raised First Amendment issues, a Federal appeals court has upheld a ruling that Soldier of Fortune magazine was liable in the contract murder of an man whose killers were hired through a "sinister" and suggestive classified advertisement in the magazine.
The 2-to-1 ruling by a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, published Monday, upheld a $4.3 million damage award to the sons of the victim, Richard Braun of suburban Atlanta.


Bird Unlaces His Sneakers and Says Goodbye
Ending a legendary career that left a monumental impact on the game he loved, Larry Bird announced his retirement from basketball yesterday.
A chronic back condition that plagued Bird the past two seasons forced him to leave the game at age 35, after 13 memorable seasons with the Boston Celtics.
He will remain with the team as a special assistant to the team's executive vice president, Dave Gavitt.
But the excruciating back pain that Bird endured this summer while playing with the United States Olympic men's basketball team convinced him to face the inevitable.


Giants' Quarterbacks Are Running Out of Room
The Giants have five quarterbacks in training camp, and there are good reasons for keeping all five.
But teams do not have that luxury, and that presents two questions:
Who stays? And where do they stay?


2 Hurricane Players Indicted
Lamar Thomas, an All-America candidate at wide receiver, was one of two University of Miami football players indicted today in a Federal inquiry of financial-aid fraud involving some 65 student athletes at the university.
Thomas and Jason Marucci, a reserve running back, were charged at the United States Courthouse with criminal fraud relating to Pell Grant forms they filled out between 1989 and 1991.


A Democratic Briefing in Houston Draws a Hostile Audience


The Heat Is Off! But Summer's Not Over
At the unfamiliar sight of potential customers, the Coney Island barker dropped her fork and grabbed a microphone, tossing lunch aside.
"A dollar a play, a dollar a win, a dollar to try your luck," she called, and the group of six young people stopped briefly to fire water pistols at clown heads.
One of them won a stuffed pink dog; another refused to pay.
"That might be it for the day," the barker sighed as they walked away.
It was another cool, misty morning on Coney Island, and Michael Amico, who runs a bank ball game, said he had so few customers that "we've started naming the teddy bears." At Lambri's Snack Bar, Mohammed Kayes complained that every day was the same story.
"We make food and then we throw it away," he said.


No, It's Not a Mad Vision. It's an Art Car. Want a Ride?
Americans love their cars.
Sometimes love turns into a different emotion, the kind that expresses itself in 10,000 marbles glued to the hood, or a boar's head, breathing smoke, fastened to the front bumper.
Harrod Blank understands.
He has sought out the impassioned few who love their vehicles not wisely but too well and made them the subject of "Wild Wheels," a documentary film that had its premiere at the National Gallery of Art in Washington on Sunday, and that opens in New York at the Film Forum next Wednesday.


A DELICATE BALANCE: Battle for Texas; Crippled by Economy, Texas Is Up for Grabs
Just 19 months ago, when the Republicans announced they would hold their convention here, President Bush seemed to have a lock on Texas.
A little more than a month ago Mr.
Perot seemed primed to take the state.
Now, even some of Mr.
Bush's most prominent supporters say he is fighting for his survival in the state that is the birthplace of his political career.
The political landscape in Texas has long favored Republicans at the top of the ticket.
But the electoral terrain has been shifting in recent years, and now both he and Gov.
Bill Clinton must clamber across uncertain ground.


Review/Opera; Decisions, Decisions, One in a Dream
How many times in later life must Mozart have wished he could retract the praise he had lavished on the new Archbishop of Salzburg, the dread Hieronymus Colloredo, in his little serenata "Il Sogno di Scipione"?
"My tongue exalts Scipio, my heart Girolamo," an epilogue reads, rendering Colloredo's given name in Italian.
In the work, performed for Colloredo's installation in 1772, the Roman general Scipio is shown in a dream, having to choose between Costanza (Steadfastness) and Fortuna (Chance), both represented by sopranos.
After visitations from his father, Emilio, and his adoptive grandfather, Publio, in the libretto by Pietro Metastasio, Scipio finally plumps for Costanza.


REPUBLICANS IN HOUSTON: Campaign Tactics; G.O.P. Tactic of Attack and Apology Is Emerging
Trying to taint their Democratic Presidential challengers without appearing to be in the gutter themselves, the Republicans have perfected a rhetorical two-step: say something nasty about the opposition, then apologize.
This have-it-both-ways ploy allows President Bush to stay above the fray as his lieutenants send out messages that they hope will stick, in spite of the apologies they offer afterwards.


THE MEDIA AND THE MESSAGE: Campaign Watch; G.O.P. Theme Flooding TV: Change With the Status Quo
Change the Congress. Change the world. Change the Cabinet. Change the channel even.
Just don't change the President!


Muehr Slips in Bid for Third Local Title
Mike Muehr's bid for an unprecedented third major golf title in the metropolitan area this summer got off on the wrong foot today as he was thwarted by the slick and fast greens of the Nassau Country Club.
Muehr, a 20-year-old who plays out of Roxiticus Golf Club in Mendham, N.J., and attends Duke University on a golf scholarship, shot a three-over-par 73 in the opening round of the 77th edition of the Met Open.
That put him six shots off the lead held by Charlie Cowell in the tournament, a $75,000 contest sponsored by MetLife.


Few Boston Officers Faulted In Inquiry Into Stuart Case
Police Commissioner Francis M. Roache today released the results of an internal investigation into police misconduct in the handling of the 1989 slaying of Carol Stuart, saying that the inquiry had found little fault with its officers but that one detective would be suspended for five days without pay for violating police practices.
Of 27 allegations of police misconduct reported by various witnesses in a separate investigation last year by the United States Attorney's office, only three were substantiated in the department's investigation.


Hear Ye, Hear Ye, the News of Today


End Ban on Gay G.I.'s, 2 Service Papers Urge
The unofficial weekly newspapers of the Army and Air Force have called on the Pentagon to end its ban on homosexuals in the armed services.
Just last year they refused to publish an advertisement praising gay soldiers in the Persian Gulf war.
The publications, Army Times and Air Force Times, say in editorials in their Aug. 24 issues that "discrimination based on sexual preference is no more legitimate than that based on race, gender or religion."


House Explosion on Long Island Injures 14 People


Peace. McEnroe Is Back on Team.
The misunderstanding is over, and it ended just the way John McEnroe, the instigator, hoped it would, with a vote of confidence for him from the Davis Cup establishment.
McEnroe, along with the singles players Andre Agassi and Jim Courier, is an official member of the United States Davis Cup team that will face Sweden in the competition's semifinal Sept. 25-27 at the Target Center in Minneapolis.
And despite McEnroe's protests to the contrary, United States Davis Cup officals say they "always assumed" McEnroe was a member of the team against Sweden.
They also say that McEnroe's name was not mentioned in the July 30 announcement that confirmed the selection of Agassi and Courier because McEnroe's doubles partner for that semifinal had not yet been determined and still has not been.


Anchorage Journal; Look, the Sky Is Falling And All's Turning to Ash
On their trip to Alaska, Charles and Barbara Strodel got to see all the sights: caribou, salmon, Dall sheep, grizzlies and, this morning, city streets covered with a quarter-inch of foul volcanic dust, a good bit of it swirling up into their nasal passages.
No matter, they said in voices muffled by tissue-paper masks.
It is something to tell the children about back in Corona Del Mar, Calif.
"They'll probably be out with a T-shirt soon," said Mrs.
Strodel, 59 years old.
"I survived Mount Whatsit."


Visits by Public Officials Helped Calm Troubled Neighborhood
To the Editor:
Rudolph W. Giuliani's "Rumor and Justice in Washington Heights" (Op-Ed, Aug. 7) offers little more than political grandstanding by a man who avoids the issues embroiling a troubled New York City neighborhood.
Mr.
Giuliani castigates Mayor David N. Dinkins and me for meeting with the family of Jose Garcia, following his shooting by a police officer.
He claims this was an act of political calculation.
Was it also an act of political calculation by John Cardinal O'Connor, who stood with us and the Garcia family?
Washington Heights was a community in rage; the only calculation in our actions was how to ease tensions.


Bernstein's Collection of Scores Is Going to the Philharmonic
Leonard Bernstein's personal music library, including his marked orchestral scores and a large collection of operas, piano music and vocal works, is to be given to the New York Philharmonic, probably next month.
The collection of more than 3,300 scores will become part of the Philharmonic's archive, which already includes a large collection of Bernstein correspondence and unissued performance recordings that document his long relationship with the orchestra.
Bernstein joined its conducting staff in 1943, when he was 25 years old and made a spectacular debut as a last-minute replacement for Bruno Walter in a nationwide radio broadcast.
He was the Philharmonic's music director from 1958 to 1969, and laureate conductor from 1969 until his death in 1990.


25 Firefighters Hurt In South Bronx Blaze
Twenty-five firefighters were injured yesterday while trying to extinguish a blaze that raced through the top three floors of a six-story Bronx apartment building, the authorities said.
All the residents of the building escaped without injury, the fire department said.
The fire, at 2134 Vyse Avenue in East Tremont, was first reported at 5:04 P.M. and brought under control by 6:25 P.M., the Fire Department said.
The cause had not been determined last night.


Smokers, Too, Want the Right to Choose; Culpable Companies
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen omits the broader point in "Smoking and Politics" (column, Aug. 5): The exposure of the public to the multitude of occupational and environmental carcinogens is enormous, and our awareness of the ramifications is developing.
The ravages of cancer to those exposed to asbestos are well known, and the scientific community is familiar with cancers among workers exposed to benzene and nickel.
Now evidence is rapidly accumulating that household uses of contaminated water causes adverse health effects.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.26
6.54
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.06
5.29
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.12
3.20
5.28
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.94
5.97
7.58
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.31
7.32
8.05
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.35
9.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.25
6.23
6.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


American Airlines Says It Will Have Big 3d-Quarter Loss
The AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines, told analysts yesterday that it would have a heavy loss in the third quarter, normally one of the strongest for the industry, since it is when summer travel is at its peak.
Michael Durham, American's chief financial officer, said only that the loss for the third quarter would be higher than its operating loss of $48 million in the second quarter.
The airline earned $70.3 million in last year's third quarter.


Stein Fires Political Salvo On Incinerator
City Council President Andrew J. Stein attacked Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday for his support of a new garbage incinerator in Brooklyn, in a move suggesting that Mr.
Stein hoped to make New York's garbage crisis a political issue in next year's race for Mayor.
Mr.
Stein, who is planning to challenge Mr.
Dinkins for the Democratic nomination, accused the administration of halfhearted efforts to recycle trash during its first term and of using incineration as a crutch to avoid an aggressive recycling program.


Wake-Up Call in Tokyo; After 2 Years of a Stumbling Stock Market, Official Japan Says It May Have a Problem
The Japanese Government has spent most of the last two years denying that the economy could be harmed by tumbling stock and land prices.
Tuesday's announcement by the Finance Minister, Tsutomu Hata, of a package of emergency financial measures to stabilize the markets, shore up Japanese banks and calm the worries of small and large investors was an important shift in policy at a time when most economists agree the economy is in a recession.
What brought about the sudden change?


An Enthusiastic Pitchman At the Helm of Lever Bros.
ADVERTISING, says the top executive at one of America's most frequent advertisers, has its own variation on the adage that war is too important to be left to the generals.
"I have never left advertising to the agencies," David F. Webb, president and chief executive of Lever Brothers, said in a rare interview.


Cut Off the Khmer Rouge
The stakes in Cambodia could scarcely be higher.
The U.N.'s most ambitious peace-building effort ever is challenged by a resurgent Pol Pot, still in command of the genocidal Khmer Rouge.
Agreed deadlines have come and gone, but Khmer Rouge fighters refuse to turn in weapons or admit U.N. monitors into zones they control.
U.N. credibility and hundreds of thousands of Cambodian lives are now at risk.
Fortunately, there's a practical solution.
The international community has a chance to cut off the Khmer Rouge from its main sources of guns and money in Thailand.


Senate Rivals Assail Ferraro Over Ethics
With Geraldine A. Ferraro the front-runner in the race for the New York Democratic nomination for the Senate, her opponents unleashed a barrage of allegations yesterday reminiscent of those that plagued her 1984 campaign for the Vice Presidency.
Two of her primary opponents, Elizabeth Holtzman, the New York City Comptroller, and State Attorney General Robert Abrams hammered at Ms.
Ferraro for what they described as her stonewalling of unresolved questions about tax problems and her possible links to members of organized crime.


George Bush's New World
The single most important event in President Bush's erratic re-election campaign -- more important than tonight's "make or break" speech -- may have been his decision to recruit his old and valued friend James Baker to impose order on chaos.
Mr.
Baker brings to this campaign what George Bush has so far not conveyed: a coherent statement of the Administration's achievements in the past four years and its goals for the next four.
Of all the questions about George Bush, one dominates: What's he for?
At the last Convention it was enough, after eight harsh years of Ronald Reagan, to promise "a kinder, gentler nation," to speak of "an endless, enduring dream and a thousand points of light." Those phrases seem mere pieties now in a time of recession and drift.


Rural Dump? No Way, Says Ontario Town
There is hardly an errant blade of grass on the gently sloping lawn of the 110-year-old yellow rick farmhouse on Warden Avenue, a few miles north of Stouffville's town center.
Elsie and William Kingdon, who have worked the 100-acre farm for the last 31 years and raised four children on it, are out back behind a barn of weathered wood, cutting hay.


China Allowing Ailing Dissident to Leave for U.S.
The Chinese authorities have issued the travel documents that will allow a prominent labor leader in the pro-democracy movement, who was force-fed and tortured until he fell ill during nearly two years in jail, to go to the United States for medical treatment.
The dissident, Han Dongfang, a 29-year-old former railway worker, received his passport this week, a close friend said today.
Nine months ago Chinese leaders promised Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d that dissidents could leave China.


UNDER THE DOME: The Overview; REPUBLICANS SEND BUSH INTO THE CAMPAIGN UNDER A BANNER STRESSING 'FAMILY VALUES'
Republicans this morning formally nominated President Bush for a second term, with Barbara Bush leading a nominating parade that cast her husband as the guardian of traditional family values and suggested that the Democrats were far less committed to the cause.
Mr.
Bush continued to work on an acceptance speech for tonight that close advisers said would almost certainly include some kind of apology for his handling of the economy.
But it was still being debated whether this should be a forthright confession of error for breaking his "no new taxes" pledge or a more general acknowledgement that he should have taken a tougher line on spending and the deficit.


Injured Krone Is Sidelined
Julie Krone, the leading jockey at Belmont Park this summer and one of the leaders at Saratoga, missed her second straight day of riding today because of a virus infection and a bruised rib.
The 29-year-old rider canceled her mounts on Monday, track officials reported, because of the flu.
The track was closed Tuesday, and she canceled her mounts again today.
Her agent indicated that she would return Thursday.
She was reported to have injured a rib when a horse lunged against the metal starting gate Saturday, although she rode three winners that day and two more Sunday.


WHERE TO FIND IT
"HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO YOU" may be popular, but it's hardly scintillating.
That's why some people want something different for special occasions.
A familiar tune, perhaps, with custom-tailored lyrics.
Or a fresh melody with lyrics that toast or roast the honoree.
A new song can be a present itself, if it comes with sheet music suitable for framing or a cassette recording.


O'Brien Or Nagle? Namath Joins Fray
The scene was the Jets' Hofstra headquarters and not a political convention, but the similarities could not be overlooked.
Here were Browning Nagle and Ken O'Brien, the candidates for the quarterback nomination, and today, as O'Brien participated in his first full practice after his contract dispute, there were TV cameras, speeches and even analysis from the spin doctors.
The main spin came from the head coach, Bruce Coslet, who would have no one believing the analysis Joe Namath had offered last weekend.
Namath suggested that the Jets had avoided settling their salary dispute with O'Brien to allow the young understudy, Nagle, a chance to learn the role without distraction.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  REVERSAL OF POLICY ON IRAQ
The decision by the United States and its allies to place a protective military umbrella over the Shiites in southern Iraq completely reverses a policy aggressively pursued just after the Persian Gulf war.
A1  ANXIETY IN THE ARAB WORLD
The move by the allies to establish a protected zone in southern Iraq and to shoot down Iraqi military planes crossing it is causing anxiety in the Arab world that in a headlong rush to confront Saddam Hussein, the West could create more instability.
A8
Second thoughts in Britain about foreign entanglements.  A9
The Persian Gulf is cleaner since the war than in 80's, report finds.
A8  POTENTIAL FOR GREATER CONFLICT
The one-day suspension of aid flights into Sarajevo, the besieged capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, has graphically illustrated how the three sides in the war could prod Western nations to intervene militarily.
A6  PLANNING FOR A NEW BOSNIA
Fearing that some European nations will try to divide Bosnia along ethnic lines, Bosnian leaders plan to offer a compromise that would decentralize the country while restoring its traditional ethnic mix.
A6
On the eve of celebrations for the anniversary of last year's failed coup d'etat, President Boris N. Yeltsin presented details of a program to provide vouchers worth 10,000 rubles (just over $60) for each man, woman and child in Russia to buy a share in state industry.
A11  An Afghan immigrant is brutally murdered in London.
A3  China is allowing an ailing dissident to leave for the U.S.
A12  The Convention A17-23  G.O.P.
HANDS BUSH ITS BANNER
Barbara Bush led a nominating parade casting her husband as the guardian of family values and portraying the Democrats as far less committed to those ideals.
A1  THE MANY GEORGE BUSHES
Man in the News: George Bush has projected so many different versions of himself over the years that his image is now reminiscent of a hologram.
Perhaps no other American politician has ever been forced to labor so long in an effort to define and redefine, explain and explain yet again, just who he is.
A1  GIVING 'EM HELL
News analysis: Harry S. Truman, the American President at the start of the cold war, has become the patron saint of George Bush, the President at the end.
And that provides one crucial clue to the kind of campaign Mr.
Bush plans to wage.
But this fall's battle promises to be a lot more personal and a lot more caustic than anything that the voters heard in 1948.
A1  DIVERGENCE ON GAY RIGHTS
The Republicans have made clear that they will make their opposition to homosexual rights an issue in the campaign.
That stance, following Governor Clinton's strong endorsement of gay rights, means that for the first time Presidential nominees will be engaged in debate over sharply differing views on homosexual issues, including AIDS.
A1  VOICES OF THE RELIGIOUS RIGHT
The network of religious Republican crusaders who helped Ronald Reagan triumph over George Bush in 1980 still rules the convention floor in 1992.
A17  A BEATEN ARMY
In the aftermath of their defeat over the party's anti-abortion plank, delegates from the New York area who support abortion rights are expressing determination that they will never let this happen again -- unless, of course, they fail to head off the religious right.
Again.
A22  MEET DAN QUAYLE
A nostalgic video that will be screened at the convention tonight is intended to reintroduce the Vice President to an electorate that still views him in terms that are largely unfavorable.
A20  CHANGE EVERYTHING! (ALMOST)
If there is one overriding message that the Republicans are trying to send to television viewers this week, it seems to be that voters can reject the status quo and still re-elect George Bush.
A20  CLINTON FIRES BACK
Governor Clinton said the Republicans' attacks against his wife were an effort to demonize her, just as they used the Willie Horton story four years ago to depict Michael S. Dukakis as soft on crime.
A22  National A24-25, B10-12  SCRUTINY OF AN AIDS INDUSTRY
A few years ago a new industry sprang up in which companies began buying the life insurance policies of AIDS patients at reduced value.
That practice, initially hailed by many patients, is now raising a host of questions, ranging from issues of privacy to violations of securities laws.
A1  NEW SICKLE-CELL FINDING
Researchers have discovered that a drug being examined as a cancer therapy may also prove to be a treatment for sickle-cell anemia and related blood disorders.
B12  WRAP-UP AT IRAN-CONTRA TRIAL
The lawyer for Clair E. George, the onetime C.I.A. official charged with lying to Government investigators about the Iran-contra affair, made closing arguments portraying Mr.
George as a victim of deceit by a friend who became the chief witness against him.
The prosecution heaped scorn on that portrayal.
B10  ONE SCHOOL SYSTEM'S REVOLUTION
A year ago the Cincinnati school system was in a state of severe crisis.
Now, with the help of local businesses, it has undertaken a vast restructuring, an effort that has been called a test case in engaging business in school overhaul, as well as a test of how far bureaucratic bloat can be reduced.
B10  THOUSANDS FLEE RURAL FIRE
As many as 14,000 people who live in the rural Gold Rush region of Northern California were ordered by the authorities to evacuate their homes, which are threatened by a heat-driven blaze that has already swept across more than 10,000 acres of rugged terrain.
A24  HOMECOMING OF THE U.S.
ARSENAL
A new report by two groups promoting nuclear disarmament details the recent shift of thousands of American nuclear warheads from overseas to bases and storage sites in 25 states, where many of them will be dismantled.
B12  Anchorage Journal: In the shadow of a volcanic eruption.
B10  Metro Digest B1  MAN SLAIN BY GANG, POLICE SAY
A 35-year-old bodega employee was beaten to death by a band of 6 to 15 young men in the Belmont section of the Bronx, the police said.
The lone witness to come forward told the police that the victim was an innocent bystander slain in a case of mistaken identity.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-14  The Jules Verne of modern architecture.
C1 Arts/Entertainment C15-28  Sports B14-19  Obituaries D21  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  George Bush's new world.
Cut off the Khmer Rouge.
Subway stations: going fast.
Topics: Eyes of the beholder.
Letters  William Safire: The three middles.
Leslie H. Gelb: Who won the cold war?
John B. Judis: Forget about the American century.
Marjorie Garber: Read my lipstick.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New York Region; Area Delegates Press Abortion Rights Cause
In the aftermath of their defeat over the Republican Party's anti-abortion platform plank, the delegates from the New York area who support abortion rights expressed determination that they would never let this happen again, unless, of course, they fail to head off the religious right.
Again.
So thoroughly were the pro-choice delegates at the convention outmaneuvered, especially those who dominate most of the New England delegations, that even their post-defeat attempts at protest have been flaccid.
The Yankee encampments outside the Astrodome are thus awash with self-criticism.


Kansas Coach Critical of Recruit
A basketball recruit's broken promise to transfer to the University of Kansas led Coach Roy Williams to issue an unusual statement criticizing the player's change of heart.


Warheads Returning From Overseas
A new report details the recent shift of many thousands of American nuclear warheads from overseas to bases and storage sites in 25 states, many of them to be dismantled with the end of the cold war.
The movement of American nuclear arms is the largest since the warheads were first deployed in the 1950's and 60's, according to the report, a collaborative effort of the Washington offices of two groups promoting nuclear disarmament, the Natural Resources Defense Council and Greenpeace.


COMPANY NEWS
WM.
WRIGLEY JR.
CO.  directors declared a 3-for-1 split of the common and Class B shares and lifted the post-split dividend 20%.
CHIQUITA BRANDS INC.  will decide within two weeks whether to begin a swap offer for as much as 10 percent of its 52 million common shares.


Defending His Wife, Clinton Returns Fire
Gov.
Bill Clinton said that the Republicans had "obviously been taken over by the extreme, intolerant right wing of the party." He said that their criticism of his wife was an effort to demonize her just as the Willie Horton episode was used four years ago to depict Michael S. Dukakis as soft on crime.
Article, page A22.


CHRONICLE
KING HUSSEIN of Jordan is undergoing medical tests for a urinary tract problem at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.
The 56-year-old monarch arrived Monday.
He was accompanied by QUEEN NOOR and his personal physician, Lieut.
Col.
Samir Farraj, who said Mayo was chosen because of its reputation for treating conditions like the King's.
But the clinic would not identify his problem.
This is King Hussein's first visit to the clinic, where he is also undergoing a general medical examination, a clinic spokesman said.


Bulletproof Glass for Judges
Prompted by increasing courtroom violence, officials in Oakland have decided to protect judges with bulletproof glass shields, which are to be installed within a month or so in Alameda County Superior Court.
The shields, hidden from courtroom view behind the judges' wooden dais, will protect them only from the waist down, and so they would have to duck behind the shield if violence erupted.
The judges did not want their whole body behind glass because they thought it would put a barrier between them and court proceedings, said Ron Overholt, the court's executive officer.


Florio Defends Gun Control
Standing on the site where a 15-year-old girl was fatally shot with a semiautomatic weapon in March, Gov.
Jim Florio held aloft a weapon similar to the one used in the slaying and waved it like a preacher brandishing a Bible at a tent meeting.
"There are those in the state Legislature who say they want to bring these guns back," Mr.
Florio said.
"We say no. There is going to be a moment of truth when we find out who owns the state Legislature, the people or the gun lobby."


BankAmerica Sells Five-Year Notes
The BankAmerica Corporation led a heavy deluge of corporate issues yesterday as the nation's second-largest bank brought out $850 million in debt.
A $350 million issue of 6 percent senior notes due July 15, 1997, was priced at 99.891 to yield 6.024 percent, or about 60 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, over Treasury issues of similar maturities, through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


Puzzling Placards A Nynex Campaign
Overgrown bugs, attached to leashes, are seen out for a stroll.
Cats are glimpsed loaded down with packages.
Before concerned New Yorkers call the A.S.P.C.A., they might do better to call the telephone company instead.
Those arresting images are among the latest installments in the continuing Nynex outdoor advertising campaign created by Chiat/Day/Mojo in New York.
Billboards, bus shelters, phone kiosks and transit signs offer the puzzling pictures, which are followed about two weeks later by explanations that are also, not so coincidentally, listings from the Nynex Yellow Pages.


Classic Pitching Duel And Typical Met Loss
The right-handers, the starters with illustrious pasts and reconstructed shoulders, took the mound with more modesty than menace.
Tonight, Orel Hershiser versus Dwight Gooden was a classic in name only.
The night's greatest ache was suffered by Gooden.
He pitched respectably and lost, as the Mets performed predictably at the plate and were defeated, 2-1.


Books of The Times; When Soviet Bureaucrats Were the Last to Know
The System  An Insider's Life in Soviet Politics  By Georgi Arbatov  Introduction by Strobe Talbott. 380 pages.
Times Books. $25.
For the past 25 years, Georgi Arbatov has been recognized as Moscow's leading "Amerikanist." As founder and director of the Institute of U.S.A. and Canada, Mr.
Arbatov built his think tank into the source of most significant work about the United States, even though to pass Kremlin muster, almost all the published studies were exceedingly propagandistic.
But Mr.
Arbatov was no ivory-tower academic.
He came to his institute after working as a highly placed Central Committee apparatchik, and he made sure through the years that he continued to serve as an adviser to whoever ruled the Kremlin.


Bosnia, Fearing Ethnic Partition, Will Propose 4 Local Authorities
The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, fearing that a European conference next week in London could endorse the division of the country along strictly ethnic lines, will offer an alternative plan that would decentralize power while restoring the country's traditional ethnic mixture.
Bosnia's Foreign Minister, Haris Silajdzic, in Washington for a meeting with Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger, said in an interview today that the proposal would not ignore ethnic concentrations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but would make the ethnic question only one of four criteria to be used in creating at least four major administrative regions.


Real Men Don't Need To Avoid 'the Couch'
To the Editor:
A recent survey of psychologists shows that our profession views the family's decline as the most important mental health issue in America.
Thus I read with interest "O.K. on the Self-Realization; What About the Economy?" (front page, July 27).
Gov.
Bill Clinton, Senator Al Gore and their families show how helpful psychological treatment can be in supporting today's beleaguered American family.
President Bush's spokesmen, however, showed a shallow grasp of the needs of families confronting substandard schools, unemployment and drug abuse.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  MISTAKEN IDENTITY LEADS TO DEATH
A 35-year-old bodega employee was beaten to death by a band of 6 to 15 young men in the Belmont section of the Bronx, and the only witness to come forward has told the police that the victim was a bystander slain in a case of mistaken identity.
A1. 2 SCHOOLS OF THOUGHT ON THE HOMELESS
The warning by New York City's Housing Authority that it cannot keep setting aside 2,000 apartments a year for homeless families without jeopardizing the stability of its projects reveals sharp disputes and poor coordination on the homeless inside the Dinkins administration.
News analysis, B3.


Pakistan's Women Suffer Special Abuse
To the Editor:
"Pakistanis Fear Chaos as Graft and Violence Rise" (news article, Aug. 2) will not be news to Pakistan's 50 million women, who have been among the most frequent, if often hidden, victims of these abuses.
You only hint at how corrupt Pakistan's security apparatus has become.
If President Ghulam Ishaq Khan's son-in-law, Irfanullah Khan Marwat, who oversaw Sind Province's most powerful police agency, is notorious for raping airline stewardesses, the police force he helped debase has made rape and other forms of sexual torture a routine part of life in jail for Pakistani women.


A Town That Didn't Go to the Races
TWO decades ago, this hilly suburb of modest single-family homes thought it had hit the jackpot.
Developers came here with a plan to build a $30 million horse-racing track, the state's first.
They promised thousands of jobs, $1 million a year in tax revenue and a burst of related development, including motels and restaurants.
Starved for any kind of industry, the community enthusiastically embraced the plan.


ARABS ARE ANXIOUS ON PLAN FOR IRAQ
The move by the United States, Britain and France to establish a protected zone in southern Iraq, and to shoot down Iraqi military planes crossing into its airspace, is stirring anxiety in the Arab world that in a headlong rush to confront Saddam Hussein, the West could create more instability in other countries in the region.
The plan, which has been endorsed by the French and British Governments but has not yet been announced in Washington, is backed by Saudi Arabia and Kuwait as a way of carrying out the de facto partition of Iraq into three regions -- Kurdish in the north, Shiite Muslim in the south and Sunni Muslim in the center.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Waived Pete Harris and Lloyd Slaughter, linebackers; Brian Boerboom, offensive lineman; Sean Beckton and Shawn Wiggins, wide receivers, and Kimble Wright, defensive lineman.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Mike Tomczak, quarterback.
Announced the retirement of Jerry Holmes, cornerback.
Acquired Dave McCloughan, defensive back-kick returner, from the Indianapolis Colts for an undisclosed draft choice.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR many years, school was a world children seldom shared with their parents, who mostly caught oblique glimpses through report cards and essays, pageants and P.T.A. meetings.
The image of the school volunteer from 30 years ago -- almost always a mother who baked brownies, accompanied classes on field trips or ran the book sale -- sounds impractical if not impossible to many of today's two-career or single-parent families.
The challenge for today's parents is to find other effective ways of participating in their children's schooling.
"We need a new definition of what it means to volunteer that doesn't necessarily involve coming to the school building," said Dr.
Joyce L. Epstein, the co-director of the Center on Families, Communities, Schools and Children's Learning at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.
"Volunteering mostly has to do with parents supporting school goals and children's learning any place and any time."


Perot Says Supporters Have an Election Role
Ross Perot, who dropped his independent Presidential campaign a month ago, said today that he and his supporters still had a role to play in the November election.
He predicted that his supporters would provide the margin that would select the next President.
"The real leverage is what both parties saw when we were active," he said.
"That is a giant there that is ready to be reawakened at any time."
But Todd Mason, author of an unauthorized Perot biography, said Mr.
Perot gave the NBC News interview to promote his new book.
"He gets his name and face on national television and it helps sales," he said.


Clifford's Trial in New York Is Postponed
The trial date in the New York State case against Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman on charges that they participated in the B.C.C.I. bank fraud was delayed yesterday when lawyers new to the case were named to defend the two men.
Yesterday's delay was the latest turn in the legal maneuvering to determine when and where Mr.
Clifford and Mr.
Altman will stand trial.
The two men face both state and Federal charges in the scandal surrounding the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
A Federal judge in Washington had set a trial date of Oct. 26, while a judge in New York had scheduled a trial on the state charges on Oct. 22.


N.F.L. Training Camp Report
Washington Redskins
Desmond Howard, the speedy Michigan receiver/punt returner who won the 1991 Heisman Trophy, remained as elusive as ever yesterday.
His agent, Leigh Steinberg, who went to the Redskins' camp in Carlisle, Pa., on Tuesday vowing to get a contract, returned to California empty-handed, but was still hopeful of concluding a deal by telephone.
Howard, who has been seeking $1.75 million or so a season, might seem cheap at the price to the Redskins, who have also tried unsuccesfully to sign tackle Jim Lachey.
Lachey has been looking for $2 million a year.
Philadelphia Eagles
While the Redskins are trying to bring in Howard, the Eagles have found their own explosive returner.
His name is Jeff Snyder, and if you have to look twice to find him it's because the 5-foot-6-inch, 170-pound receiver/returner is one of the smallest players in the N.F.L., not to mention one of the most impressive rookies.
In three exhibition games, Snyder, a sixth-round pick from the University of Hawaii, has scored three touchdowns, two by catching passes and one by running back a punt 90 yards.
He also has a 23.4-yard punt return average and a team-leading five tackles on special teams.
Snyder seems to take special delight in cutting down the tall timber on kickoffs.
As he told The Philadelphia Inquirer: "They look at you like, 'You hit me that hard?' " Los Angeles Rams
The Rams cut second-year kicker Jerry Kauric, leaving Tony Zendejas without a challenger.
That might seem surprising considering that Zendejas was 24th in scoring among the league's kickers last season, but his paltry 76 points was hardly his fault.
Although he did miss one of his 26 extra-point attempts, he was 17 for 17 in field goals.
Indianapolis Colts
The Colts broke camp a day early and cut seven players, including linebacker Carl Zander, a Plan B acquisition who started 14 games for Cincinnati last year.
Coach Ted Marchibroda said the Colts were so deep at linebacker he decided to cut Zander early so he would have time to find a new job.
San Diego Chargers
In a sport that is said to come down to a matter of blocking and tackling, surprisingly few players get a chance to block
and
tackle.
The latest exception is Steve Hendrickson.
After two years as an H-back, Hendrickson has been shifted to linebacker, and according to Coach Bobby Ross, he's taken the transition in stride.
"He's done a tremendous job," said Ross, who has not ruled out using Hendrickson as part of the team's goal-line offense.
One reason Hendrickson has taken to the new position is that it is an old one.
He was a linebacker before he came to the Chargers as a free agent in 1990 and began making a name for himself as a special teams player.
Green Bay Packers
Now you might not want to stand up on tip-toe, look him directly in the chin and tell an offensive tackle that he is cherished more for his bulk than his dexterity, but in the N.F.L., tackle is not considered a skill position.
So when Ken Ruettgers, a 6-foot-6-inch, 286-pound left tackle, settled his contract dispute, he was told to expect to play in Saturday's game against the Rams.
As the line coach, Tom Lovatt, explained: "If he was a guard, I'd say he needs more time. But a tackle is more physical. It's just a matter of going out there." Miami Dolphins
Linebacker Cliff Odom agreed to a two-year, $1.2 million contract just when the Dolphins need him most.
Starting outside linebacker David Griggs is still unsigned, and two current starters, John Offerdahl and John Grimsley, suffered slight injuries in Saturday's 31-27 victory over Denver.
Odom had more tackles (181) over the last two seasons than any other Dolphin.
His return leaves Miami with two unsigned players, Griggs and starting fullback Tony Paige.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Assails G.O.P. Attacks Aimed at Wife
Gov.
Bill Clinton, the Democratic Presidential nominee, offered a stinging criticism of President Bush and the Republican Party today, saying their attacks on his wife were an effort to demonize her just as they used the Willie Horton story to depict Michael S. Dukakis as soft on crime.
"What they're trying to do is kind of make it a Willie Horton thing against all independent working women, trying to run against them in a way that I think is really lamentable," he said.


THE MEDIA AND THE MESSAGE: On Stage; In G.O.P.'s History of Wars, The Candidates' Roles Grow
Nominating conventions, it is said, are moments for a candidate to make history.
They can also be moments for rewriting history, in this case military history.
So, exit Lieut. (j.g.) George H. W. Bush, World War II bomber pilot.
Enter President Bush, Top Gun.


School Board Toughens Chancellor's AIDS Pledge
The New York City Board of Education yesterday approved a version of a new pledge for outside lecturers on AIDS prevention, over the objections of the board's own president, H. Carl McCall, and Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez.
The action, approving a more extensive pledge than the Chancellor had proposed, was less significant for its substance than for what it revealed about the strained relationships between Mr.
Fernandez and a majority of the seven-member board.
The board will decide at the end of this year whether to appoint him for another term.


GROWING
IT was hot in the forest, which can so often look just like a mess of plants.
And the work itself looked hot and messy as two dozen high school students from the Bronx hacked away at porcelainberry vine and amur honeysuckle with weed wackers and hand clippers.
"But we sing and we make jokes and the time flies by," said Angel Colon, 18, a senior at Morris High School.
"Sometimes I feel kind of sad because I'm so into it and then it's time to go home."


BEHIND THE SCENES: The Campaign Staff; Triumvirate Shapes Bush Acceptance Speech
If President Bush assumes blame or credit for his convention speech Thursday night, responsibility for its language falls mostly to a triumvirate of friends and aides, led by a man who once crafted sound bites for Richard M. Nixon.
He is Raymond Kissam Price Jr., a 62-year-old former newspaper editor who is one of Mr.
Bush's old friends and political kibitzers.
Among the cognoscenti, Mr.
Price is an acknowledged master of the sweeping, uplifting political speech, and the aides say that is the sort of address the President will try to deliver: broad, thematic and generally optimistic in a campaign that so far has had its share of dark moments.


No All-Stars To Steal Viewers
The Republicans probably should be thankful they did not have to compete Tuesday night against baseball's All-Star game, as the Democrats did.
A total of almost 19 million people watched the second night of the Republican convention on the three broadcast networks, according to Nielsen Media Services.


Dinkins Administration Feud Shows Strain of Dealing With Homeless
The warning by New York City's Housing Authority that it cannot keep setting aside 2,000 apartments a year for homeless families without jeopardizing the stability of its projects has once again revealed sharp disputes and poor coordination inside the Dinkins administration over how to handle the homeless, an issue it has studied to death.
At the heart of the fight is a philosophical divide over whether homeless people mostly need a house -- simply bricks and mortar -- or are suffering from a complex mesh of social and health problems that only intensive services, training and monitoring can solve.


For Kamieniecki, No Doubt About It
For so long, things had gone so terribly wrong for Scott Kamieniecki.
It wasn't the pitching, not really.
It was the record, the numbers, that hideous six-week streak of losses and no-decisions without benefit of even one victory.
When he entered Yankee Stadium last night, he hadn't won since July 9, when he beat lowly Seattle.
In 19 starts this season, he had won only twice.
Sometimes it was a lack of run support that hurt him.
Sometimes it was his own right arm.
No matter, those awful numbers still followed his name.


COMPANY NEWS: A New Swiss Timepiece; Brightest Watch Is Introduced
It did not pass muster with Frank Siegel, a salesman at Yaeger Watch in Manhattan.
"This doesn't make much sense to me," he said.
"I just can't see it."
Nor did it impress Mark Young, editor of the Guinness Book of World Records, as a candidate for his collection of wonders.
"Not something of general interest," he ruled.


Lurie Reportedly Joins Anti-Vincent Alliance
Bob Lurie, eager to get approval for his $110 million sale of the San Francisco Giants, has agreed to support the effort of a group of owners to oust Commissioner Fay Vincent in exchange for their support of the Giants' move to St.
Petersburg, Fla., some owners said yesterday.
In the guerrilla warfare being waged against Vincent by a group of owners led by Jerry Reinsdorf of the Chicago White Sox and Peter O'Malley of the Los Angeles Dodgers, Lurie had been among the group of owners supporting the commissioner.
But now, Lurie is said to have joined Vincent's opponents, who have challenged the commissioner on a variety of issues, including his role in labor relations, his realignment of the National League and his allocation of expansion money between the two leagues.


A Shield for the Shiites; The Use of U.S. Air Power in Southern Iraq Can Protect Rebels, With a Nod to Politics
The decision by the United States and its allies to place a protective military umbrella over the southern third of Iraq is a complete reversal of a policy adopted and aggressively defended just after the Persian Gulf war.
In March 1991, the Bush Administration concluded that shooting down Iraqi helicopters to thwart a crackdown on the Shiite Muslims in southern Iraq would be the first step toward a military quagmire.
Today some of the same officials who once urged caution are sounding the alarms, building the case for combat patrols to protect the Shiites.


CHRONICLE
BARBARA WALTERS has filed for divorce from MERV ADELSON, the former chairman of the Lorimar Telepicture Corporation.
The two were married in 1986, but the bicoastal marriage foundered and the couple separated two years ago.


Banks Sits at Home While Three Compete for His Job
Four weeks after the Giants opened training camp here, Carl Banks sits home, unsigned and frustrated.
Meanwhile, three young players are fighting to get his job, even temporarily, and, more important, to make the team.
Lawrence Taylor is the Giants' right, or weakside, outside linebacker.
When Banks finally arrives for his ninth National Football League season, he will be the left, or strongside, outside linebacker.
Until he gets here, the job is being rotated among Bobby Abrams, starting his third professional season, and Kavanis McGhee and Corey Miller, starting their second.


Woody in New Yorkers' Eyes: A Tarnished Idol?; Squalid Dispute Intrudes on Fans' Image of a Maker of Bittersweet Celluloid Dreams
In the mind, or at least the films, of Woody Allen, New York is not quite real.
It's better than in reality, glittering and bittersweet, a place without graffiti or litter, where all the architecture is idiosyncratic and grand, where everyone's a character (as in "What a character!") and where the complex frustration of daily living is sweetened, if not entirely solved, by the siren song of achievable dreams.
It's New York as many would have it.
"Woody said to me once that he knew the city had changed in his lifetime,' " said Eric Lax, whose biography of Mr.
Allen was published a year ago.
"He said: 'It's not nearly as wonderful as I make it out to be. But I feel about New York as a child whose father is a bank robber. I know he's not perfect, but I still love him.' " I Heard the News Today, Oh Boy


Gang Fatally Beats A Mistaken Target, Bronx Witness Says
A 35-year-old bodega worker was beaten to death by a band of 6 to 15 men early yesterday in Belmont, the Bronx, the police said.
The lone witness to come forward told the police that the victim was a bystander slain in a case of mistaken identity.
The victim, Carmelo Rivera, was set upon with kicks, fists and a glass bottle just minutes after leaving work, shortly after midnight.
The incident took place on the unlit corner of East 187th Street and Beaumont Avenue.


CHRONICLE
Where else would ALICE TULLY's 90th birthday be celebrated, but in Alice Tully Hall at Lincoln Center, the concert hall that was built with her gift in 1969?
And what more appropriate way than with an evening of music for the benefit of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, the hall's resident ensemble that she also helped establish and continues to encourage?
The celebration, on Sept. 14, called "A Toast to Miss Tully," is to be a evening of music and fond reminiscences, said LAURENCE D. LOVETT, the chairman of the Chamber Music Society, who conceived the idea.
BROOKE ASTOR and NIN RYAN, both of whom also turned 90 this year, agreed to be co-chairwomen for the event.


INSIDE
Trade Gap Narrows a Bit
The nation's trade deficit narrowed slightly in June, as both exports and imports hit record highs.
Page D1.
Is the Glow Off Woody?
New Yorkers, who have a kinship with Woody Allen, ask whether recent headlines have altered it.
Page B1.


Prisoner Recaptured After Birthday Escape
Just two weeks before he was scheduled for parole, a state prison inmate serving 2 to 4 years for forgery escaped from a hospital in Manhattan yesterday, his 26th birthday.
He was recaptured 13 hours later.
About 2:30 A.M. yesterday, the prisoner, John Stagno, told a corrections officer he was going to the bathroom and then climbed out a window of St.
Clare's Hospital and Health Center on West 51st Street, lowered himself three stories down some bedsheets and disappeared.


Continental Alydeed Could Become Toast of Saratoga
The name on the saddle cloth is Alydeed, but around the barn they call him "Alydude." And he is some big dude, the dark-brown grandson of the renowned Alydar, the international star of the Stakes Barn at Saratoga Race Course these mornings, the best 3-year-old in Canada these days and -- depending on how he runs Saturday in the $1 million Travers Stakes here -- maybe the best anywhere.
Craig Perret, who has been on Alydeed's back in all of his eight races this year, sounds like a pitchman when he says: "He's like a stick of dynamite. I know when you give him his cue, it's bye-bye, I'm out of here. I feel he can do anything at any time."


Events: Lots of Tours And Oodles of Crafts
An Arboretum and Music
92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; (212) 996-1100.
On Sept. 6 the Y will sponsor a bus trip to a Beethoven Festival at Planting Fields Arboretum, the 400-acre garden in Oyster Bay, L.I.
The festival features lectures and performances by quartets, ensembles and an orchestra.
Fee, including an arboretum tour, $48.
Another bus tour on Sept. 11 will visit the Culinary Institute of America and the Vanderbilt Mansion, a 50-room Italian Renaissance house, in Hyde Park, N.Y.
Tickets, at $75, include a four-course lunch at the institute.
Museum Quality
American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
Two craft shows continue through Nov. 8.
"A Decade of Craft: Recent Acquisitions" is an exhibition of ceramics, fiber art, jewelry and metalwork.
A second show features studio crafts including furniture, dinnerware, jewelry and clothing.
Lectures are scheduled in conjunction with both exhibitions.
Talks for "A Decade of Craft" will be given on Oct. 13 and 27.
Artists featured in the studio crafts show will lecture on Sept. 22, Oct. 6 and 20 and Nov. 3.
All talks, which are free with museum admission, start at 6 P.M.
The museum is open 10 A.M. to 8 P.M. on Tuesdays and until 5 P.M.
Wednesday through Sunday.
Admission is $4.50, or $2 for students and those 65 and older, and no charge for members and children age 12 and under.
Manhattan Neighborhoods
Adventure on a Shoestring, 300 West 53d Street; (212) 265-2663.
Tours of two neighborhoods will be offered on Sunday.
Starting at 12:30 P.M., a walking tour of the Union Square area will include the Academy of Music Theater, built in 1854, and the building on 14th Street that housed Luchow's restaurant for 102 years.
A tour of the Turtle Bay section of Manhattan starts at 3 P.M.
Fee for each tour: $5.


Forget About the American Century . . .
Since Operation Desert Storm, President Bush, invoking the famous phrase of Henry Luce, has boasted repeatedly of a "Next American Century." At the Republican National Convention, Ronald Reagan and Housing Secretary Jack Kemp took up the theme.
Mr.
Reagan, noting that his own life had coincided with the "American Century," attacked "the pundits and finger-pointers who are down on us as a nation" and promised that "America's best days are yet to come." Mr.
Kemp, not to be outdone, declared that Americans were "on the eve of a new century and a new millennium." But what were once fighting words have become, in the mouths of these Republicans, empty promises and tokens of nostalgia.


Trade Gap Narrows Modestly
The nation's persistent trade deficit showed scant improvement in June, narrowing only slightly to $6.59 billion as both exports and imports hit record highs, the Commerce Department said today.
The Bush Administration was quick to greet the report -- which showed exports of $38.28 billion, a 7.2 percent increase from May's level -- as a sign of renewed economic strength in the United States.
"President Bush's leadership and experience in promoting America abroad is paying off in dividends for us at home -- in the form of jobs and economic growth," Commerce Secretary Barbara H. Franklin said in a statement.
Criticism by Democrats
But as Democrats were quick to point out, the gain in exports was balanced by a 4.7 percent increase in imports, to $44.88 billion, and the overall trade deficit remains far above its level last winter and most of last year.
"In the first few months of this year, it looked like significant progress was being made, but that has gone out the window now," said Representative Robert T. Matsui, a California Democrat on the House Subcommittee on Trade.


Trade Pact May Intensify Problems at the Border
The new North American Free Trade Agreement, once ratified, will clearly increase the already frenetic business activity carried out on the Mexican border.
But it will also turn up the environmental, health and social pressures that have all but overwhelmed border communities.
As it is, sanitation and housing conditions are extremely bad in much of the region here where El Paso and Juarez, Mexico face one another across the Rio Grande.
Hepatitis, for example, is endemic.
Cholera bacteria have been detected in recent weeks just across the border in Juarez's waste water, and health authorities in both countries are rushing to prevent an outbreak of the deadly disease.


Subway Stations: Going Fast
It's a sound idea: Require developers of big real estate projects to improve nearby subway stations in return for zoning breaks, or to alleviate congestion their projects might cause.
The concept worked well during the 1980's.
But with development now at a standstill, New Yorkers are suffering shabby subway stations from Times Square to Atlantic Avenue.
The developers of the now-stalled plan to build four massive office towers on Times Square were supposed to spend $91 million to modernize the 42d Street station.
More than 266,000 people, including visitors from all over the world, use that dark, dank station daily.
Similar conditions mar the Columbus Circle station, the 72d Street IRT station and Brooklyn's Atlantic Avenue terminal, all deprived of improvements by the collapse of development.


Second Thoughts After Britain Pledges Forces
A day after the Government abruptly committed British military forces to duty in two of the world's most dangerous places, some second thoughts were being raised here today about the perils of Britain's new foreign entanglements.
Opposition members in Parliament demanded to know what it was that Prime Minister John Major learned during a six-hour emergency Cabinet session on Tuesday that convinced him of the need to act with such dispatch.


Bridge
Players arriving during the next two days for the World Team Olympiad beginning Saturday in Salsomaggiore, Italy, will carefully study the list of teams they will have to meet in the qualifying stage.
They will be curious to see whether there will be any representation from the former Soviet Union.
Will there be a Russian team?
Or a Ukrainian team?
Or a Unified team, as in Barcelona a month ago?
Or, because of financial problems, no team at all?
If any Ukrainian player takes part, the most likely is Alexander Rapoport of Kharkov, who made an appearance at the Summer Nationals in Toronto last month.
He demonstrated his considerable playing skill on the diagramed deal from a recent Ukrainian championship.
As South, he landed in four hearts doubled after East's natural two-club opening, using a strong-club system, provoked much activity from West and North.


Samuel Mindel Dies; Philanthropist Was 64
Samuel Mindel, a developer who was active in many philanthropic organizations, died on Saturday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 64 years old and lived in Great Neck.
Mr.
Mindel died of cardiopulmonary arrest after a brief illness, said his daughter, Marlene.


Airline Publishing Rival's Magazine
For the first time, American Airlines will publish an in-flight magazine for another airline, in addition to American Way, its longtime magazine for American Airline passengers, the carrier said yesterday.
Southwest Airlines in Dallas has hired American Airlines Magazine Publications in Fort Worth to publish Southwest Spirit, its in-flight magazine previously published by East/ West Network, which closed.


Stanley Woodward Sr., Former U.S. Envoy, 93
Stanley Woodward Sr., the American Ambassador to Canada in the Truman Administration, died on Monday at his home in Washington.
He was 93 years old.
Mr. Woodward died of natural causes, his son, Stanley Jr., said.


The Jules Verne Of Modern Architecture
Don't imagine Architectural Digest.
Imagine the face of a make-believe Avon Lady as she pulls up to 3501 Monte Vista Avenue, home of Bart Prince, maverick architect.
A mysterious metal gate with spiky appendages opens forebodingly.
She nudges her wheels in, tentatively.
A missile-like capsule hoisted on cylinders -- Home Sweet Home for Mr.
Prince -- looms over her head.
To her left, the pavement is undulating.
It winds and descends, spiraling downward, into a tubular space formed by an arching trellis.
She feels as if she is walking inside a worm.
The acrylic roof appears to float, lifted magically by dragon's wings.
"They don't pay me enough," she is muttering to herself.
"Why did I ever get into this business?"


Peace Images Are Defaced In Crown Hts.
In the Brooklyn Botanic Garden yesterday, at the edge of the troubled Crown Heights area, black and Hasidic civic leaders gathered to call for understanding and unity on the first anniversary of the racial disturbances in the neighborhood.
They even planted a pine tree to symbolize what the group called a "new beginning for Crown Heights."
But just how far the area needs to travel to achieve the goal of conciliation was illustrated in the heart of Crown Heights, across President Street from where a car driven by a Hasidic man struck and killed a 7-year-old black child, Gavin Cato, last Aug. 19, touching off four days of violence.


Film Festival To Open Sept. 25
The 30th annual New York Film Festival will open on Sept. 25 with "Olivier, Olivier," a mystery drama in French by the Polish director Agnieszka Holland, based on the true story of a child's disappearance from a small town in France.
Miss Holland's "Europa, Europa," about a quick-witted Jewish youth who escapes death during the Holocaust by passing himself off as a Nazi, was one of last year's most acclaimed foreign films.
The new film has a "freshness and sense of a new approach even working in traditional ways" that is reflected in many of this year's programming choices, said Richard Pena, the chairman of the festival's selection committee and program director of the Film Society of Lincoln Center, which sponsors the festival.


Now, AIDS Patients' Lives Are Drawing Speculators
It seems like a plan that is worthy and simple enough:
A company buys the life insurance policies of AIDS patients at reduced value so the patients can have at least some cash from the policies while they are alive.
After they die, the company is paid the full amount due under the policies.


Drug Found Useful in Treating Sickle Cell Anemia
Researchers have discovered that a drug being examined as a cancer therapy may also turn out to be a nontoxic treatment for sickle cell anemia and related blood disorders.
Scientists at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine and the National Cancer Institute said today that the drug, phenylbutyrate, which is commonly used for rare metabolic disorders in children, has been found to increase production of a fetal type of hemoglobin that is beneficial to sickle cell patients.


Corrections
A headline in Science Times on Aug. 11 about a questionnaire used to predict whether couples will remain married four years later misstated the number of questions.
It is 11, not 125.


Gay Men's Chorus Audition
The New York City Gay Men's Chorus will hold auditions for its 13th season on Sept. 8 and 9 at 7 P.M.
A prepared song is required, and applicants will be tested on sight reading and voice placement.
Nonsingers who wish to help with the day-to-day operations of the group may also apply.
Membership dues are $10 a month.
The 150-voice company will present three series of concerts at Carnegie Hall during the 1992-93 season.
Information: (212) 279-0228.


Settlement Approved On Pfizer Heart Valves
A Federal district judge in Cincinnati approved a settlement yesterday in a class action lawsuit involving heart valves made by Pfizer Inc.'s Shiley unit.
The pact affects 51,000 people with functioning valves, as well as their spouses.
Pfizer, based in New York, estimated that the settlement would cost the company $165 million to $215 million.
At least 450 Shiley valves have failed, and the failures have been cited in about 300 deaths.


AT HOME WITH: Marla Maples; Cinderella, With Both of Her Shoes
MORE than anything else, she's scared.
Bounding into her living room, beaming a school-spirit smile, she seems not to breathe at all.
She dashes around the room, fiddling with the stereo, offering a drink, trying so terribly hard to please.
Marla Maples has good reason to worry about the press.
After being identified in Aspen, Colo., two years ago as the very visible other woman in the Donald and Ivana Trump marriage and divorce, The New York Post quoted Ms.
Maples on its cover as saying "Best Sex I Ever Had" next to a picture of a gloating Mr.
Trump. (She denies saying it.) And though she recently made her Broadway debut in "The Will Rogers Follies," she was almost upstaged by the arrest of her publicist, Chuck Jones, who stole her lingerie and more than 200 pairs of her shoes, slashing their backs.
He was even videotaped licking and sniffing a select few.


Calendar: Plants from Near and Far
American Greenery
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.


REPUBLICANS IN HOUSTON: The Religious Right; Many Delegates See an Immoral and Scary America
It wasn't just souvenirs, choirs, country bands or even Pat Buchanan that drew Karen S. Johnson, Shirley Whitlock and hundreds of other religious conservatives to Houston this week.
It was the hermetically sealed moral fiber of the Astrodome.
"Everywhere I go there are like-minded people," Mrs.
Johnson said.
"That's so nice."
The two delegates who came to the Republican National Convention committed to Patrick J. Buchanan have limited exposure to the unlike-minded where they live: Mesa, Ariz., a quiet, conservative town with many mobile retirement homes and Christian churches.


BIOGRAPHY OF A CANDIDATE: Man in the News; Making and Remaking a Political Identity: George Herbert Walker Bush
It was torture, in 1988, for George Bush to try to explain who he was.
Plucking at his chest, as though he could pull his soul out of a buttoned-down shirt, he told campaign aides, "We got to get me out there; we got to get more of me out there."
Throughout his Presidency, he has known, as he once put it, that people were "trying to figure out what makes this crazy guy tick" and wondering whether "there was some there there -- if not in me then in others" around him.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a Connecticut Supreme Court ruling involving drug use by a pregnant woman referred incorrectly to Nadine Taub, a lawyer involved in the case.
She represented the American Public Health Association, not the mother.


Topics of The Times; Eyes of the Beholder
Growing old can be difficult.
Each year can bring on new aches and pains, a slower gait, less acute hearing.
Simple tasks -- like listening to a dinner companion over the background din in restaurants, or pushing one's way onto a crowded subway car -- can become agonizing.
Most oldsters take these inevitable irritations in stride.
But when insensitive institutions seem to compound life's problems, the elderly can become enraged.
Take the older readers of The Philadelphia Inquirer, the city's first-rate daily newspaper.
According to The Inquirer's newsroom bulletin, they have complained bitterly about the paper's typeface size.


Crackdown Seems to Lead Algeria Into Chaos
The Algerian Government plans "drastic measures" to prevent political activity in mosques.
The action, announced Aug. 13, was the latest indication that the seven-month campaign of repression, press censorship, mass arrests of Islamic fundamentalists and stiff jail sentences has failed to stem a rising wave of public discontent.


Night Terrors
The newborn parents were grown-ups, an intelligent and mature couple, cool under pressure in responsible jobs.
When their baby finally came after a 10-year wait, he was, well, perfect.
He slept through most of the first five nights, fussing only when hungry or wet.
But at midnight on the sixth night he awoke crying, and nothing could console him.
They fed him and changed his diaper.
They walked around caressing him until he nodded off.
But moments later he was crying again.


Allen 'Spoiled and Mutilated' His Better Self, Farrow Says
Mia Farrow's voice was heard yesterday for the first time in her child-custody dispute with Woody Allen.
In a letter to a friend, she described feeling betrayed and said she had "come so perilously close to a genuine meltdown of my very core" since learning of Mr.
Allen's romance with Soon-Yi Previn, 21 years old, whom Ms.
Farrow adopted when she was married to the conductor Andre Previn in the 1970's.


Foreign Affairs; Who Won the Cold War?
Republican claims this week that they won the cold war prompt me to reveal an off-the-record conversation I had with the Chief of the Soviet General Staff in 1983.
Marshal Nikolai Ogarkov told me at that time -- before President Reagan's increases in military spending fully took hold, six years before the Soviet empire in Eastern Europe crumbled and eight years before the Soviet Union itself collapsed -- that the cold war was already essentially over, if not finally won by the West.
I had known the beribboned marshal for years, when I was a Government official and a correspondent.
He was always brilliant, plain-spoken and hard-line.
We talked on a wintry March afternoon, just days after Mr.
Reagan's speech aptly described the Soviet Union as "an evil empire."


Municipal Issues Are Weak Again
The municipal bond market was weak again yesterday as a glut of new issues, brought on by the sharp drop in interest rates recently, left dealers with a lot of notes and bonds that were hard to pass on to investors.
Traders said that the long end of the market was unchanged to down as much as half a point.


UNDER THE DOME: News Analysis; Bush in a Truman Mode
Harry S. Truman, the American President at the start of the cold war, has become the patron saint of George Bush, the President at the end.
That provides one crucial clue to the kind of campaign Mr.
Bush plans to wage.
He will denounce the House and Senate Democrats, echoing Truman's 1948 attacks on the "do-nothing, good-for-nothing 80th Congress."


Bush's '88 Strategist, Ailes, Gets Bigger Role
Roger Ailes, the caustic and aggressive architect of George Bush's 1988 advertising strategy, has been given an expanded role in this year's campaign and spent today coaching the President as Mr.
Bush rehearsed the speech he will deliver to the Republican convention on Thursday night.
Mr.
Ailes has repeatedly said that he does not want a formal position on the campaign staff.
Officials in the Bush camp said he would increase his activities as a political tactician.


Economic Scene; George Bush's Sins of Omission
ACCORDING to the preconvention polls, just one American in seven approved of the way President Bush is handling the economy -- a thumbs-down rating that even Jimmy Carter could not match in the darkest days of the 1980 oil shock.
So what has Mr. Bush done to earn this dubious distinction?


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
American exports and imports both set records in June, leaving the trade deficit slightly narrowed at $6.59 billion.
The Bush Administration hailed the results -- particularly the exports -- as evidence of renewed economic strength, while Democrats interpreted them as showing stagnation.  [ Page D1. ]
Securities officials are attacking a plan that lets AIDS patients get some money from their life insurance -- by selling their policies to companies that resell them to investors.
Although patient advocates laud the plan, state securities administrators say it creates a speculative futures market in death.  [ A1. ] Companies
No, Virginia, the Rockies are out West.
A Federal judge upheld Anheuser-Busch in "hoisting Coors by its own petard" in ads that attacked the Colorado brewer, which advertises "the taste of the Rockies," for adding Virginia water to beer sold in the East.  [ D1. ]


THE MEDIA AND THE MESSAGE: The Vice President; Vice President Sees This Race as Chance to Recast Image
The country's first exposure to Dan Quayle's home town in 1988 was not exactly what the Vice President had in mind.
Rather than seeing Huntington, Ind., as an idyllic town in the heartland, television viewers saw an angry mob of locals on the courthouse green, heckling the reporters who were interrogating Mr.
Quayle about his enlistment in the Indiana National Guard.
Four years later, Mr.
Quayle will try again, this time with a nostalgic video intended to introduce him to the Republican National Convention on Thursday night and to reintroduce him to an electorate that still views him in largely unfavorable terms.
The four-minute video is just one component of the full-throttle campaign waged by Mr.
Quayle and his aides during convention week to redefine him as a man of courage, conviction and, perhaps most important, common beginnings.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Aztar Corp., Phoenix, a gaming company, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $185 million of 10-year senior subordinated notes. *
Federal National Mortgage Association is offering $300 million of 6.93 percent medium-term notes due 2002 at 99.875 to yield 6.95 percent through Lehman Brothers.


Convention Summary
IT'S A FAMILY AFFAIR AS G.O.P. NOMINATES BUSH
On a night dedicated to traditional family values, delegates to the Republican National Convention nominated President Bush to seek re-election, as a cavalcade of speakers, including the First Lady, Barbara Bush, and Marilyn Quayle, the wife of the Vice President, helped cheer him on.
The hall grew silent as Mary Fisher, who has AIDS, rebuked those who see the sickness as a self-inflicted plague.
For many delegates, last night was a time to signal which side they stood on in the religious and cultural war that Patrick J. Buchanannow leads.
The party has made it clear that its opposition to homosexual rights will constitute a major front in that battle.
A G.O.P.
TACTIC MAY BE PAYING OFF
The tactics employed by the Republicans in Houston -- including saying something nasty about the Clinton campaign, only to apologize later -- might be having an effect.
A CBS News survey showed that negative opinions of Gov.
Bill Clinton had risen this week.
Mr.
Clinton fought back , saying President Bush had been "taken over" by the "extremist right wing" of the party.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Clark Terry
Village Vanguard
There is, in the presence of the trumpeter and fluegelhornist Clark Terry, an old-fashioned sense of the American experiment at work.
Mr.
Terry, who spent decades performing with Duke Ellington and would have been one of jazz's finest musicians even if he had quit at that time, has a great idiosyncratic tone, fat and buzzing and liquid, that sounds like a response to the environment.
A virtuoso, he's able to convey the excitement of the dance and all its rituals in a fine-art setting, with precise yet relaxed improvisations that dart in unexpected directions and give off unexpected meaning.
And Mr.
Terry is funny.
Not only has he figured out the art in his music, but he also understands that humor, in his onstage demeanor as well as in the playing, is one way of bringing the audience into the process, that humor is a democratic tool.
At the Village Vanguard on Tuesday night, Mr.
Terry introduced his band and referred to himself as Bunk Johnson; then he stopped his band in mid-song and brought out Pastor Genzel, a minister who works with jazz musicians, claiming that the club's booths had all been blessed.
And when introducing another tune he said it would be performed a cappella -- "That means with no clothes on."


Bosnia Airlift Resumes; Plane Incident Is Murky
After a one-day halt, the United Nations said today that it was resuming its airlift to Sarajevo.
But a mystery developed over what had earlier been described as a possible attack on a British transport plane that had brought relief supplies to the besieged city.
The incident had forced the first suspension of the flights to the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina since the United Nations authorized the use of force to protect aid shipments last Thursday.
It also raised new anxieties among relief officials about whether the international effort could continue.


Smokers, Too, Want the Right to Choose
To the Editor:
I was sorry to see that Anna Quindlen, whose columns I often enjoy, has joined the ranks of the antismoking fanatics ("Smoking and Politics," Aug. 5).
I wonder if she knows how much her voice resembles that of those frequent adversaries of hers, the right-to-lifers.
The voice speaks simple truths that are far from simple: "The simple part is this: smoking kills" (compare "Abortion is murder").
She nods toward sweet reason: "even activists oppose outright prohibition," but the voice asks, "Why do we allow the sale of a product that has no beneficial effects and many fatal ones?" (compare "How can we permit the slaughter of the unborn?").


Sports of The Times; Winning In the Game Of Defeat
WHEN 53-year-old Larry Laoretti made the United States Senior Open the first (and so far only) official victory of his life last month, Gary Player smiled solemnly and explained what only those who know the game's capricious heart truly understand.
"In golf," Player, the winner of more than 100 tournaments, said with childlike directness, "the best player usually doesn't win."


British Racial Attacks Grow, Alarming Minorities
Ruhullah Aramesh fled his native Afghanistan eight months ago, bound for what he hoped would be a better life in England.
This month, the 24-year-old immigrant was dead, killed by a group of white teen-agers on a South London street.
Mr.
Aramesh, the police said, was the victim of pure racial hatred.
Set upon by young toughs after he tried to stop them from harassing a group of female relatives, he was knocked to the ground and repeatedly struck on the head with iron bars, clubs and a sawed-off pool cue.


Fashion Advertisers' Record On Minorities Is Denounced
Some of America's most prestigious marketers of expensive fashion, beauty and cosmetic products, like Calvin Klein and Estee Lauder, were attacked yesterday for limiting or omitting members of minorities from their magazine advertisements.
Other marketers also came under fire, but for using members of minorities in what were deemed stereotypical roles.
That judgment is likely to be questioned by those who believe appearances by minority athletes and musicians is a positive development.


11 Officers Face Discipline In Inquiry in Beating Case
The New York City Police Department will file disciplinary charges against 11 officers who refused to cooperate with the Brooklyn District Attorney's investigation of a brutality charge by a civic leader in Bedford-Stuyvesant last month, the police said yesterday.
Police officials said the officers -- 11 of the 13 at the scene -- violated department rules by refusing on the day after the incident to answer questions by the District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, in his office.
The plans to file disciplinary charges against the officers were first reported yesterday in The New York Post.


Water Quality in Parts of Persian Gulf Benefited Because War Kept Tankers Away
Despite the huge oil spill off Kuwait and Saudi Arabia during the Persian Gulf war, some parts of the gulf were actually cleaner in the months just after the war than they were in the late 1980's, a newly published scientific report says.
The authors say it appears that declining tanker traffic during the war reduced industrial oil pollution to the south of the war-related spill, which was confined to more northerly waters.


Review/Pop; A Singer Who Bridges The Generation Gap
Her low notes were languorous and sultry.
She scat-sang in playful feints and flurries.
But it was Chaka Khan's high notes, flung skyward with the abandon of gospel music, that made the audience at the Beacon Theater on Tuesday night shout and squeal.
Ms.
Khan, who has disappeared and reappeared sporadically since the mid-1980's, has returned to performing with voice and moxie intact.
In her songs she usually plays the ardent, faithful lover, lusty as well as romantic, praising her partner as she flirts.
When she was with the band Rufus in the 1970's, she was a little more aggressive; the band's best-remembered hit was the teasing "Tell Me Something Good." Songs from her new album, "The Woman I Am" (Warner Brothers), like "I Want," promise she'll "be right there whenever you call."


Colleagues Pay Tribute to Judge Sirica


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Victoriana
Q.
I live in a 19th-century house and want flower beds in the Victorian style.
What plants do you suggest? -- Stephen Morrison, St.
Louis.
A.
I think the spirit of Victorian plantings is maintained to perfection at the 104-year-old gardens at Lake Mohonk Mountain House in New Paltz, N.Y.
"We aim for effect, not historical accuracy," said Chet Davis, who has been head groundskeeper at the hotel for nine years.


'Most Happy Fella' to Close
"The Most Happy Fella," a revival of the 1956 Frank Loesser musical, is to close after the matinee on Aug. 30 at the Booth Theater, 222 West 45th Street.
The show, directed by Gerald Gutierrez and co-starring Spiro Malas and Sophie Hayden, will have run for 23 previews and 221 regular performances.


Laura P. Bechtel, 89, Widow of Industrialist
Laura Peart Bechtel, who helped her husband expand the Bechtel Group into one of the world's largest engineering and construction companies, died on Sunday at her home in Oakland, Calif.
She was 89 years old.
A family spokesman said she died of natural causes.


Velarde Still Works To Shed Utility Tag
Randy Velarde stood at the back of the Yankees clubhouse, in front of the large-screen TV.
A videotape was playing.
Don Mattingly was at the plate, Mike Moore on the mound.
This was Tuesday, hours before the Yanks were scheduled to face Moore and the Athletics.
Velarde got into his stance, watched Moore's delivery, and swung in unison with Mattingly on the screen.
Then he rewound and repeated the movement.
Again.
And again.
And again.
"I'm trying to pick up his release points," said Velarde, the Yankees' 29-year-old shortstop du jour.
"I try to pick up the type of movement, his tendencies. There are certain things different players look for."


New Times Sq. Plan: Lights! Signs! Dancing! Hold the Offices
To restore life to the ghostly strip that 42d Street has become, Robert A. M. Stern envisions rooftop restaurants on the scale of Tavern on the Green, dance rehearsal studios with broad plate-glass windows, floodlit architecture and a jumble of giant signs and little stores, some stacked one atop the other as in Tokyo.
Mr.
Stern, a Manhattan architect who has attracted much notice with his work for the Walt Disney Company, was designated yesterday to head the design team that will oversee the refurbishing of 42d Street, from Broadway to Eighth Avenue.


UNDER THE DOME: News Analysis; Bush in a Truman Mode
Harry S. Truman, the American President at the start of the cold war, has become the patron saint of George Bush, the President at the end.
That provides one crucial clue to the kind of campaign Mr.
Bush plans to wage.
He will denounce the House and Senate Democrats, echoing Truman's 1948 attacks on the "do-nothing, good-for-nothing 80th Congress."


THE MEDIA AND THE MESSAGE: Marilyn Quayle; Marilyn Quayle Says the 1960's Had a Flip Side
Portraying herself as the Republican Party's foil to Hillary Clinton, Marilyn Quayle said tonight that she better represented the baby boomer generation, as a mother who put her family ahead of her career.
She also indulged in a new form of 60's nostalgia -- recalling the unwild times of Richard M. Nixon's Silent Majority.
"We did not believe in destroying America to save it," Mrs.
Quayle told the Republican National Convention in a remark that brought her some of the strongest applause.


Curse the Peace-Shattering Lawn Mower!
To the Editor:
"Lawn Mower Is New Target in War Against Air Pollution" (front page, Aug. 6) painfully omits noise pollution.
The noise of lawn mowers and, worse, leaf blowers, has become one of the major irritants in our small towns and suburbs.
Here in New Haven I seldom see people actually sit in their gardens, but they attack them weekly with an assortment of machines, ruining their neighbors' summer evening or Sunday morning.
Leaf blowers, in their weird irrationality, are the most appalling, as everyone who has watched a man attack a few leaves with what is virtually a portable airplane engine must admit.
I can but assume that gardeners don't mind going deaf lugging these machines around, while it would offend their egos doing the same job with a few strokes of a broom and being "sweepers."


Edith R. Peterson, 78; Studied Cell Cultures
Edith R. Peterson, a medical researcher into cell cultures at Albert Einstein College of Medicine, died on Saturday at Horton Memorial Hospital in Middletown, N.Y.
She was 78 years old and had moved to Middletown two years ago from the Bronx.
She died of a stroke, said Art Oshins, a spokesman at Albert Einstein.


Essay; The Three Middles
Extricating himself delicately from the fervent embrace of party activists who never liked him, and professing never to have read their hard-right platform, George Bush will seek re-election by going after what a Chinese pundit would call "the three middles": the middle class, the Middle West, and the middle of the political spectrum.
Because Roger Ailes is here to direct, we can look forward to a strong but not strident delivery of an acceptance speech.
Because the speech was drafted by the libertarian Nixonite Ray Price ("the lift of a driving dream") and emended by the ultrapragmatic Bakerite Robert Zoellick, we can expect a thematic address.


REPUBLICANS IN HOUSTON: The Houston Thing; Mrs. Bush and the Call Of Author! Author!
Attention must be paid.
Barbara Bush, giving assembly-line interviews to local television stations, had finally had enough of her stereotype as the custodian of maternal, stay-at-home family values.


CHRONICLE
The British editor ALEXANDER CHANCELLOR is joining The New Yorker as the editor of the magazine's "Talk of the Town" section, which was the showcase for writers like James Thurber and John Updike.
TINA BROWN, the magazine's new editor, announced this latest change, saying, "This is the only job in the world that would have lured such a celebrated editor and writer to give up his own magazine and cross the Atlantic."


A Little Insurance for Insurers
Chicago has given the world a raft of innovative financial products -- futures markets in everything from mortgage securities and Government bonds to indexes of stocks.
Now the Chicago Board of Trade is about to introduce its latest innovation: futures contracts in insurance.


Accounts
*
Hyatt International, Chicago, to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Hong Kong, to develop an integrated marketing program for its hotels and resorts in Europe, Asia, Australia, Mexico and Latin America.
Part of the account was previously at BBDO Hong Kong.
Billings were estimated at $15 million to $20 million. *
Stac Electronics, Carlsbad, Calif., to Larsen Colby Inc., Los Angeles, to handle its account, previously at Drew Advertising, Santa Monica, Calif.
Larsen Colby was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $3 million, in a review that included two other Los Angeles shops, Ogilvy &amp; Mather and Foote, Cone &amp; Belding.


A DELICATE BALANCE: The Gay Vote; Gay Rights and AIDS Emerging As Divisive Issues in Campaign
Homosexual issues, which for months were derided with winks and nods by Republicans as they talked of family values, have flared into the open at the party's national convention here and on the streets outside the Astrodome.
Beginning with a speech by Patrick J. Buchanan on Monday night and continuing with remarks by other Republicans over the last two days, the party made it clear that it would make its opposition to homosexual rights a major issue in the campaign, portraying Bill Clinton and the Democrats as wanting to give preferential treatment to gay men and lesbians.


Caderousse Journal; Bite the Bullet? Provence Says, Bite Your Tongue!
In the struggle over who defines the true face of France, the people of Provence's vineyards and its sunflower and tomato fields are preparing for a new fight against the planners in Paris.
The villagers of Caderousse, in the heart of the Rhone Valley, want no part of France's technological masterpiece, the world's fastest train.
They do not want it careening through their back gardens, tearing up their soil, pushing aside their barns or rattling their nerves.


Corrections
A report in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about a settlement with Iran involving the Sun Company appeared with the incorrect logotype.
The logotype shown was that of Sun Microsystems, not the Sun Company.


Blocked From Chief's Job, An S.&amp; L. Executive Quits
The Metropolitan Financial Corporation, a Minneapolis-based savings and loan holding company, said yesterday that Paul A. Lipetzky, its president, had resigned.
"I left on good terms," Mr.
Lipetzky said, "but I saw that the career opportunity I expected was not there." Mr.
Lipetzky said he had expected to be named chief executive of the company, which has $5.3 billion in assets.


No Headline
"What a thrilling welcome. You make me feel wonderful, but then I always feel wonderful when I get to talk about the strongest, the most decent, the most caring, the wisest, yes, and the healthiest man I know." BARBARA BUSH.  [ A18:2. ]


A Midsummer Night's Snook Fishing Drama
On a recent trip to Florida, during the sultriest dog days, I went snook fishing.
The snook, with silver gray flanks and a black stripe along his body, looks like an elongated striped bass.
He will charge an angler's offering like the most truculent largemouth.
Once hooked, he will take to the air with the headshaking leaps of a well-conditioned, small mouth.
All in all, quite a game fish, highly prized by even the most jaded angler.
A visit to Kleiser's, the charming outdoors store in Palm Beach, led me to a few choices to take snook.
The first, and theoretically the easiest, was surf fishing.
When the snook are in, this can be very productive.
But they weren't in the stretch of Boynton Beach that my daughter, Lucy, and I fished.
Next, my wife and I spent a day on Lake Worth with Hank Rolfs, an affable and accomplished guide, but even the best guide is not a guarantee of angling success.
We tried everything, all the likely holes, even chumming with minnows, and, again, we went snookless.


Day Care Offers A Better Life To the Old and Ill
THE competition was heating up.
"O.K., David, give it all you've got."
"Two hands, Freda. Smack it!"
"Over the net, Murray. Over the net!"
The pink, carpeted room sounded like a noisy gymnasium, with players on both sides of the net urging teammates to go all out to keep the ball in the air.
The score? Don't ask.


Officer Charged With Taking Gifts
A former New York City Department of Sanitation enforcement officer was indicted yesterday on charges that he removed and destroyed 28 summonses in exchange for money and favors.
The summonses had been given to merchants for violating the city's garbage and health codes.
The former officer, Marvin Henderson, a 34-year-old sergeant in the department's Sanitation Enforcement Agents squad, was charged with tampering with public records, forgery and grand larceny after an investigation conducted by the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, and Susan Shepard, the city's Investigation Commissioner.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Drop Nineteens  CBGB
Paula Kelley seemed to be in pain.
She was crouched on the stage during Drop Nineteens' set at CBGB on Friday night, with her knees hugged to her chest, her feet crossed in front of her and her eyes tightly shut.
She rocked back and forth, and the band pushed into a crisis pitch of guitar noise and droning rhythms.
Ms.
Kelley's pain did not seem to be physical but emotional: pain of the private sort, the "no one in the world understands me" sort.
She seemed to imagine herself a character in some epic tragic poem, a heroine of Ophelian proportions, wearing baggy jeans and a T-shirt instead of a gown, drowning in the grungy feedback waters of alternative rock.
Like many other bands on the post-Sonic Youth circuit, Drop Nineteens exudes an aura of adolescent preciousness.
Its influences seem to stretch back three or even five years: its use of atonal chords, excessive distortion and mumbled non sequiturs can be traced back to Sonic Youth's 1988 album "Daydream Nation." Like Sonic Youth, Drop Nineteens has a fascination with Madonna: its album "Delaware" (Caroline) as well as the CBGB set included a version of "Angel," a single from Madonna's album "Like a Virgin."


In a Lost Season, Cone Still Trying to Win 20
For the Mets, the concept of performing as a club for the remainder of 1992 has been reduced to mere artifice.
The club believes there is an explanation -- injuries -- and so there won't have to be an apology.
The struggles are almost purely personal -- for perhaps the odd open job, for the justification of enormous contracts, for the enhancement of future wealth.


Braves' Glavine Just Can't Lose
Braves 4, Expos 2
Tom Glavine set a franchise record with his 13th consecutive victory and drove in two runs as the surging Atlanta Braves beat Montreal by 4-2 tonight, the Expos' fourth straight loss.
Glavine (19-3) has not lost since he was beaten in Montreal on May 22.
He came into the game 0-2 this season and 2-10 lifetime against Montreal but stopped the Expos on seven hits over eight and one-third innings, striking out six and walking two.


MTV-Chiat Deal Is Reported
Chiat/Day/Mojo in New York is likely to be awarded a special project for the MTV music video cable television network, industry executives who insisted on anonymity said yesterday.
Chiat/Day/Mojo and MTV, in separate telephone interviews, declined to confirm the information.
The executives said that the two other agencies participating in the review were Mullen Inc. in Wenham, Mass., and Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano in New York, confirming a report earlier this month in Adweek listing the three participants.


Dr. Joseph Jordan, 73, An Analytical Chemist
Dr.
Joseph Jordan, an analytical chemist and professor emeritus at Pennsylvania State University, died on Friday at his home in State College, Pa., near the University Park campus.
He was 73 years old.
He died of abdominal cancer, said Barbara K. Kennedy, a spokeswoman for the university.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Becker Ends Long Slump
Mired in a yearlong slump that has saddled him with a 26-10 record, third-seeded Boris Becker rediscovered his touch yesterday for a 6-4, 6-4 victory over a fellow German, Markus Zoecke, at the United States Hardcourts in Indianapolis.
Playing his first match on a hard court since March, the ninth-ranked Becker connected on 62 percent of his first serves.
In other second-round matches, top-seeded Jim Courier defeated Cedric Pioline, 6-4, 6-2; Pete Sampras, seeded second and the defending champion, routed Stephane Sansoni, 6-0, 6-1, in 39 minutes; and No. 11 Jimmy Connors beat Simon Youl, 7-5, 6-4.
Fourth-seeded Carlos Costa was the highest ranked of four seeded clay-court specialists who lost.
Costa, ranked 11th, lost to Marcos Ondruska of South Africa 6-1, 6-3.
Brett Steven, ranked No. 156, upset No. 8 Derrick Rostagno, 6-3, 6-3. (AP) A Happy Birthday for Fernandez: Mary Joe Fernandez celebrated her 21st birthday with a 6-4, 6-1 victory over Pascale Paradis and advanced to the third round of the Matinee International Canadian Open in Montreal.
In other matches, No. 4 Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere downed Lisa Raymond, 6-2, 6-1, and ninth-seeded Judith Wiesner beat Catarina Lindqvist, 6-4, 7-5. (AP) Samara and Baker in Final: Top-seeded Tina Samara of Laurel Hollow, L.I., and unseeded Jennifer Baker of Mentor, Ohio, scored straight-set victories and reached the women's singles final of the United States national amateur championships in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y..
Samara, who will be a freshman at Georgia, was in top form in rolling to a 6-0, 6-1 victory over Susan Bartyl of Honeoye Falls, N.Y.
In the other semifinal, Baker, a U.C.L.A. sophomore, upset fourth-seeded Jennifer Lane of Sherborn, Mass., 6-4, 6-1.
In the men's division, No. 1-seeded Andrew Weiss of Great Falls, Va., a junior at Princeton, survived three match points and beat 15th-seeded Grady Burnett of Atherton, Calif., and advance to the quarterfinals.
SOCCER  New Teams in European Cups
It was a night the new names in European soccer had their moments of glory.
Teams from Slovenia, Israel, the Faroe Islands, Latvia, Liechtenstein and Ukraine kicked off the European Cups last night.
In the preliminary round of the Champions Cup, Skonto Riga of Latvia won, 3-1, at Klaksvikar Itrottarfellag of the Faroe Islands; the host, Olympija Ljubljana of Slovenia, beat Norma Tallinn of Estonia, 3-0, and Maccabi Tel Aviv won, 2-1, at Valletta of Malta.
Tavria Simferopol of Ukraine played to a scoreless tie at Shelbourne of Ireland.
In the Cup Winners Cup, the host, Maribor Branik of Slovenia, beat Hamruns Spartans of Malta, 4-0; Chernomorets Odessa of Ukraine was a 5-0 winner at Vaduz of Liechtenstein; Beggen of Luxembourg was a 1-0 winner at B36 Thorshaven of the Faroe Islands, and Happoel Pettah of Israel won, 2-0, at Stromgodset of Norway.
It is the first season Israeli teams are allowed to play in the European competitions. (AP) LITTLE LEAGUE  Pittsburgh Advances, 2-1
Cory Sullivan's solo home run in the top of the third inning gave Ingomar of Pittsburgh a 2-1 victory over Darlington of Pawtucket, R.I., in the Eastern Little League tournament yesterday in Bristol, Conn.
Ingomar advances to the semifinals against Manchester South (N.H.) on Thursday, with that winner playing undefeated Nottingham of Hamilton Square, N.J., in the final on Friday.
Darlington was knocked out of the double-elimination tournament. (AP) SWIMMING  Quance Breaks Caulkins Mark
Kristine Quance overcame fatigue to win the 400-meter individual medley last night at the National Swimming Championships in Mission Viejo, Calif., and erased the 10-year-old pool record held by Tracy Caulkins.
Quance, who won in 4 minutes 43.32 seconds, won her second national title of the meet.
Her time eclipsed Caulkins's mark of 4:44.78 at the 1982 World Championship Trials.
"That hurt so bad," Quance said.
"My legs were so dead it felt like I had anchors on my feet. I felt great in warmup, I don't know what happened, I was kind of struggling through the whole thing." Quance, considered a favorite to make the United States Olympic team in the 400 IM, missed the trip to Barcelona, Spain, because she was fighting a severe case of mononucleosis during the Olympic trials in March.
She decided to concentrate on the 200 breaststroke, in which she finished third and out of the running for a trip to the Olympics.
Matt Hooper, an 18-year-old from San Antonio, won the men's 400 IM in 4:22.57.
John Piersma, 17, of Huntsville, Ala., and Michelle Jesperson, 17, of Madison, Wis., won both 200 freestyle events.
The only U.S.
Olympian to swim last night night was Angie Wester-Krieg, who was fifth in the 200 freestyle with a time of 2:04.13. (AP)


Review/Dance; Amid a Sea of Concrete, a Pool Party
There are so few uncluttered expanses in Manhattan that the shock of coming upon one prompts the urge to dance across it.
And the new Kaskel Plaza, which joins Lincoln Center and the Juilliard School building in a wide bridge over West 65th Street, is a pretty, gloriously open-looking space.
So it seemed fitting that the Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival should inaugurate the plaza with dance commissioned for the occasion.
Risa Jaroslow's new "Pool Party Paradise," danced to nicely lolloping music by Steve Elson on Tuesday afternoon, is a well-conceived occasional piece.
It would be hard to go wrong with 24 blue plastic pools, 16 naiads in luscious-colored tank suits and their swains and a mysterious runner, all framed by city edifices near and distant, the reflecting windowed hallways of Avery Fisher Hall and a wide-open sky.
There was even sun and a little breeze for the occasion.


Ex-C.I.A. Official Portrayed as a Victim of Deceit
The lawyer for Clair E. George, the former top Central Intelligence Agency official charged with lying about the Iran-contra affair, portrayed his client in final arguments today as a victim of a craven campaign of deceit by a former friend and fellow employee at the agency.
In his closing remarks to a jury in Federal District Court, Richard A. Hibey, Mr.
George's lawyer, offered as the centerpiece of his defense the credibility and character of Alan D. Fiers.
Mr.
Fiers, once Mr.
George's close friend and subordinate at the C.I.A., was his chief accuser during the five-week trial.


Home Video
Hits for the Fall
Movies like "Hook" and "Bugsy" rule the list of most-rented videos this summer, but dealers are eyeing the next crop of hits coming this fall.
Top-10 titles get people into video stores, and distributors say the next batch of hits should get the job done about as well as their predecessors.
One title counted on is "Batman Returns," from Warner.
The studio won't comment on its plans, but Variety reports this week that the film will be released on Oct. 21, priced to sell at $24.98.
Some dealers say it will rent as well as it sells.


Today's Schedule
Order of events and speakers from the Republican Party, which is not providing specific times.  8 P.M. (Eastern daylight time) Call to order by Richard N. Bond, Republican national chairman.
* Presentation of colors by the Texas A&amp;M color guard.
* Pledge of allegiance led by Shannen Doherty, actress.
* National anthem sung by Sandi Patti.
* Invocation by the Rev. Ed Young of the Second Baptist Church in Houston.
* Lynne Cheney, chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities.
* Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri.
* Former President Gerald R.  Ford.
* Acceptance speech by Vice President Dan Quayle
* Attorney General Gale Norton of Colorado.
* Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader.
* Acceptance speech by President Bush. Today's Television
Live Network Broadcasts  ABC (Channel 7 in New York)
9 P.M. to 11 P.M.  CBS (Channel 2 in New York)
9 P.M. to 11 P.M.  NBC (Channel 4 in New York)
9:30 P.M. through the last event of the night.  PBS (Channel 13 in New York)
8 P.M. to the final gavel.  Cable Networks
CABLE NEWS NETWORK
(Channel varies by cable system)
8 P.M. to 11 P.M.  C-SPAN (Channel varies by cable system)
Gavel-to-gavel coverage.  UNIVISION (UHF Channel 41 in the New York area)
9:30 P.M. to the final gavel.  MTV (Channel varies by cable system)
Report at 8 P.M.  COMEDY CENTRAL (Channel varies by cable system)
9 P.M. to 11 P.M.  CROSSWALKS
(Available only in New York City; cable channel 74)
Noon to 6 P.M., rebroadcasts of the previous day's proceedings.


A DELICATE BALANCE: Issues -- AIDS; AIDS Speech Brings Hush to Crowd
Mary Fisher is rich, white, heterosexual and high-caste Republican.
Hers is not the common face of AIDS.
But she is as much imperiled by the disease as anyone could be, and tonight she told the assembled delegates of the Republican Party that they must recognize that something many in the party had seemed to see as a disease of other people belonged to them, too.


Court Rejects Coors Bid To Block Ads by Busch
A bruising advertising attack by Anheuser-Busch that disparaged rival Coors Light beer and questioned its claim to pristine Rocky Mountain integrity was upheld yesterday by a Federal judge in Manhattan.
The Adolph Coors Company of Golden, Colo., which advertises that its beers are brewed from pure Rocky Mountain water, adds water from Virginia to the beer it sells in Eastern markets.
The attack by the Anheuser-Busch Companies exploited that disparity.
Hoisted on 'Its Own Petard'
One ad showed a picture of a railroad tank car -- presumably filled with Coors Light -- heading East with an imposing "no" signal over it and a warning to beer drinkers: "Don't Be Railroaded."


'2 Trains Running' to Close
"Two Trains Running," the fifth play in August Wilson's historical cycle documenting 20th-century African-American life, is to close after the matinee on Aug. 30 at the Walter Kerr Theater, 219 West 48th Street.
The play, directed by Lloyd Richards and starring Larry Fishburne and Roscoe Lee Browne, will have run for 160 regular performances and 7 previews.


Businesslike With Business's Help, Cincinnati Schools Shake Off Crisis
A year ago, the Cincinnati public school system was, in the words of its superintendent, a system in crisis.
Four in 10 students never graduated from high school.
Management and cost controls were weak, contributing to the district's crippling $76 million debt.
Public confidence had so eroded that in November 1990 voters rejected a tax levy.
The district slipped into state receivership, a form of bankruptcy for public agencies.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
ASPHALT driveways need routine care to keep the minor damage that always occurs from getting worse.
Repairing cracks and small holes is not difficult; sealing a driveway to protect it from sunlight and chemicals and to keep it water-resistant is messy but also fairly easy.
To repair narrow cracks -- up to half an inch wide -- use liquid crack filler, made for driveway repair.
Inexpensive grades are usually adequate, but select a premium grade when extra elasticity is needed: in areas where a great deal of freezing and thawing occurs, for example, or for application during cool temperatures.
Crack filler and other products needed for driveway maintenance are available at hardware stores and home centers.


Jets Talk Big About Giants
How seriously do the Jets take their exhibition game Saturday with their crosstown rivals, the Giants?
Listen to two players today:
"It's going to be war," defensive end Dennis Byrd said.
"It's time to rock and roll. They know it, we know it. If we want to overshadow the Giants, we've got to win football games. Everybody's going to play good, hard football to see who wears the hat in New York.


Market Place; Less Enthusiasm For Hong Kong
CHINA'S tiny stock markets are calm again after last week's rioting and wild price swings.
And no sign of political rumbling has yet emerged from Beijing about suspending or scaling back these capitalist experiments in the world's most populous Communist country.
That's good news for investors in mutual funds who have sunk money in Hong Kong, where a much larger stock market is both jittery about news from China's capital and eager to ride the avid economic growth that is infecting southern China.


Excerpts From Speech Nominating Bush
Following are excerpts from remarks last night by Labor Secretary Lynn Martin at the Republican National Convention, as transcribed by The New York Times.
In the past decade, the years of George Bush and Ronald Reagan, it is our America that's moved the world.


Nassau Democrats Unite Against Rescue Proposal
A plan to resolve Nassau County's fiscal crisis approved recently by the New York State Legislature was declared dead today by county Democrats, who accused Nassau's Republican leadership of hiding millions of dollars in departmental budgets.
"They refuse to cooperate and provide us with all the necessary budgetary information," said Lewis J. Yevoli, the Supervisor of the Town of Oyster Bay and one of the three Democrats who collectively hold veto power over the six-member County Board of Supervisors.


Smokers, Too, Want the Right to Choose; Dispel Teen-Age Cool
To the Editor:
In "Smoking and Politics" (column, Aug. 5), Anna Quindlen lambastes the cigarette industry for producing ads aimed at teen-agers.
While this practice is morally reprehensible, I don't think that most teen-agers are lured into smoking their first cigarette by an advertisement in a magazine.
At my high school, a large percentage of the student body smokes; smoking is seen as cool.
Even I have succumbed to the irresistible temptation to find out why so many people in this country think cigarettes are so wonderful.
I've discovered that smoking isn't as terrific as it seems when you've never tried it.


YELTSIN OUTLINES SALE OF INDUSTRY
On the eve of celebrations for the anniversary of last year's failed coup d'etat, President Boris N. Yeltsin went on television tonight with details of a privatization program that will provide vouchers worth 10,000 rubles (just over $60) for each man, woman and child in Russia.
Mr.
Yeltsin, back from a two-week vacation, gave a somber, even defensive assessment of his economic reforms.
"Some people say we plunged into the stream before learning to swim," he said.
"But we have not choked, nor have we drowned."


Visits by Public Officials Helped Calm Troubled Neighborhood; The Summer of '86
To the Editor:
Rudolph W. Giuliani should know a lot about political responses and Washington Heights (Op-Ed, Aug. 7).
In the summer of 1986, when crack was becoming the new drug of choice, he put on his "undercover leathers and dark shades" and joined New York's Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, who was running for re-election, to break the law by buying crack on the streets of Washington Heights.
None of the drug dealers from whom he purchased the crack were ever arrested or prosecuted.


THE MEDIA AND THE MESSAGE: The Vice President; Vice President Sees This Race as Chance to Recast Image
The country's first exposure to Dan Quayle's home town in 1988 was not exactly what the Vice President had in mind.
Rather than seeing Huntington, Ind., as an idyllic town in the heartland, television viewers saw an angry mob of locals on the courthouse green, heckling the reporters who were interrogating Mr.
Quayle about his enlistment in the Indiana National Guard.
Four years later, Mr.
Quayle will try again, this time with a nostalgic video intended to introduce him to the Republican National Convention on Thursday night and to reintroduce him to an electorate that still views him in largely unfavorable terms.
The four-minute video is just one component of the full-throttle campaign waged by Mr.
Quayle and his aides during convention week to redefine him as a man of courage, conviction and, perhaps most important, common beginnings.


Money Market Funds' Yields Are Down Another Notch
Yields offered by money market funds ticked down in the latest week as interest rates flattened in the money markets, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
The seven-day compounded and simple average yields for tax-exempt funds were both down a basis point, to 2.17 percent and 2.15 percent, respectively.
For the 30-day average, the compound and simple yields were 2.20 percent and 2.18 percent, respectively.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Puerto Rico Bond Offering Includes Variable-Rate Debt
The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico was in the tax-exempt market yesterday to sell $538.7 million of fixed-rate bonds and some variable-rate securities, with proceeds from the latter going toward the refinancing of some bonds issued to the public between 1986 and 1990.
In the negotiated public offering, underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company tentatively priced $343.2 million of fixed-rate bonds to yield a maximum 6.25 percent for an issue due in 2014, with another longer-term bond due in 2009 priced to yield 5.90 percent.
For shorter maturities, investors were offered serial bonds with yields ranging from 3.80 percent in 1994 to 4.90 percent in 1997, 5.75 percent in 2002 and 6.05 percent in 2006.


Fukutake Signs Accord To Buy 67% of Berlitz
Berlitz International Inc., the language instruction and translation company formerly controlled by the late Robert Maxwell's Macmillanpublishing unit, said yesterday that it had signed a definitive agreement to sell a 67 percent stake to the Fukutake Publishing Company.
The deal, which has various strings attached, has a cash value of about $276 million.


Plano, Tex., Prices $121.7 Million of Debt
The City of Plano, Tex., yesterday tentatively priced $121.7 million of general obligation debt to refund in advance previously sold debt with higher interest rates.
The bond offering was made through Merrill Lynch &amp; Company and priced to yield a maximum of 6.20 percent for an issue due in 2012, with shorter-term serial bonds priced to yield from 2.90 percent in 1993 to 6.15 percent in 2010.


Topics of The Times; Fine Spun
The political term "spin" continues to evolve, as seen in Houston during advance discussion of President Bush's big speech last night.
By now, the pundits will have decided whether the speech met their expectations.
But beforehand, there was confusion: In which direction were Bush publicists trying to spin the story?
"Spin" became familiar as a political noun in the 1980's, referring for instance to the "spin doctors" eager to impart their interpretation to events like debates.
In time the verb form developed, as when a publicist sets out "to spin the story our way." The newest refinement, with overtones of astronomy and radio dials, calibrates efforts by publicists to manipulate expectations.


Review/Film; A Swedish Tale of Betrayal, Bleak and Too Beautiful
"The Ox," directed by Sven Ny kvist, best known for his work as Ingmar Bergman's cinematographer, is a solemn tale of betrayal and reconciliation set in rural Sweden in the 1860's, when drought and famine prompted a tidal wave of immigration to America.
The screenplay, written by Mr.
Nykvist and Lasse Summanen and said to be based on a true story, is about an archetypal poor farmer who slaughters his neighbor's ox to feed his hungry wife and baby daughter.
When the farmer is eventually caught, he's sentenced to life imprisonment.
In a twist at the film's end, the pardoned farmer must forgive his wife as his neighbor has forgiven him.


In Economic Plan of '92, Bush Avoids Trap of '88
This time, no one will be able to blame President Bush for breaking his promises about the economy at the Republican convention.
They are simply too vague, not even remotely resembling the "read my lips: no new taxes" pledge he made four years ago in New Orleans.
He said tonight that if he was re-elected, he would propose tax reductions across the board.
But he never said which taxes would be lowered, and he made the pledge contingent on offsetting spending reductions.


Review/Film; Loggers And Indians At War
An aerial view of a forest in northern Canada devastated by the lumber industry "looks like the moon on a bad day," one character in the film "Clearcut" says.
To another observer, the same sight "looks like money."
Those remarks define the bitter regional war that ignites this Canadian film, which opens today at the Gramercy Theater.
As the movie begins, a local lumber company that is the area's economic wellspring has just won a legal skirmish against an Indian tribe whose sacred ground has been violated by a road used to truck timber from the forest to the mill.
Peter (Ron Lea), the big-city lawyer for the Indians' cause, arrives in time to witness a bloody battle between the police and the Indians, who are trying to prevent the company's logging trucks from entering their territory.


Plot of New Woody Allen Film Seems to Mimic His Life
Amid the allegations and counterallegations that began with a child-custody suit, the producers of Woody Allen's latest film have begun holding screenings of what some in the audience said was art imitating life.
The film, "Husbands and Wives," is scheduled to be released in October.
The first screening, in Manhattan on Wednesday evening, was for magazine writers and editors.
Other screenings for critics are scheduled for the next few weeks in Los Angeles as well as Manhattan.
The plot involves a college professor (Mr. Allen), his wife (Mia Farrow), the breakup of their marriage and his relationship to a 21-year-old student (Juliette Lewis).


Clear Skies for the Tigers, Storm Flags for the Giants
While the sale of the Detroit Tigers within the pizza industry continued to proceed smoothly through the ranks of baseball ownership yesterday, the future of the San Francisco Giants remained a subject of some question and controversy.
National League owners, meeting via telephone conference call, unanimously but unofficially approved the sale of the Tigers by Tom Monaghan (Domino's Pizza) to Mike Ilitch (Little Caesars).
American League owners also voted unanimously a day earlier at a meeting in Chicago.
Owners of both leagues are scheduled to vote formally in a telephone conference call Monday.


Pentagon Accused of Bias In Enforcing Ban on Booty
For as long as the United States has fought in wars, soldiers have returned home with war booty, some of it illegally imported.
But an Army captain, facing court-martial for illegally bringing back Iraqi assault rifles from the Persian Gulf war, is believed to be the first to challenge the military's standards for punishment in these cases.
He says senior officers who committed similar offenses have received little or no punishment.


Review/Film; Young Hero in Pajamas Braves Nightmare Land
The title character of "Little Nemo: Adventures in Slumberland," a captivating animated feature, is a perky, wide-eyed boy whose nighttime dreams are so tumultuous that he sometimes wakes up on the floor beside his bed.
One night when the circus is in town, four clowns with cone hats appear at his bedroom window with a professor who summons him to visit King Morpheus in Slumberland.
He has been chosen, the professor explains, to be the official playmate of the king's daughter, Princess Camille.
Accompanied by his pet squirrel, Icarus, the little boy boards a turn-of-the-century showboat attached to a dirigible and sails through the sky to Slumberland.
On their way, they bypass Nightmare Land, which spins in the heavens like a lump of coal, discharging lightning and thunder.
Their destination turns out to be a Christmasy, pink-turreted toy land of happy people and circusy pleasures.


Review/Film; Violence Compounded by More Violence
If a list were compiled of movies that destroyed the most glass, "Rapid Fire" would probably rank near the top.
During its nonstop mayhem, several glass walls are shattered, and the film's star, Brandon Lee, guns his motorcycle through a window.
Mr.
Lee, son of the action star Bruce Lee, who died in 1973, plays Jake Lo, an indestructible college student and martial-arts virtuoso.
The movie is shameless in exploiting the father-son connection to try to make the star, who exudes a bored, dead-eyed cool, seem sympathetic.


Militello Departs and the A's Deluge Arrives
There was a different sound and a different feel for the first six innings at Yankee Stadium last night, elements that have been absent for weeks while the Yankees struggled for an identity and struggled even more to win more games than they lost.
The new sound emerged from the thrilled fans who watched Sam Militello handle the Athletics.
The new feel was the apparent feel of a winning team as the Yankees tried to complete a three-game sweep of the A's, the best team in the American League, for the first time in seven years.


California Budget Crisis Gets Angrier


First Black Federal Judge Appointed in 1910
To the Editor:
In "The Case of the Missing Black Judges" (Op-Ed, July 29), A. Leon Higginbotham states: "For 145 years the Federal courts in the continental United States -- the Supreme Court, Courts of Appeals and District Courts -- were entirely made up of white males. The first woman, Florence Allen, was appointed by Franklin D. Roosevelt, in 1934, and the first African-American, William H. Hastie, in 1949, by Harry S. Truman."


AMERITECH MANAGERS TO BE OFFERED INCENTIVES TO LEAVE
The Ameritech Corporation said it planned to cut its management staff by 2,500, or 12 percent, by next April through layoffs and early retirement.
Under the plan, managers will receive incentives to leave, including up to six months' salary.
The move follows a similar program last fall in which 2,100 managers left.
Ameritech, a Bell regional telephone company that serves the Midwest, reached its peak of 78,500 management and nonmanagement employees in 1987; it now has 74,000 employees.


Washington Issue's Top Yield Is 6.24%
The State of Washington is in the municipal market this week with a $308 million general obligation bond issue priced to yield a maximum 6.24 percent for a security due in 2017 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Shorter-maturity serial bonds are priced to yield from 2.90 percent for a 1993 maturity to 4.65 percent in 1997, 5.50 percent in 2002 and 6 percent in 2007.
For investors interested in other long maturities, the underwriters are offering a yield of 6.14 percent for a bond due in 2012.


New York City Begins Another Search for a Film Chief
Under pressure from an ailing film industry, New York City officials said yesterday that they are starting from scratch in the four-month search for a film commissioner who can woo Hollywood back to New York.
The choice of a new head for the relatively low-budget office became the subject of intense controversy after local film makers protested that four finalists chosen in June by a nine-person search committee simply were not up to the job.
Film and television production is an important business in New York City, where a seven-month strike that ended in May 1991 cost the city half its normal number of production days.
This year, the number has continued to decline, slipping 5 percent further.


Beyond Morality in the Balkans
When the French offered to send 1,100 troops to Sarajevo, an eminent German defense official said off the record: "Great! And who is going to supply the other 89,900 men?"
As the Serbs continue hammering at the Bosnians, there is no shortage of moral outrage and strategic advice.
TV continues to dredge up images supposedly banished forever from the mind.
Former leaders no longer in the business of making real choices urge quick strikes from the air.
Pundits advise us to drive a corridor to Sarajevo and to blow up artillery positions in the hills.


Iran-Contra Judge Proves to Be a Master of Control
Early in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George, Federal District Judge Royce C. Lamberth displayed the kind of temperament he is known to deploy skillfully in controlling a trial.
Mr.
George, a former top Central Intelligence Agency official, is charged with concealing the agency's role in the Iran-contra affair, and the trial has involved mountains of classified material.
Similar cases have foundered when intelligence agencies blocked and delayed the release of documents.


MORE ON THE CAMPAIGN
The Trials of Dan Quayle
Even as the Vice President wages an aggressive campaign to reintroduce himself to the electorate, the old demons, it seems, are always lurking.
Man in the News, page A11.
About-Face
The two parties engaged in role reversal this year: The Democrats stage-managed their convention like Republicans, and the Republicans put on theirs like Democrats.
Page A12. 'Inhale This!'
The Republicans' gathering was not without an undercurrent of confrontation, or even nastiness, or even a dirty trick or two.
Page A17.


Bush Takes a Swing at Cuomo
Along with a roundhouse attack on Gov.
Bill Clinton for what he cast as "Elvis economics" and other risky policies, President Bush laced his acceptance speech last night with a jab at Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York.
"Governor Clinton even says that Mario Cuomo belongs on the Supreme Court," Mr.
Bush said.
"If you believe in judicial restraint, you probably ought to be happy. After all, the good Governor of New York can't make up his mind between chocolate and vanilla at Baskin Robbins. If he's there, we won't have another Court decision for 35 years."


Reports That the Sun Was Extinguished Prove Premature


D'Amato Steps Back From His Own Party
Facing a bruising re-election battle in New York, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato took a swipe at the G.O.P., saying it had focused too intensely on "family values."


Transcript of Bush Speech Accepting the Nomination For Another Four Years
Following is the speech by President Bush to the Republican National Convention last night accepting the party's Presidential nomination, as transcribed by The New York Times.
Thank you very much, and I am proud to receive, and I'm honored to accept your nomination for President of the United States.


Pay, Not Perot, Lures Workers In Ballot Effort
Petition-gatherers for Ross Perot were out in force in midtown Manhattan yesterday, part of the disavowed Presidential candidate's continuing effort to get his name on the November ballot in all 50 states.
But the workers were not some of the thousands of volunteers who had labored for Mr.
Perot around the country until he unexpectedly withdrew from contention last month.
These workers were being paid $10 an hour.


Tractor-Trailer Crashes Through Guard Rail on Tappan Zee Bridge


Would a Woman Patient Win RU-486 Approval?
To the Editor:
The spectator sport of watching government waver and contradict itself provokes thought as this election year progresses.
I was pleased and enraged by your July 30 report on the approval of the use of RU-486 to prolong the life of a cancer patient -- a
male
cancer patient.
I was glad to see the advancement of medicine, but enraged by the thought that the use of RU-486 would probably not have been approved had the victim of meningioma been a female.
In the political battle over women's bodies, I imagine the Congressional subcommittee's arguments against its use would have stemmed from the fact that RU-486 is identified as an abortion agent and alters a woman's hormonal balance.


Review/Art; Long Island Shows: Small, Closely Focused and Odd
August is always a busy art month on eastern Long Island, where many in the art world spend their down time working in summer studios or gossiping at the beach.
For some reason, August 1992 has produced an especially large crop of substantial art exhibitions, and they grow more plentiful as one travels east.
Some of these shows are smallish, rough-around-the-edges retrospectives that provide the chance to size up achievements of well-known artists from the 1960's and 70's.
The Nassau County Museum of Art in Roslyn, for example, has mounted a 30-year survey of the maverick figurative artist Larry Rivers.
And the Guild Hall Museum in East Hampton has brought together nearly three decades' worth of sculpture by Roy Lichtenstein, the Pop painter, for the first time.
This show is paired with a small overview of the career of the New Image painter Donald Sultan.


CHRONICLE
British newspapers ran photographs yesterday of a topless DUCHESS OF YORK, Prince Andrew's estranged wife, cuddling with JOHN BRYAN, a 37-year-old Texas businessman at a secluded villa on the French Riviera.
The pictures of the former Sarah Ferguson accompanied headlined stories that predicted the scandal would end any remaining hope of a reconciliation in the royal couple's six-year marriage.
Mr.
Bryan has said that he was only a financial adviser to Prince Andrew and the Duchess.


Lindsley F. Kimball, 97, Is Dead; Founded New York Blood Center
Lindsley F. Kimball, a longtime Rockefeller family associate who organized the New York Blood Center and also headed the U.S.O. and National Urban League, died on Sunday at his home in Newtown, Pa.
He was 97 years old.
He died of an intestinal hemorrhage, a family spokeswoman said.


CHRONICLE
For 70 years, AL HIRSCHFELD has been turning out his line drawings, capturing thousands of theatrical luminaries in his inimitable style. (He prefers to call it "characterizing, rather than caricaturing.") And now it is his turn to be caricatured.
To celebrate his contributions to theater arts, the Stage Directors and Choreographers Foundation recently invited some of the stars he has drawn over the years to turn artist and to catch his likeness in a drawing.


Attempt to Recall Mayor Is Struck Down in Passaic
It took a group of residents more than two and a half years to collect enough signatures to recall Mayor Joseph Lipari and a few seconds to see their efforts founder today on a ruling by the City Clerk that no one, including Mayor Lipari, understood.
The Clerk, Sabatini Fiorellino, certified 736 of 7,431 signatures.
Most of the rest were declared void because, she said, "the person executing the certificate was not a valid signer on the petition." That was her only explanation for her decision to reject 372 of the 431 signature sheets submitted, and she repeatedly declined to discuss it further.


Excerpts From Vice President Quayle's Address
Following are excerpts from the speech last night by Vice President Dan Quayle to the Republican National Convention accepting the party's Vice-Presidential nomination, as transcribed by The New York Times.
I know my critics wish I were not standing here tonight.
They don't like our values.
They look down on our beliefs.
They're afraid of our ideas.
And they know the American people stand on our side.
And that's -- and that's why, when someone confronts them and challenges them, they will stop at nothing to destroy him.
And I say to them: You have failed.
I stand -- I stand before you, and before the American people -- unbowed, unbroken and ready to keep fighting for our beliefs.


New York City Begins Another Search for a Film Chief
Under pressure from an ailing film industry, New York City officials said yesterday that they are starting from scratch in the four-month search for a film commissioner who can woo Hollywood back to New York.
The choice of a new head for the relatively low-budget office became the subject of intense controversy after local film makers protested that four finalists chosen in June by a nine-person search committee simply were not up to the job.
Film and television production is an important business in New York City, where a seven-month strike that ended in May 1991 cost the city half its normal number of production days.
This year, the number has continued to decline, slipping 5 percent further.


A Word From the Wives
The wife of the President of the United States professed amazement. After speeches by
President
Ronald Reagan,
President
Gerald Ford,
Secretary
Jack Kemp,
Senator
Phil Gramm, what on earth was
she
doing addressing the Republican Convention?
In truth, Mrs.
Bush knew exactly what she was doing -- and so did the Bush campaign.
In the Year of the Woman, the Republicans were trotting out the wives.
And what a pair of wives they are.
There's Marilyn Quayle, wife of the Vice President and everything, she implied in a speech, that Hillary Clinton is not.
Marilyn Quayle was "a budding lawyer" when she married, but her husband "wanted a partner -- and he has one. Political liberals have no monopoly on respecting women's abilities."


Iraq Vows to Resist Western Flight Ban
Iraq warned today that it would use "all means available" to resist a Western plan to bar Baghdad's warplanes from flying over the Shiite Muslim region in southern Iraq.
The defiant announcement, made on Baghdad radio, was the first official Iraqi reaction to a plan by the United States and its Western allies to prohibit Iraqi military planes from flying south of the 32d parallel.
The air shield is intended to prevent attacks on the Shiites, who have been frequent targets of Iraqi air raids since their failed uprising after the Persian Gulf war.


A Soul Singer With as Much Bite as Bark
Ask Swamp Dogg for the moon and he'll give you the stars.
Ask him for his opinion and he'll give you a song like "Appelle-Moi Noir," in which he tells you exactly what he thinks of racial stereotypes.
Ask him for a hit record and he'll give you "Surfin' in Harlem" (Volt), a wacky and wild assortment of soul grooves, funk attitudes and rock-and-roll ribaldry that's brazenly uncommercial.
That's the kind of guy Swamp Dogg is.
He's naturally skewed.
Ask Swamp Dogg for an interview and he'll give you an hourlong colloquy on subjects as diverse as radio Arbitron ratings, Fats Domino, pit bulls, prejudice, insanity, newspaper editors who drink too much, nuclear physicists and just why he's upset with Woody Allen.
"A guy by the name of Swamp Dogg -- right away you figure he isn't all there," says Swamp Dogg.
"That's exactly what I want you to think."


A TV Set Helps Promote TV Guide
In a video version of the inmates taking over the asylum, a television set assumes control of itself in a new series of irreverent commercials for TV Guide magazine.
In the fast-paced spots, created by Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc. in Venice, Calif., the set speaks in a hip voice -- actually, the voice of Chris Hooper, the campaign's art director -- as it changes channels, adjusts the volume and performs other tricks reminiscent of "Max Headroom" or the opening credits of the 1960's science-fiction series "The Outer Limits."


Art in Review
'Benchmarks' Katonah Museum of Art Katonah, N.Y.


The Advocate Plans To Speed Ad Spinoff
The Advocate said yesterday that it would accelerate plans to make the magazine for gay and lesbian readers more attractive to mainstream advertisers by removing sexually oriented advertising and spinning it off into a separate publication.
Though The Advocate has recently been carrying ads from large marketers like Carillon Importers and Time Warner, others have said that the sexually explicit nature of the biweekly's classified and display advertising made them reluctant to purchase space.


If You Freeze It, the N.H.L. Will Come
In what could be the first of several dramatic attempts in the near future to repair its image, the National Hockey League announced yesterday that it will hold 24 neutral-site games in the upcoming season, in cities ranging from Halifax to Dallas.
The neutral-site games were provided for in the settlement of last April's 10-day strike by N.H.L. players.
Each team will play two apiece as the league tests new markets for possible expansion.


Live, From Houston, This Is Your Local Reporter
Cary Pfeffer, a reporter covering the Republican National Convention for Channel 12 News in Phoenix, had snagged his biggest interview of the week.
For three precious minutes he had Jack F. Kemp, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, all to himself.
Standing in a booth overlooking the sprawling Astrodome, Mr.
Pfeffer thrust his yellow microphone in Mr.
Kemp's face and got right to the big question: Was the Secretary running for the White House in 1996?


A Steeplechase for the Ages
Three aging steeplechase horses who ran 1-2-3 for the same trainer last year in the richest jumping race of the summer tried it again today.
They didn't pull off a sweep, but they won a measure of success when the senior star of the stable, a 10-year-old son of Seattle Slew named Yaw, won the race for the second straight year.
The three horses trained by Jonathan Sheppard tried their "double triple" in the $116,840 New York Turf Writers Cup at Saratoga Race Course.
Last year, Yaw finished first, Moonstruck second and Double Bill third.
The last two are now 9 years old, and the three were the oldest horses in today's race.
They have raced 134 times in their combined careers, and won 30 times.


Art in Review
Tibetan Buddhist Altar Newark Museum


Art in Review
'In Good Conscience' 'The Radical Tradition in 20th-Century American Illustration' Katonah Museum of Art Katonah, N.Y.


Topics of The Times; Oh Deer!
If all goes well in an experiment at a National Zoo research center in Front Royal, Va., deer in suburban Washington will before long be injected with a contraceptive.
The idea is to slow breeding in areas where hunting is impractical.
But it's not as simple as it sounds.
The deer need at least one contraceptive shot a year, which is easy in controlled surroundings but tough with wild deer.
And there are potentially troublesome side effects.
An inoculated doe will come into heat several times each fall, rather than just once, for example, raising the prospect of exhausting the bucks.


Students Lead Assault on Brazil's Besieged Chief
Lampooning President Fernando Collor de Mello's tastes in elegant monogrammed shirts, student protesters in Rio recently hand-tailored a shirt to fit Brazil's new rebellious spirit.
"Pretty Shirt, Little Fernando!" mocked a banner carried by students from the high school President Collor attended here in the 1960's.
Depicted on the banner was a shirt with black and white prison stripes.


A Vice President Who Has Been Tested: James Danforth Quayle 3d
Patrick J. Buchanan was about to deliver his most memorable zinger, the line about how Gov.
Bill Clinton "sat up in a dormitory in Oxford, England, and figured out how to dodge the draft." An impish producer at NBC News, who had an advance text of Mr.
Buchanan's Monday night speech to the Republican convention, ordered the cameras trained on Vice President Dan Quayle.
As the Astrodome crowd erupted in cheers, Mr.
Quayle sat stiff and expressionless, his eyes shifting self-consciously to the left and then to the right.
The camera lingered.
Mr.
Quayle, whose own candidacy was bombarded by questions about the draft four years earlier, did not smile.


An Absolute Stroke Of Luck for TBWA
A decision by TBWA Advertising Inc. to purchase an advertisement on the back cover of Forbes magazine produced a serendipitous bonus: a separate appearance on the issue's front cover.
The Aug. 31 issue of Forbes, which carries the magazine's annual survey of mutual funds, features on its front cover an illustration of a family of bears reading that same issue of Forbes.
The front cover of the tiny magazine in the illustration reproduces the front cover of the issue.
The back cover of the tiny magazine in the illustration reproduces the back cover of the issue -- an ad for Absolut, called "Absolut Standard," showing a bottle of the vodka made of gold.


Taking No Prisoners In a Cultural War
The Republicans have declared cultural war on the Democrats, and it is not going to be pretty.
There is no telling to what lengths George Bush will go.
This is, after all, the Phi Beta Kappa from Yale who declared with a straight face in 1988 that his favorite television show was "Hee Haw."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
William Taylor, the F.D.I.C. chairman, died following colon surgery.
His death threw into doubt his plan to increase the insurance premiums that banks and savings associations pay to protect depositors.
He had cast the tie-breaking vote to lift premiums by an average of 22 percent, when the plan was approved in May.  [ Page D1. ]  A career regulator, Mr.
Taylor was lauded by both Republicans in the White House and Democrats in Congress.
Alan Greenspan called him an "extremely capable public servant of unquestioned integrity.  [ A22. ]
Little change would have occurred in first-time filings for jobless benefits early this month, but for G.M. workers who filed for unemployment insurance when the automaker shut its plants for two weeks.
That led to the largest jump in more than 10 years.  [ D2. ] Companies
Olympia &amp; York is seeking a five-year moratorium on debt repayments to its biggest creditors.
The goal of the plan, which the world's largest property manager is to file in Canadian bankruptcy court today, is to allow the company to stay in business.  [ D1. ]


Judge Questions Teamsters' Will To Avoid Crime
A Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday castigated the new leadership of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, elected seven months ago on an anti-corruption platform, for opposing a larger Government role in ridding the union of links to organized crime.
At the same time, the judge imposed stronger rules for an oversight board in an effort to protect the union from further corruption.


No Choice but to Confront the Economy
When the Republicans arrived in Houston last weekend, the salient issue of the 1992 Presidential campaign was the economy, and when they leave town this weekend, it will still be the economy.
But President Bush reframed the debate tonight, promising across-the-board tax cuts next year if the new Congress agrees to spending cuts to offset them.
It was a bold attempt to persuade the American people to forgive him for the increases he accepted in June 1990, and give him another chance.
It was also a brisk challenge to the Democrats -- the Democrats who control the House and Senate as well as Mr.
Bush's Democratic opponents this fall.


Russian Critical of Jews Will Not Quit Academy
A Russian mathematician has refused to resign as a foreign associate of the National Academy of Sciences, which had asked him to quit because of his purported anti-Semitic writings.
The academy today released a letter from the mathematician, Igor R. Shafarevich, in which he defended his writings as not being anti-Semitic even though they are critical of Jewish groups and the place of some Jews in Russian history.
His refusal to quit means he will remain with the academy because its bylaws have no provisions for expelling members.


INSIDE
Placing the Homeless
The New York City Housing Authority won greater discretion to select which homeless families move into its public housing projects.
Page B1.
C.I.A.
Defector Seized
The only C.I.A. officer to defect to the Soviet Union was arrested in Sweden, and may stand trial in the United States, officials said.
Page A3.
Banking Agency Chief Dies
William Taylor, a top banking regulator, died at 53, throwing into doubt his plan to raise bank insurance premiums.
Page D1. (Obituary, page A22.) A New Bahamian Leader
Hubert Ingraham was elected Prime Minister of the Bahamas, sweeping Sir Lynden O. Pindling out of office after 25 years.
Page A8.


D'Amato Criticizes G.O.P. Over Emphasis on Family Values
Heading into a bruising re-election battle this fall in New York, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato took a clearly calculated swipe at his own party yesterday, saying the Republicans had focused far too intensely on "family values" and had failed to address voters' concerns about the economy in great enough depth.
"I don't think any party has a corner on family values, and I don't think that any party should claim that it has one," Mr.
D'Amato said in an interview at the Republican National Convention in Houston.
"What we should do is talk about programs that will help a family with real challenges, whether it is a traditional family or a single-parent family."


HDTV GROUP COMPLETES GOVERNMENT TESTING PROCEDURE
The Advanced Television Research Consortium, one of four groups competing to develop a high-definition television system for the United States, said its system had completed tests at a Government-supervised laboratory.
The consortium is a joint venture of Philips N.V. of the Netherlands; the David Sarnoff Research Center in Princeton, N.J.; Thomson S.A. of France, and NBC.
The laboratory results will be used next year by the Federal Communications Commission to select the technical standard for  the advanced television technology.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 602 money market mutual funds increased by $1.94 billion, to $389.61 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 373 institutional funds increased by $1.81 billion, to $311.05 billion.
The assets of the 229 general-purpose funds were up by $127.4 million, to $78.56 billion.
The 274 broker-dealer funds decreased by $1.53 million, to $218.37 billion, the institute said.


Notes and Bonds Retreat in Price
Treasury bond and note prices fell slightly yesterday in thin trading as investors waited to see what economic proposal President Bush would make in his acceptance speech and whether the rally in the market would resume soon.
"All eyes are on Texas," said John Costas, managing director of government trading at the First Boston Corporation.


Abroad at Home; Merchants of Hate
"GOP Needs a Kremlin to Bash," the lead headline in The Chicago Tribune said the day before the convention.
It neatly stated the seeming dilemma of a Republican Party that for 40 years had made a theme of denouncing the Democrats as soft on Communism.
But the collapse of the Soviet Union did not faze Pat Buchanan, Pat Robertson or the others who speak for the Republican Party today.
They bashed the un-Christian and the un-straight.
They bashed Hillary Clinton and Bill Clinton.
And they even managed to flog the Red menace.


Rodgers Gets Ready to Come Back
It seemed like a good time for a celebration.
Buck Rodgers was turning 54 years old, he was feeling better every day and he was with his family, enjoying a bright summer day near the pool.


Paul Haakon, 80, Ballet and Broadway Dancer
Paul Haakon, a ballet and Broadway dancer of the 1920's and 30's, died on Sunday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, said Rita Sears, a friend.


Clinton Needles Bush, Trying to Quiet His Thunder
Gov.
Bill Clinton returned to the campaign trail today to restake his claim to the votes of the disenchanted Democrats who went Republican in the 1980's.
"I ran hard to the Reagan Democrats in the primary," the Democratic Presidential nominee said.
"And I intend to do it in the general election Well, we want them back."


TV Interview Violated Defendant's Rights
To the Editor:
As both criminal-defense lawyers and as United States citizens, we were aghast that the authorities in New York's Orange County permitted reporters from WNBC-TV in New York City and The Middletown Times Herald Record to interview Nathaniel White, a suspect in the serial murders of six Hudson Valley women (news article, Aug. 6).


Review/Film; If You Fumbled the Book, You'll Love the Movie
Help is at hand for everyone who, like me, plunked down $18.95 to buy Stephen Hawking's "Brief History of Time" only to realize, upon reaching page 11, that not a word had sunk in after page 5.
"A Brief History of Time" has been its own black hole.
It not only swallowed up enough of the curious to keep it on the best-seller lists for 100 weeks.
It also seems to have prevented any reader from emerging to sound the alarm: brief the volume is, but also dangerously dense.
Errol Morris, a director of documentaries ("The Thin Blue Line," "Gates of Heaven"), has come to the rescue of everyone who feels somehow inadequate for failing to mush on to the last page.
Inspired by the book and working with the English physicist's cooperation, Mr.
Morris has now made a film with the same alluring title.
It opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas.


Remarkable Role Reversals In the 2 Parties' Big Shows
The political parties pulled off a striking role reversal at this year's national conventions: the Republicans stage managed their show like Democrats and the Democrats put on theirs like Republicans.
The partisan oratory at the events were in character, of course.
But when it came to production values, pacing and excitement, each side seemed to mimic the customs of its rival.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Connors Is Still at It  Jimmy Connors did it again.
The old man of tennis staved off an upstart youngster in the United States Hardcourts in Indianapolis yesterday.
Connors upset fifth-seeded Wayne Ferreira, 6-3, 6-2, in just over an hour to advance to a quarterfinal round for the second time in as many tournaments.
Two weeks before the United States Open and his 40th birthday, Connors was on a roll against a player 19 years younger.
Ferreira, a semifinalist at the Australian Open this year, is ranked 12th in the world.
In other third-round matches, top-seeded Jim Courier outlasted David Engel, a Swede ranked 164th in the world, 7-6 (7-2), 6-2; No. 2 Pete Sampras, the defending champion, took out Todd Witsken, 6-4, 7-5, and No. 3, Boris Becker, needed two hours to beat No. 13 David Wheaton, 7-6 (9-7), 6-3.
Next up for Connors is Becker, who leads the lifetime series 4-0. (AP) Hy Defeats Maleeva
Patricia Hy, Canada's top-ranked player, reached the quarterfinals of the Canadian Open with a 6-3, 6-3 upset victory over fifth-seeded Katerina Maleeva in Montreal.
The Cambodian-born Hy will have to get past top-ranked Monica Seles to become the first Canadian to reach the semifinals of the $550,000 tournament.
Seles dispatched 14th-seeded Naoko Sawamatsu of Japan, 6-1, 6-2, in only 53 minutes. (AP) Fine Hour for Amateur
Andrew Weiss of Great Falls, Va., a junior at Princeton and the favorite in the event, swept the final nine games and beat No. 8-seeded Cesar Conde of Coral Gables, Fla., 6-1, 6-0, to reach the men's semifinals yesterday in the United States national amateur championships at the Concord Hotel in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y.
GOLF A Day for Birdies
With 10 birdies and no bogeys, Greg Whisman, a graduate of the Ben Hogan Tour, had 20 points after yesterday's first-round play of the International golf tournament in Castle Rock, Colo., a record for the event, which is played under the modified Stableford system. (AP) SWIMMING  3d Victory for Quance
Kristine Quance, who missed a chance at making the United States Olympic team because of mononucleosis, won her third event -- the 100-meter breast-stroke -- at the national championships at Mission Viejo, Calif., last night.
Quance won in 1 minute 9.60 seconds, posting the fourth fastest time in United States history in that event.
Mike Barrowman won the men's 100 breast-stroke in 1:02.02, tying his best time and winning his first-ever national title in the event.
Barrowman won the 200 breast-stroke on Tuesday.
Angie Wester-Krieg won her second event of the meet, the women's 100 butterfly, in 1:01.26. (AP)


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days: Vice President Quayle
TODAY: 8 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America," interview.  (Channel 7 in New York.)  Senator Al Gore
TODAY: 8:30 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America," interview. President Bush
TODAY: 5 P.M., C-Span, tape of a rally in Gulfport, Miss.


Art in Review
'In Good Conscience' 'The Radical Tradition in 20th-Century American Illustration' Katonah Museum of Art Katonah, N.Y.


COMPANY NEWS
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morris Township, N.J., will provide auxiliary power units to Northwest Airlines Inc. and Alitalia in separate deals worth $55 million.
CARGILL INC., Minneapolis, an agricultural products concern, agreed in principle to acquire Richland Sales Co. of Reedley, Calif., in its first venture in the fresh fruit industry.


In Today's Russia Too, the Rich Get Richer; Crime and Punishment
To the Editor:
"The Man in the Iron Cage: A Russian Horror Story" (news article, July 30), about Andrei Chikatilo, the accused Russian serial killer, may give the impression that the case was overseen and solved by the Rostov-on-Don police and, in particular, by Lieut.
Col.
Viktor V. Burakov.
Serious crimes in the former Soviet Union and in today's Russia are handled by the Attorney General's office, especially if the local police prove unable to cope, as happened in Rostov.


Review/Film; A Quirky Drug Dealer With Allusions on High
Paul Schrader's "Light Sleeper" is about the mid-life crisis of a decent, exceptionally responsible Manhattan drug dealer.
John LeTour (Willem Dafoe) is the sort of man who will make a special delivery to a customer in need at the emergency room of St.
Luke's Hospital.
When he thinks another customer is using too much, John refuses to sell.
Later, when that same customer seems to be going around the bend, John recommends a first-rate rehab center in Minnesota and calls the customer's brother to come help.
They don't make dealers like John anymore.
Nor do film makers with credits to equal Mr.
Schrader's ("The Comfort of Strangers" and "Patty Hearst," among others) often bring forth movies as ponderously fuzzy-minded as "Light Sleeper," which he both wrote and directed.


COMPANY NEWS: Ding-a-Ling Marketing; An Ice Cream Truck Not Just for Kids
As it rolled through Times Square in Manhattan yesterday, the vehicle turned many heads, which was no small feat in New York.
The bus, painted with a black-and-white checkerboard pattern, blue stars and yellow sunbursts worthy of Ken Kesey, belongs to Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade Inc., the anything-but-corporate-culture ice cream company.


Cry for Brazil
The Western Hemisphere's second-largest country is in an uproar.
Fernando Collor de Mello, Brazil's first freely elected President since the 1960's, is accused of widespread corruption and faces impeachment.
To stay in office he is recklessly dispensing patronage, despite surging inflation and international commitments to austerity.
It is for Brazilians, not Americans, to decide Mr.
Collor's political future.
Washington's interest is in continued democracy and economic recovery, not personalities.
Fortunately, all sides pledge to follow constitutional procedures.
But economic recovery is threatened in any event -- through the profligacy of Mr.
Collor or his replacement by an untested Vice President, Itamar Franco.


U.S. Is Said to Prepare An Ultimatum to Iraq
The United States and its allies plan to issue an ultimatum to Iraq early next week, instructing Baghdad to stop military flights in the south or risk having the planes shot down, Administration officials said today.
Officials said they expected the demand to be issued late Monday or early Tuesday.
Iraq has used planes and helicopters to attack Shiite Muslim communities in the south, where there is widespread political and religious opposition to President Saddam Hussein.


Union Plans A Walkout For One Day
Angered by planned layoffs of their members, four locals of the Communications Workers of America have threatened to stage a one-day walkout on Friday against the State Department of Human Services.
Members of Locals 1037, 1038, 1039 and 1040 have been asked not to report to work on Friday and to go instead to the State House for a noon rally that the organizers have billed as a "Day of Rage."


Fab Four Is in the Hunt at the Met Open
Four players were high up on the leader board today in the second round of the $75,000 Met Open because they found a way to handle the slick and fast greens of the Nassau Country Club.
Mark Mielke, who captured the New York State Open last month in his first year as the head pro at the Lawrence Golf Club on Long Island, was alone in the lead at 138 after shooting a two-under-par 68 this afternoon at the 6,648-yard course.


On TV, a Victory in Family Numbers
George Bush may not be able to win the election against Bill Clinton on the economy.
He may not even be able to win the fight over so-called family values.
But there is one battle he wins definitively: the battle over family numbers.
Mr. Bush has a big family. Mr. Clinton has a small family.


Lawyers Say Mix-Ups Led to Miami Charges
The two University of Miami football players indicted Tuesday in the Federal inquiry into financial-aid fraud at the school were granted a one-week continuance today to persuade the prosecutor, Martin B. Goldberg, of their worthiness to join other Miami student athletes in a pretrial diversion program.
A standout wide receiver, Lamar Thomas, and a reserve running back, Jason Marucci, both seniors, missed the United States Attorney's 30-day deadline to be eligible for the diversion program.
But both said today, through their attorneys, that mix-ups prevented them from doing so.


Olympia Proposes Debt Delay
Three months after Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the world's biggest property manager, filed for bankruptcy protection in Canada, it is asking its biggest creditors to back a five-year moratorium on debt payments to allow the company to stay in business.
The battle has been uphill all the way.
Under a proposal Olympia says it will file in a bankruptcy court here on Friday, bank lenders, bondholders and holders of short-term Olympia i.o.u.'s are being asked to postpone the payments on Canadian debts totaling $8.6 billion in return for various forms of equity.


Review/Concert; A Little Day Music Defies Its Ambiance
Music written for the out of doors was a thriving industry in the 18th century.
Martial pieces, or else those intended for al fresco entertainment, leaned toward the vividness of winds and brass and away from instruments that need the echoes of surrounding walls for resonance.
The three pieces at Wednesday's Young Artists Concert Series at midday in Bryant Park -- two of them by Mozart -- were nicely engineered for the open air though perhaps not for the special requirements of midtown Manhattan.
In competition with jackhammers to the north, sirens to the east and the loud unbroken hum of city life, Jean Francaix's subtle and retiring little "Divertissement" (1947) was more or less swallowed up, indeed more divined than actually heard.


Art in Review
Tibetan Buddhist Altar Newark Museum


Art in Review
'Benchmarks' Katonah Museum of Art Katonah, N.Y.


CREDIT MARKETS;
A $296 million tax-exempt offering for the Las Vegas-McCarran International Airport is being sold to the public by Clark County, Nev., through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
The tax-exempt revenue bonds for passenger operations include a 1992 series A issue, which is priced to yield a maximum 6.37 percent for a bond due in 2012 and 6.30 percent for one due in 2022.
Yields on the shorter serial bonds range from 4.95 percent in 1997 to 6.20 percent in 2007.


TVWeekend; How Roy Cohn Looked at the World
The central character of "Citizen Cohn" persecutes the innocent and the idealistic, consorts with criminals and reactionaries and sneers at honor and honesty, when he is not stealing from clients.
He is a Jew who has it in for Jews and a homosexual who denies his homosexuality even as he is dying of AIDS.
He also has terrible table manners.
You don't have to be a fan of the late Roy M. Cohn, best or worst remembered for his association with Sen.
Joseph R. McCarthy's Communist-hunting, to appreciate that a play about an incarnation of malevolence presents problems for a writer.
A dramatization of the man's sins may turn out to resemble a Jacobean horror show without the poetry.


Philadelphia Gets New Police Commissioner
A 30-year veteran of the Philadelphia Police Department, Richard Neal, was appointed today to succeed Willie L. Williams as police commissioner.
Mr.
Williams left the department in June to become Chief of the Los Angeles Police Department.
Mr.
Williams held the position for four years before being chosen to succeed Chief Daryl F. Gates.
Mr.
Gates stepped down in the wake of the police beating of Rodney G. King and the handling of the riots that followed the acquittal of four police officers who were involved in the incident.


What the President Deserves
With Republican cheers ringing in his ears, President Bush last night made two requests of America.
The first concerns the peace that has welled up across the globe during his four years in office.
George Bush has done much to manage and advance this process.
For that, he asks -- and deserves -- America's admiration.
Having done that, he seeks a more palpable reward, a second term, in which to reap the fruits of peace and "to pass the sweet cup of prosperity around our American table." The trouble with this request is that the domestic ideas he sketches out to support it so far sound too slight or too speculative to do the job.
For his plan to deserve serious consideration, let alone support, he will soon need to offer much greater detail.


A 33,000-Year-Old Skeleton Of Egyptian Is Found in Sinai
A scientific expedition has found a 33,000-year-old skeleton of an Egyptian, the oldest human relic ever found in this country.
The Government-owned daily Al Ahram said that the bones were found in the Firan valley in the Sinai desert and that stones had fused with it preserving it for thousands of years.


Arbitrator Issues Finding
Major league clubs changed the rules of the amateur draft to enhance their bargaining leverage and reduce their costs, baseball's arbitrator found yesterday.
Five weeks after striking down the new draft rules that extended a club's rights to a player from one year to as many as five years, George Nicolau issued an 18-page opinion explaining his decision.
He ruled on July 17 that changes in the draft rules had to be negotiated with the union because the draft is linked to the provision in the collective bargaining agreement covering compensation for free agents.


Lebanese Efforts Fail to Resolve Dispute Over Timing of Elections
Lebanon's fragile, two-year-old peace appeared in danger of collapsing as efforts failed today to resolve a conflict between the Syrian-backed Government and the main Christian factions on holding general elections.
A coalition of the main Christian parties called for a three-day general strike on Friday with a view to blocking the vote, which is scheduled to begin on Sunday.
But the Muslim Minister of Interior, Maj.
Gen.
Sami al-Khatib, served notice today that the election, the first in this country in two decades, would proceed on schedule, and warned the opposition against any move to disturb the peace.


Dorothy R. Jones, 81, Writer and Professor
Dr.
Dorothy Richardson Jones, an author and professor emeritus of English at Queens College died on Friday at Rutland (Vt.) Regional Medical Center.
She was 81 years old and lived in Dorset, Vt., and Hollywood, Fla., since her retirement in 1973.
She died of liver cancer, said her companion, Dr. Wyatt D. Jones.


Sierra Nevada Blaze Tests Fire Crews
A treacherous fire raged out of control for the fifth day in the Sierra Nevada foothills today, leaving thousands of firefighters and evacuated residents praying for a promised change in the weather that would lower temperatures and raise humidity here in the rugged Mother Lode country.
But until the hot, dry weather changed, as it did at nightfall, the fire tested the 3,900 firefighters who have come here from around the state.
Using 521 engines, 90 bulldozers, 16 air tankers, 14 helicopters and 28 water trucks, they are battling a 17,000-acre fire that began on Sunday when a car's exhaust ignited a patch of parched grass.


On 61st Birthday, King Is Own Noisemaker
On his 61st birthday yesterday, Don King held a news conference and filled it with what Don King does best: hyping, hustling, taking care of No. 1.
For starters, King -- a cottage industry for the legal profession -- announced he had sued the heavyweight contender Donovan (Razor) Ruddock because, King said, Ruddock had breached a promotional contract with him.


CHRONICLE
NBC may want ARTHUR KENT to appear on the air from the Croatian capital of Zagreb, but it does not want the reporter to appear from the set of the "Tonight" show.
The network abruptly canceled Mr.
Kent's scheduled appearance tonight, releasing a memorandum signed by ANNE H. EGERTON, a vice president for legal affairs, who wrote that Mr.
Kent's threatened lawsuit against NBC for defamation raised the possibility that an interview on the show might result in further claims of defamation.


ITT Official to Head Combined Divisions
The ITT Corporation named Louis J. Giuliano yesterday to run its newly combined defense and components divisions.
The Manhattan-based company said it had merged the two divisions because many of their markets, manufacturing processes and strategies overlapped.


Noncitizens Should Again Have the Vote
To the Editor:
"Until World War I, nearly half the states in the country allowed immigrants to vote at one time or another, even in Presidential elections," you state in a July 31 news article on discussions to give immigrants the vote.
According to "Strangers in the Land: Patterns of American Nativism 1860-1925" by John Higham, only seven states still had immigrant voting rights by 1917: Indiana, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Missouri, Arkansas and Texas.


L.I. Office for the Disabled Employs a Republican No-Show
Don Dreyer leaned forward in his wheelchair last week and pleaded with the deadlocked members of the Board of Supervisors to keep services going for 30,000 disabled people in Nassau County.
"Once again, vulnerable people with disabilities are being held hostage," he said.


Rise in Siblings Strains The Limit of Diplomacy
SIBLING rivalry is an important problem in the American family.
Is not.


Review/Film; Atoms to Bees in Alternative Realities
David Blair's "Wax, or the Discovery of Television Among the Bees" is so obsessed with looking and sounding like nothing that has come before that it defies the conventional wisdom that movies should be clear and well focused.
Set in the vicinity of Alamogordo, N.M., with some of its more striking scenes filmed in the Carlsbad Caverns, the movie reimagines the world as it might be perceived through the blurred eyesight of a bee.
That world is a surreal video dreamscape in which visual phenomena are continually metamorphosing in ways that used to be described as psychedelic.
In scenes shot in the New Mexico desert, the landscape unfolds like a shivering mirage, with the images of faces and mountains furling and dissolving like pictures on a flag in the wind.
A bomb-sight grid becomes a honeycomb that becomes a map of the brain.
The letters of a riddle float in the air and rearrange themselves into another slogan that seems to answer the first riddle.
"Wax" goes so far as to imagine an alternative alphabet used to communicate by the spirits of the dead.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
SHAKY RELATIONS AT EDUCATION BOARD
Relations between Schools Chancellor Fernandez and the seven-member Board of Education have plunged to such an abyss lately that some New York City leaders are beginning to talk publicly about how much longer Mr.
Fernandez will want to remain in office.
But the situation may be more complicated than it appears and perhaps not as dire.
B2.
REPRESENTATIVE SOLARZ'S GAMBIT
Thrown by reapportionment into a district with a popular and influential Democratic incumbent, Representative Stephen J. Solarz made an unusual political decision, one that set off one of the most topsy-turvy races in this disjointed political year.
He decided that his best hope lay in another district -- one created to improve New York's chances of electing a second Hispanic Representative.
Now, he is trying to sell himself to a constituency that, by and large, is distinctly unlike him.
B2.
NEW SEARCH FOR FILM COMMISSIONER
Under pressure from an ailing film industry, New York City officials say they are starting from scratch in the four-month search for a film commissioner who can woo Hollywood back to New York.
B3.
SLAYING STUNS A NEIGHBORHOOD
Merchants and residents of the Belmont section of the Bronx sound a note of worry when they talk about the increase in drug trafficking in their neighborhood.
But they insist the community is still an island of serenity, and they say that is why the beating death early Wednesday of a bodega worker has left them stunned.
B3.
VERDICT IN ARSON CASE
A 20-year-old man was convicted of Federal civil rights charges involving the firebombing of a real-estate agency that showed houses to black families in the traditionally white Canarsie section of Brooklyn.
B3.
ART IMITATING LIFE?
Amid the allegations and counterallegations that began with a child-custody suit, the producers of Woody Allen's latest film have begun holding screenings of what some in the audience said was art imitating life.
B3.
REGION
MAYOR'S JOB SAFE -- FOR NOW
It took a group of residents more than two and a half years to collect signatures on petitions to recall the Mayor of Passaic, N.J., and a few seconds to see their efforts founder on a ruling by the city clerk that no one, including the Mayor, understood.
B5.
PROTESTING LAYOFFS BY SKIPPING WORK
Angered by planned layoffs, one union representing state employees in New Jersey plans a one-day walkout Friday against the Department of Human Services.
State officials said that the protest might disrupt some office services but that its overall impact would be small.
B5.
AN INVISIBLE WORKER IN NASSAU
The Nassau County Office of the Physically Challenged has run out of money, and its chief last week issued a plea for help.
But he has now conceded that one of his six employees is a political appointee who had never set foot in his office.
Instead she was paid $42,000 a year to work on a variety of special assignments.
B5.
Pollution closes 15 New Jersey beaches.
B4.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B4
Chronicle B4


Critic's Notebook; Lombard's Madcap Recipe: Hauteur, Chic and Humor
THE initial setting in Howard Hawks's "Twentieth Century" (1934) is a bare Broadway stage where Oscar Jaffe (John Barrymore), a theater impresario deferentially called "sire" by his press agent, is taking the first day of rehearsals of his new production.
The show is a ghastly romance set in an antebellum South whose fictional apogee would be reached a few years later in "Gone With the Wind." The air is thick with out-of-state "Ah-declares" and "you-alls."
Oscar is having difficulty with his latest discovery, an ex-lingerie model nee Mildred Plotka (Carole Lombard), whom he has newly christened Lily Garland.
Eager and ambitious but painfully shy, Lily isn't screaming the way Oscar demands when she hears that her daddy has shot her lover dead on the front lawn.
Her best attempt is a tentative "eek." Oscar, a Krakatoa waiting to erupt, is gentle and avuncular.


'On Stage, and Off'
The "On Stage, and Off" column will resume with the new theater season in the fall.


In Downtown Syracuse, the Streets Get Emptier; The Closing of the Last Department Store Causes the City to Try to Redefine Its Core
Some people say that Syracuse's proud old downtown began to die when Interstate 81 was built in the 1960's.
Others think the suburban malls did it, each more grandiose than the one before, sucking stores and people from the city like so many vampires.
Whatever the cause, Doris Smith now finds that her modest office building in the heart of downtown is half-empty and eerily quiet.
"It is very sad and very depressing," said Mrs.
Smith, a receptionist for an advertising agency where the ground floor was vacated by yet another failed store just two weeks ago.
"It's hard to bring any visitors into this city, because it doesn't look very good anymore."


Art in Review
Roland Reiss  The Neuberger Museum of Art State University College Purchase, N.Y.
It's best to enjoy Roland Reiss's miniature mises en scene without reading some of the highfalutin essays in the accompanying catalogue, in which the usual French suspects -- from Ferdinand Saussure and Claude Levi-Strauss to Roland Barthes and Michel Foucault -- are trotted out to buttress claims for the artist's substantiality.
Nowadays simply giving pleasure seems inadequate.
Art must lay claim to intellectual weight and social significance.
Hence, even the printed leaflets at the museum echo the fashionable jargon that aims to give the art its heft: referring to the fact that people are big and these works are small, a leaflet says "viewers are afforded an empowering overview of each scene." An editor should have been empowered to moderate such language.
Mr.
Reiss's sculptures come in two sizes: tiny and gigantic.
A crew of 10-foot-high figures, one resembling a Malevich abstraction, another a kind of Gumby figure, have been crowded into the lobby outside the galleries in which the table-top tableaux are assembled.
Like the Hollywood set designers who seem to have inspired him, the Los Angeles-based Mr.
Reiss is an illusionist, simulating one material or another, like concrete or bronze, or one kind of thing or another, whether it's a work from art history or a monster from a science-fiction film.


U.S. Seeks New Mechanism To Try to End Balkan War
The United States will press next week for tighter sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro and for the creation of a more durable international negotiating "mechanism" aimed at ending the Balkan conflict, Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Deputy Secretary of State, said today.
In an interview, Mr.
Eagleburger, who will take over the State Department as Acting Secretary on Sunday, said he would bring both proposals to a conference in London that begins on Wednesday.
Last June the United States joined other members of the United Nations in imposing economic and political sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro, which are viewed as the supporters of Serbian aggression in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


In the Summer, Art's Force Is Centrifugal
DURING the summer, the perennial question of what art is in and what art is out takes on a specifically geographic connotation.
With galleries and museums in New York City slowing almost to a crawl, institutions outside the city invariably pick up the pace, and in places like Southampton, L.I.; Ridgefield, Conn., and Williamstown, Mass., you can find some of the most ambitious exhibitions of this season.
In Southampton is a show whose theme is familiar in a museum world that has been doing its share of navel-gazing and self-flagellation.
Titled, fittingly, "A Museum Looks at Itself: Mapping Past and Present at the Parrish Art Museum, 1897-1992," it is the latest effort to place the art museum in the context of a changing political landscape.


Early Tilt-Rotor Craft Crashes
An early version of a tilt-rotor aircraft, similar to the larger, more advanced V-22 Osprey, crashed today during a routine demonstration flight near Dallas, slightly injuring the pilot and co-pilot, the aircraft's manufacturer said.
Two prototypes of the Osprey, whose future is a point of tension between Congress and the Pentagon, have crashed in the last 14 months.
Last month, an Osprey headed for a landing at the Marine air station at Quantico, Va., crashed, killing all seven people aboard.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about AIDS and homosexual issues misstated the political position of Urvashi Vaid, the executive director of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.
Ms.
Vaid has not endorsed either Presidential candidate.


Chancellor's Tensions With School Board Are Worrying Dinkins
Mayor David N. Dinkins, seizing an opportunity to emphasize his plan to take control of the Board of Education, said yesterday that the school board's meddling was threatening to drive Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez from his job.
He described the Chancellor as "very unhappy" and said, "I will do all I can to persuade him to stay," a suggestion that Mr.
Fernandez may already have threatened to quit.


Review/Theater; Brothers, Sisters and Rivalry in a Michigan Cabin
In "The Melville Boys" by Norm Foster there is a distinct dichotomy between the play and the production.
The play is stitched together from familiar strands, some of them frayed from frequent use in situation comedies.
The actors, under the assured direction of Susann Brinkley, are fresh and personable.
They hold one's interest even as the characters tread predictable paths.
This Canadian play, in its New York premiere at Alice's Fourth Floor, is a tale of sibling rivalry enacted in a lonely cabin on a lake in northern Michigan.
In a very different time, the cabin could have been the setting for a Hemingway short story.


RUSSIA COUP TRIAL IS YIELDING A MAZE
Not everyone in Moscow this week is celebrating the anniversary of the victory over the coup attempt of last year, least of all Yelena A. Lukyanov.
Her father, Anatoly Lukyanov, is one of 11 men who are still being held in prison one year later on charges of conspiring to seize power, awaiting a verdict in a case that looks like it may never end.
Ms.
Lukyanov, a 34-year-old law professor and committed Communist, calls them "political prisoners," victims of what she describes as a corrupted Government that has no interest in seeing justice done.
"It is not to their benefit to bring this case to court," she said.
"It will do them no good, and they know it."


No Headline
The world changes for which we've sacrificed for a generation have finally come to pass, and with them a rare and unprecedented opportunity to pass the sweet cup of prosperity around our American table.
PRESIDENT BUSH.  [ A15:2. ]


Charles L. Austin, 89, Steel Company Leader
Charles Lee Austin, former president and vice chairman of the old Jones &amp; Laughlin Steel Corporation of Pittsburgh, died Wednesday at the Mayflower Place nursing home in West Yarmouth, Mass.
He was 89 years old.
Mr.
Austin, a native of Port Chester, N.Y., graduated from Princeton University in 1924 and was an executive at several companies before joining J. &amp; L. as treasurer and a director in 1942.


Tuk Meas Journal; Age-Old Hatreds Haunt Vietnamese in Cambodia
Um Tral's last mistake was to sing a song in Vietnamese.
Neighbors in this hamlet near Cambodia's southern border with Vietnam say Mr.
Um Tral's boisterous singing was overheard by a gang of perhaps 25 Cambodian soldiers.
In an anti-Vietnamese rage that many Cambodians insist is for them almost instintive, the soldiers attacked with knives and guns, screaming, "Destroy the Vietnamese enemy!"


Alternative Music Is Piquing Interest as a Marketing Tool
CANNY MARKETERS, always looking for a trend to co-opt, are latching onto an alternative to rock 'n' roll music for their advertising: alternative music.
The music goes by many names -- alternative rock, post-punk, grunge rock, thrash, new rock.
And the bands that play it go by some of the most colorful names since the days of Moby Grape and the Strawberry Alarm Clock: Pearl Jam, Nirvana, Soundgarden, the Red Hot Chili Peppers, XTC and the Jesus and Mary Chain.


T.W.A. Buyout Negotiations Stall Over Pilot Job Security
Negotiations for a possible buyout of Trans World Airlines have become snagged over job security and over how the carrier should make up a shortfall in the pension fund.
The pilots' union and the management, led by Carl C. Icahn, T.W.A.'s chairman, have been seeking to put together a plan under which the airline would be turned over to the creditors and unions.
Under the plan, Mr.
Icahn would no longer have a major role.


Japanese Stocks Surge as Nikkei Finishes Above 16,000
The stock market rebounded sharply today for a third straight day, with the Nikkei index of 225 shares rising more than 6 percent to close above 16,000 points for the first time since July 23.
The current rally began after the Japanese Government's announcement earlier this week of an emergency package of measures aimed at stabilizing the nation's battered financial system.


Manager Is Charged In Sex Abuse Case
The former supervisor of the medical records unit at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in the Bronx was indicted yesterday by a Federal grand jury on charges that he sexually abused five coworkers over a year.
The charges were filed, prosecutors said, after the man's fifth victim told the authorities he had raped her.


Corrections
A picture caption last Friday about the discovery of bone boxes near Jerusalem belonging to Caiaphas, the Jewish High Priest who tried Jesus, incorrectly translated the Aramaic inscriptions shown.
They contained letters of Caiaphas's name, not the phrase "Joseph, son of Caiaphas."


3 Cities Lose Power As a Crow Flies In
Most of Hoboken, N.J., and parts of Jersey City and Union City, N.J. lost electrical power for more than an hour last night when a crow flew into a switching station, shutting down a critical piece of equipment, said officials at Public Service Electric and Gas of Newark.
The power was cut off at 7:07 P.M. and restored at 8:12 P.M., said a company spokeswoman, Michelle O'Neil.


Corrections
The headline with a report on Monday about the wedding of Jamie Lyn Kraemer misidentified the bridegroom.
He is Daniel Cassidy.


William Taylor of F.D.I.C. Dead at 53
William Taylor, one of the nation's senior banking regulators, died this morning at Fairfax Hospital in Fairfax, Va.
He was 53 years old.
Mr.
Taylor, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation since October, died of complications after undergoing surgery for colon blockage on Aug. 13, a spokesman for the agency said.
The spokesman, Alan Whitney, said Mr.
Taylor had developed pneumonia over the weekend and had had a heart attack this morning.


POLITICS AND FAMILY: SOUTHERN WOMEN - Voices of Women in the 'Family Values' Debate: a Sampling, North and South; In Atlanta, the Message Strikes Chord, but Not With All
Sue Weidert is all for family values.
She loves Barbara Bush.
She thinks Mrs.
Bush made important points Wednesday when the Republicans put on a full-court press to lure female voters.
But if the election were today, she would vote for Bill Clinton for President.


Iran-Contra Case Is Given to the Jury
A Federal jury deliberated for more than four hours today without reaching a verdict in the case of Clair E. George, a former top official of the Central Intelligence Agency charged with lying to Congress and investigators about the Iran-contra affair.
The jury of eight women and four men were given the case at mid-day after hearing instructions from Federal District Judge Royce C. Lamberth.
Judge Lamberth told the jurors to disregard their feelings about the underlying events of the case, the secret shipment of arms to Iran and the diversion of some profits to the Nicaraguan rebels, called contras, during the Reagan Administration.


Serbs' Gains in Bosnia Create Chaotic Patchwork
In the months since Serbian forces began seizing huge swaths of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the territory under their control has become a patchwork of rival Serbian fiefs consumed by lawlessness and economic collapse.
Stark images of violence and near anarchy can be seen throughout this newly proclaimed country, which calls itself the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and covers roughly two-thirds of what was once one of the republics of Yugoslavia.


Market Place; The Gap's Luster Fades Somewhat
THE GAP INC., a brilliant supernova stock just six months ago, has dimmed to a white dwarf, its price down more than 40 percent since the beginning of the year.
In fact, its market performance this year has been one of the worst among retail stocks, scarcely a stellar bunch.
Analysts who once raved about the company's phenomenal growth rates have reined in their enthusiasm and revised their rosy prognostications.
"Now with the stock price broken and minimal earnings gains this year, the mystique has withered away," said Donald I. Trott, a retail analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds.


Art in Review
'Quotations' 'The Second History of Art' Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art Ridgefield, Conn.


2,000 Airport Hustlers Caught Since June
Port Authority police officers, working undercover and dressed as tourists, have arrested or issued summonses to nearly 2,000 limousine and baggage hustlers during the last two months in a crackdown at New York City's three main airports, the Port Authority said yesterday.
The pilot program, which will continue until mid-September, is part of an effort that has also included in-flight videos, signs and brochures designed to steer travelers away from illegal baggage handlers and limousine drivers.


Sounds Around Town
Violin Improvisations
Claude Williams, St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street, midtown Manhattan, (212) 935-2200.
Claude Williams is known to some as the Count Basie Orchestra's original guitarist (replaced by Freddie Green).
Mr.
Williams didn't stop there: at 84, he's an astoundingly fertile improviser, but on violin.
He's a product of Kansas City in its heyday, and in his music it's possible to hear the Southwestern approach to blues -- dry, skeptical and knowing -- as well as the roots of be-bop.
Mr.
Williams's infrequent visits to New York are always an occasion.
The show is Sunday at 7 P.M.; there is a $12 cover.
Jamaican Toasting
Shabba Ranks, the Ritz, 254 West 54th Street, midtown Manhattan, (212) 541-8900.
Because of his association with a major label (Epic), Shabba Ranks is probably the best known of the Jamaican dance-hall toasters.
He's fast and funny, and he boasts.
He'll share the stage with Pete Rock and C. L. Smooth, New York's own rappers, who are riding their hit "They Reminisce Over You." The show tomorrow night is at 8 o'clock, and tickets are $25.
Blues Guitar
Melvin Taylor, Sculpture Garden, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, (718) 638-5000.
Mr.
Taylor, a ferocious blues guitarist from Chicago, looks a bit like an accountant.
He's young, and his recent -- and first -- appearance in New York was a revelation.
He'll be joined by some jazz musicians for his horn section, including Arthur Blythe, Chico Freeman and Stanton Davis.
The show is Sunday at 3; tickets are $5.
Tickets are available on the day of the performance only.


Sports of The Times; No Runs, No Hits, Just Briefs
THE CITY of St.
Petersburg, Fla., obviously belongs in major league baseball.
Officials from that heretofore deprived city came to New York the other day and displayed its credentials, the only ones needed these days to show that a city or an owner is ready for the major leagues.
They invoked the word lawsuit.


In Today's Russia Too, the Rich Get Richer
To the Editor:
"How to Take Over the Store" (The Week in Review, Aug. 2) -- a success story of a Russian store manager, Natalya Maloletneva, turned proprietor of the store -- blurs some fundamental detail, which, I am afraid, leaves your readers in the dark about the basic prerequisite for such a success in the Commonwealth of Independent States.


Vigilante Slaying Shocks Serene Area of the Bronx
Merchants and residents of the Bronx neighborhood of Belmont sound a note of worry when they talk about the increase in drug trafficking in their neighborhood.
But they insist the community is still an island of serenity in the city, and they say that is why the beating death early Wednesday of a bodega worker has left them stunned.
"We work here 20 years, and nothing ever happens," said Santo Roppo, 58, who works at Joe's Deli, on 187th Street, as he and a co-worker, Joe Reale, ate a lunch of cheese and bread.


The Mets Rediscover The Thrill of Victory
It took a while for the dugout to get used to the routine again.
The first home run elicited only the slightest stir.
The second, an extraterrestrial Bobby Bonilla shot, had the Mets up and about.
And then the third, following immediately in a modest approximation of Bonilla's arc, had people on the top steps.
The entire night for the Mets was like a great educational experiment, a club relearning how it feels to win.


Lampley's New Look Raises (2) Eyebrows
Jim Lampley's second go-round as a college football studio host, this time for NBC's Notre Dame telecasts, will feature a mere shadow of his trademark, machine-gun delivery of scores, but two very distinct brown eyebrows.
"When I was on a roll those November Saturday afternoons," said Lampley, recalling his ABC studio years from 1981 to 1987, "anything was worth the challenge. Could I do 43 scores in 3 minutes? Sure. Could I do 48? Sure. I wanted people to say, 'Wow.' I didn't think of it as mechanical."


How to Be Pro-Choice and Pro-Bush
To the surprise of many pundits and to the disappointment of many Democrats, the 1992 Republican National Convention has ended as it began -- on an upbeat note.
Despite our differences, Republicans understand that the top priority in the next 10 weeks is the re-election of George Bush and the election of a Republican Congress.


Coopers &amp; Lybrand Sues Phar-Mor Executives
Top executives of Phar-Mor Inc., the discount drug company that dismissed and subsequently sued Coopers &amp; Lybrand, its accounting firm, are being sued by the Big Six firm.
Phar-Mor had dismissed Coopers in the wake of disclosures earlier this month that two senior executives had embezzled company funds and reported $350 million in nonexistent Phar-Mor profits.
Coopers filed the suit on Wednesday against David S. Shapira, Phar-Mor's chief executive, charging negligence in the management of the company's affairs.


NFL TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Instantly Delayed Replay
An illegal penalty cost the Pittsburgh Steelers a probable victory over the Philadelphia Eagles on Aug. 8, the National Football League said yesterday, but with no provision in the rules to reverse the effect of a bad call, the exhibition game will stay in the record books as a 35-33 Eagles victory.
The dispute centered on a flag thrown on what turned out to be the last play of the game as the Steelers were preparing to attempt a 32-yard field goal.
Field officials ruled that the Steelers had used an illegal formation by not having seven men on the line of scrimmage, and since the team had no timeouts left, 10 seconds were run off the clock, effectively ending the game.


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, Fifth Avenue at 55th Street, mid-Manhattan.
The actor Roscoe Lee Browne will read selections of modern poetry.
Today at 1 P.M.
Free.
Part of the Free Theater Project, which presents free performances at the church.
Information: (212) 874-5935.
LECTURES AND WALKS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
"The Streets Where We Lived," a walking tour of the Lower East Side, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "House of Heritage," a slide show documenting the history of the museum building, and at 2 P.M. by "How We Lived: Life in a New York City Tenement," a discussion of the lives of the many immigrant groups in the area at the turn of the century, based on a scale model of a tenement building.
Separate admission is required for each event.
Lecture tickets: $4.
Walking tours: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 431-0233.


Dollar Plummets to Reach Lowest Level Against Mark
As President Bush prepared to deliver his acceptance speech to the Republican National Convention in Houston, the American dollar closed yesterday in New York at its lowest level ever against the mark.
The dollar was at 1.447 against the mark in late trading, slipping under the previous record low of 1.4475 set in February 1991.


Sounds Around Town
Helen Merrill, Cooool
Helen Merrill, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Gramercy Park, (212) 533-7902.
This veteran jazz singer's voice which suggests the singing equivalent of Miles Davis's trumpet at its coolest and most contemplative, has hardly changed over more than three decades.
Helen Merrill has just released a superb new album on which she is supported by a trio led by the pianist Roger Kellaway, with Tom Harrell on trumpet and Wayne Shorter on saxophones.
At Fat Tuesday's she will be backed by Torrie Zito on piano, John Goldsby on bass and Terry Clarke on drums.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 9 and 11 and Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
Tickets are $15, and there is a $7.50 food and drink minimum.
An Older Voice Anew
Jo Thompson, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, midtown Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
Jo Thompson, a Detroit-born singer, is making her first New York club appearance in more than 30 years.
She recently re-emerged at a Carnegie Hall benefit concert for a scholarship fund established by her husband, the journalist and civil rights leader Albert Dunmore.
During the golden age of New York nightclubs, she performed at such cabarets as Cafe Society and Billy Rose's Diamond Horseshoe, and she has been described as "a piano-playing Lena Horne," Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9:15 and 11:15 P.M.
There is a $20 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.
Buster and Banshees
Buster Poindexter and His Banshees of Blue, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-7880.
Buster Poindexter, the master of rock-and-roll revels, and his band of cutups put the fun back into the music in one of the world's hippest lounge acts.
Mr.
Poindexter, a k a David Johansen, has an especially sharp ear for raucous rhythm-and-blues novelties that are as funny as they are danceable.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 8 and 11.
Seats are $15.


G.O.P.'s Young Confrontation Corps
In a long, gray concrete room off to the side of the Astrodome, a couple hundred attractive young men and and women, members of the Republican Youth Coalition, sat on folding chairs and accepted the praise of a grateful party elder.
"I want to tell you all that you have really done wonderfully," said Jeanie Austin, a co-chairwoman of the Republican National Committee.
"You have really kept us in the news this week. I saw you take on the other side's rally the other day and that was great. We're really proud of you."


Diner's Journal
The Changing Scene
NEW CHEFS: Two chefs whose restaurants closed this summer have found new Manhattan homes.
David Ruggerio, who was the chef at Maxim's on Madison Avenue, has moved to Le Chantilly, 106 East 57th Street, in midtown.
His menu goes into effect on Sept. 10.
The current chef, Jean-Louis Montestruck, has not announced his plans.
Tom Colicchio, chef at the late Mondrian on East 59th Street, has teamed up with Danny Meyer, owner of Union Square Cafe on East 16th Street, to open a new restaurant.
The two are looking for a location and hope to open in 1993, Mr.
Meyer said.
OPEN: Zocalo, featuring Southwestern cuisine, at 302 Columbus Avenue, at 74th Street, Upper West Side, (212) 721-6000. . . .
Restaurant Luxe, serving a mix of American and European fare, at 24 East 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 674-7900.
The chef is Rick Laakkonen, formerly of the River Cafe in Brooklyn and Petrossian in midtown Manhattan. . . .
Second Avenue Brasserie, 1043 Second Avenue, at 55th Street, mid-Manhattan, (212) 980-8686, by the owners of City Cafe on the Upper East Side. . . .
Brasserie des Theatres, in the Paramount Hotel at 235 West 46th Street, midtown Manhattan, (212) 719-5588, under the same ownership as Park Bistro and Les Halles in Manhattan.
The bar opens today; food service begins after Labor Day.


Average Player Salary Is $368,603 in N.H.L.
The National Hockey League yesterday said its average salary for 1991-92 was $368,603 and announced that RIC NATTRESS and STEVE KONROYD were eligible for free agency because their salaries fell below the average.
Nattress, who was with the Toronto Maple Leafs at $300,000 a year, has signed an offer sheet with the Philadelphia Flyers (for $1.9 million over four years).
Konroyd is with Hartford.


BUSH PROMISES ACROSS-THE-BOARD TAX CUT AND AN ECONOMIC REVIVAL IN A SECOND TERM
President Bush tonight appealed for a second term with a promise of new, across-the-board tax cuts next year, a pledge to control Government spending and an attack on his opponent, Gov.
Bill Clinton, as a throwback to failed Democratic policies at home and abroad.
Mr.
Bush, accepting his party's nomination here before 2,210 delegates in the Houston Astrodome, presented himself as a tested leader on the world stage who was now committed to waging the struggle for economic revival at home.


America West Airlines Shrinks to Try to Survive
In the logo of America West Airlines, the stylized initials suggest a lovely burgundy sun flying over mountain peaks.
But for the present at least, a more appropriate symbol might be the creosote bush, a desert shrub that survives droughts by shedding a branch at a time, cutting back just enough to sustain life until rain returns.
The last big airline to be founded since deregulation of the industry in 1978, America West has had no choice in recent months but to cut back again and again, shedding planes, employees and even its founder.


Man Convicted in Firebombing Of Brooklyn Real-Estate Agency
A 20-year-old man was convicted yesterday of Federal civil rights charges involving the firebombing of a real-estate agency that showed houses to black families in the traditionally white Canarsie section of Brooklyn.
The defendant, Frank Scire of Canarsie, was found guilty of taking part in firebombing Fillmore Real Estate, which was under court orders not to discriminate against members of minority groups.
The incident heightened tensions and set off protests in the neighborhood last summer.


De Klerk and Mandela: Each Says, It's Your Move
In the last few weeks, President F. W. de Klerk has begun to sound like a man who, unable to budge a stalled train, climbs into the cab and makes locomotive noises while his aides holler, "All aboard!"
To create the impression that the new South Africa is, any minute, about to pull out of the station, the Government has flirted ostentatiously with the political fringes, including black nationalists of the Pan-Africanist Congress and Afrikaner nationalist defectors from the Conservative Party.


Julie Hunnewell, 63, A Consultant on Art
Julie Desloge Haggerty Hunnewell, a patron of the arts and civic figure on Long Island, died Aug. 19 at North Shore Community Hospital, in Glen Cove, L.I.
She was 63 and lived in Glen Cove.
Mrs. Hunnewell died of cancer, said Tex McCrary, a family friend.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  A BOSNIA OF SERBIAN FIEFS  In the months since Serbian forces began seizing huge swaths of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the territory under their control has become a patchwork of rival Serbian fiefs consumed by lawlessness and economic collapse.
A1  U.S.
TO PRESS SERBIAN SANCTIONS  Washington will press next week for tighter sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro and for the creation of a more durable international negotiating "mechanism" aimed at ending the Yugoslav conflict, Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Deputy Secretary of State, said.
A10  Flights to Sarajevo resume.
A10  IRAQ WARNS ON WESTERN PLAN  Iraq warned that it would use "all available means" to resist a Western plan to bar its warplanes from flying over the Shiite region in southern Iraq.
A6  BAHAMIAN SWEPT FROM POWER  After 25 years in office, the Prime Minister of the Bahamas, Sir Lynden O. Pindling, who led the island nation to independence from Britain and in recent years quarreled with the United States over his possible role in the drug trade, has been swept from power in a Parliamentary election.
A8  Public protest erupts in Brazil over corruption.
A7  Russia's case against the ex-head of the Soviet Parliament.
A3  Sweden arrests the only C.I.A. agent who defected to Moscow.
A3  News analysis: An apparent stalemate in South Africa.
A1  THE MESSAGE AND ITS MEANING  With their "family values" attack in which they have portrayed Hillary Clinton as an unwifely feminist, the Republicans have, to be sure, set themselves apart from the Democrats.
But they may also have begun dividing members of their own party.
A1  How the family-values pitch is playing among American women.
A13  23 BUSHES (COUNT 'EM)  George Bush may or may not be able to win the election against Bill Clinton on the economy.
He may not even be able to win the fight over so-called family values.
But there is one battle he wins definitively: the battle over family numbers.
A12  THE MANY TRIALS OF DAN QUAYLE  Man in the News: Even as the Vice President wages an aggressive campaign to reintroduce himself to the electorate, the old demons, it seems, are always lurking.
A11  ABOUT-FACE  The two parties pulled off a striking role reversal at this year's national conventions: The Democrats stage-managed their show like Republicans, and the Republicans put on theirs like Democrats.
A12  'INHALE THIS!'  The convention was not without an undercurrent of confrontation, or even nastiness, or even a "dirty trick" or two.
A17  The Houston Thing: Phyllis Schlafly, movie critic.
A11  The local-news reporters at the big show.
A12  Returning to the stump, Clinton visited Michigan.
A17  National A18, D16  CALIFORNIA WILDFIRE RAGES ON  A treacherous blaze burned out of control for a fifth day in the Sierra Nevada foothills southeast of Sacramento, leaving thousands of firefighters and evacuated residents praying for a promised change in the weather that would lower temperatures and raise humidity.
A18  TROPHIES AND TRIALS  For as long as the United States has fought wars, its soldiers have returned home with war booty, some of it brought into the country illegally.
Now an Army captain, facing court-martial for illegally bringing back Iraqi assault rifles from the Persian Gulf war, is challenging what he calls a double standard in which senior officers who commit similar offenses receive little or no punishment.
A18  REBUKE FOR TEAMSTERS  A Federal judge castigated the new leadership of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, elected seven months ago on an anti-corruption platform, for opposing a large Government role in ridding the union of links to organized crime.
A18  ANOTHER H.U.D.
INDICTMENT  A onetime assistant to former Senator Edward W. Brooke was charged with lying to a grand jury that tried to determine whether Mr.
Brooke had improperly obtained housing grants for his clients from the Government.
A18  CELESTIAL COLLISIONS  Scientists are reporting new evidence that speeding objects from space struck Earth 370 million and 65 million years ago, possibly disrupting the global climate and causing mass extinctions.
D16  RUSSIAN DENIES ANTI-SEMITISM  A Russian mathematician refused to resign as a foreign associate of the National Academy of Sciences, which had asked him to quit because of writings that it deemed anti-Semitic.
D16  A forerunner of the Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft crashed.
A18  Law Page A21  A judge in the Iran contra affair: on temperament as a courtroom tool.
Another step in a landmark sex discrimination suit against a law firm.
At the Bar Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25 Editorials  Aid for the rich, not the economy.
A word from the wives.
Cry for Brazil.
Topics: Oh deer!
Letters  Anthony Lewis: Merchants of hate.
Christine Todd Whitman: How to be pro-choice and pro-Bush.
Josef Joffe: Beyond morality in the Balkans.
Army and Air Force Times: Lift the ban on gay soldiers.
Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-25  Sports B6-12  Obituaries A22


Dr. Norman Bernstein, Child Psychiatrist, 64
Dr.
Norman Bernstein, a child psychiatrist who was a prominent authority on burn victims' psychosocial adjustment to their injuries, died on Aug. 10 at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 64 years old.
His wife, Marilyn, said the cause of death was lymphoma.


The Selling of Stephen J. Solarz
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, frequently derided by his political opponents as the Congressman from Israel, speaks Spanish, at least in some of his new campaign commercials.
"Cuando cuentan contigo, tienes que actuar" ("When people are counting on you, you have to take action"), he says in a heavy accent in opening one 30-second commercial.


Corrections
An article and headline in some copies yesterday about a speech about AIDS at the Republican National Convention referred incorrectly to the speaker, Mary Fisher.
Ms.
Fisher is infected with the AIDS virus; she does not have AIDS.
The article also misstated her marital status in some copies.
She is divorced.


O'Connor Again Praises Dinkins For Actions in Washington Hts.
John Cardinal O'Connor, in his weekly newspaper column, strongly supports Mayor David N. Dinkins's handling of the disturbances in Washington Heights in July and rejects any suggestion that the Mayor's actions betrayed the Police Department.
"Not once did I hear him say or imply anything that I considered disloyal to the police force, and I say that as a man fiercely loyal to and grateful for the police force," Cardinal O'Connor, the head of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, wrote yesterday in Catholic New York, the archdiocese newspaper.
"Had I heard the Mayor say or imply anything disloyal, I would have publicly disagreed and walked out."


Review/Art; In Massachusetts, 2 Early American Abstract Artists
Suzy Frelinghuysen (1911-1988) was a painter of talent who was better known as a gifted soprano at the New York City Opera.
Her husband, George L. K. Morris (1905-1975), although a largely forgotten figure today, was at the very forefront of American art during the 1930's.
Not only as a painter and discerning collector but also as a critic for Partisan Review, Morris preached the gospel of abstraction when American abstract painters had few supporters.
An excellent exhibition here at the Williams College Museum of Art recalls the contributions of this exceptional couple by bringing together a selection of their paintings and of the art they collected by the likes of Braque, Picasso, Arp, Ben Nicholson and Joaquin Torres-Garcia.
More than simply a tribute to Frelinghuysen and Morris, the show is also a reminder of a crucial but often overlooked period in the development of 20th-century American abstract art, just before the rise of the New York School in the 1940's and 50's.


Ex-C.I.A. Officer Who Defected to Moscow Is Arrested in Sweden
The only C.I.A. officer to defect to the Soviet Union was arrested today in Sweden, raising the possibility that he might be returned to the United States to stand trial on spy charges, Justice Department officials said.
The officer, Edward Lee Howard, fled the United States from his home in New Mexico in 1985, barely eluding pursuing Federal law enforcement agents who had closed in on him after getting a tip from a Soviet defector.


Corrections
An article from the Republican National Convention yesterday, under the subheading "On Stage," about President Bush's military record, misstated the military record of Senator John S. McCain of Arizona.
He was a Navy aviator.


New York City Begins Another Search for a Film Chief
Under pressure from an ailing film industry, New York City officials said yesterday that they are starting from scratch in the four-month search for a film commissioner who can woo Hollywood back to New York.
The choice of a new head for the relatively low-budget office became the subject of intense controversy after local film makers protested that four finalists chosen in June by a nine-person search committee simply were not up to the job.
Film and television production is an important business in New York City, where a seven-month strike that ended in May 1991 cost the city half its normal number of production days.
This year, the number has continued to decline, slipping 5 percent further.


The Art Market
Still a Good Deal
Photography remains a relatively bright spot in the otherwise dismal art market of the last two years, with a number of photography dealers reporting that sales have been holding steady, or even rising.
A major reason for this appears to be the widespread sense among both dealers and collectors that photographs, which are still relatively inexpensive compared with works in other media, are underpriced as well.
Moreover, photography didn't experience the same frantic rise in prices that hit much of the rest of the market during the 1980's, and so did not have as far to fall when boom turned to bust.


BAHAMIAN LEADER LOSES IN ELECTION
After 25 years in office, the Prime Minister of the Bahamas, Sir Lynden O. Pindling, who led this Caribbean island nation to independence from Britain and in recent years quarreled with the United States, has been swept from power in a parliamentary election held here on Wednesday.
Plagued since the early 1980's by persistent accusations that he has taken bribes from cocaine and marijuana traffickers and saddled more recently with an economic decline that has left thousands without jobs, Sir Lynden's Progressive Liberal Party was resoundingly defeated by Hubert Ingraham, a former protege who broke with the party and now heads the Free National Movement.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon.
Closing This Weekend
"THE PENNY ARCADE SEX AND CENSORSHIP SHOW," Performance Space 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village.
A two-hour revue on the theme of sex, with music and dance, featuring Penny Arcade, a character monologuist.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight through Sunday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Information: (212) 477-5288.
Closing Next Weekend
"TWO TRAINS RUNNING," Walter Kerr Theater, 219 West 48th Street, Manhattan.
August Wilson's play about black culture in the 1960's; directed by Lloyd Richards, and starring Larry Fishburne and Roscoe Lee Browne.
Through Aug. 30.
Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $45.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"THE MOST HAPPY FELLA," Booth Theater, 222 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
Frank Loesser's musical, directed by Gerald Gutierrez.
Through Aug. 30.
Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $45 to $60.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
FELD BALLETS/NY, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Modern dance.
Through Aug. 29.
Performances: Mondays through Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 2:30 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $28.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
"CONSUMPTION OF PARADISE," Elsa Mott Ives Gallery, Y.W.C.A. of the City of New York, 610 Lexington Avenue, at 53d Street, midtown Manhattan.
A multi-media exhibition on the environment by 14 female artists.
Through Aug. 28.
Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.; Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 755-4500.


Two Securities Indictments
Another chapter of the seemingly unending Wall Street securities scandals unfolded yesterday as a Federal grand jury indicted a former employee of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company's junk-bond department and a customer for conspiracy, mail fraud and bribery.
The indictment charged Edward L. Scherer, a former desk analyst in the high-yield bond department, and Ellis J. Strelitz, a furniture company executive in Virginia Beach, Va.
Richard T. Kursman, a former Merrill Lynch trader, was named in the indictment but was not charged.
The indictment charged that they had secretly enriched themselves by more than $1 million by illegally trading in a Merrill Lynch securities account maintained by Mr.
Strelitz.


Inside Post Position Goes to the Fast One, Dixie Brass
Dixie Brass, the superstar of speed, drew the inside post position today for the $1 million Travers Stakes and promptly set the tone for a catch-me-if-you-can race that may decide who is the best 3-year-old colt in the land.
His trainer, Dennis Brida, left little mystery in the scenario he will try to create during the race against nine other horses on Saturday: "My horse will go to the lead, and everyone is going to have to chase him."


POLITICS AND THE FAMILY: NORTHERN WOMEN - Voices of Women in the 'Family Values' Debate: a Sampling, North and South; In New Jersey, The Reaction Is 'Show Me'
Barbara Bush won praise for being warm and wonderful.
Marilyn Quayle fared less well among those who listened to the speeches of both women at the Republican National Convention last night, though she won points for emphasizing "family values."
But in this central New Jersey town, the seat of a county where registered Republican voters outnumber Democrats 2 to 1, any political loyalties that Mrs.
Bush inspired among women were clearly being put in check today.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Called up Tim Salmon, outfielder, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Placed Randy Knorr, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled David Weathers, pitcher, from Syracuse of the International League.
National League
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Signed a contract with WCMQ-AM to originate Spanish-language broadcasts in 1993 and 1994 with an option through 1996.
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Preston Wilson, third baseman-outfielder, to a minor league contract.
FOOTBALL National Football League
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Andre Waters, safety, to a two-year contract.
Waived Dennis McKnight, offensive lineman, and Don Overton, running back.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Orson Mobley, tight end.
NEW YORK JETS -- Waived Don Boyd Odegard, defensive back, from the physically unable to perform list.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Placed Larry Stayner, tight end, on injured reserve.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Waived Gerald Riggs, running back. HOCKEY National Hockey League
NHL -- Announced that an arbitrator had determined the league's average salary for 1991-92 was $368,603 and that Ric Nattress and Steve Konroyd, defensemen, were eligible for free agency because their salaries fell below the average.
Nattress, who was with the Toronto Maple Leafs, has signed an offer sheet with the Philadelphia Flyers.
Konroyd has re-signed with the Hartford Whalers.
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Named Rick Minch director of media relations.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Named Darcy Regier assistant general manager.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Signed Frederik Jax, right wing.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Acquired Sylvian Lefebvre, defenseman, from the Montreal Canadiens for a third-round draft choice in 1994.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Acquired Yvon Corriveau, left wing, from the Hartford Whalers to complete the June 15 trade that sent Nick Kypreos to the Whalers for Mark Hunter.
East Coast Hockey League
WHEELING THUNDERBIRDS -- Named Joel Stern play-by-play announcer.
HORSE RACING  GARDEN STATE PARK -- Named Alex Kraszewski III assistant general manager.
COLLEGE  BALL STATE -- Named Brian Moore assistant ticket manager.
BROWN -- Named Brian Durocher men's assistant hockey coach.
CAL POLY POMONA -- Named Rosie Wegrich women's volleyball coach.
CHARLESTON -- Named Otto German director of student athletes supports services and compliance director.
COLGATE -- Named Kathy Frick women's assistant field hockey and women's lacrosse coach, Jeri Maerz women's assistant soccer coach and Jeff Standish men's assistant soccer coach.
CORNELL -- Named Merja Connelly women's volleyball coach.
HARTFORD -- Named Denise Cohen interim athletic director.
KEAN -- Announced the resignation of Joe Lynch, baseball coach.
KINGS POINT -- Named Mickael Smolens assistant athletic director.
MASSACHUSETTS -- Named Glenn M. Wong interim athletic director.
MIAMI -- Announced it has finalized a two-game series with Washington for Sept. 24, 1994 in Miami and Sept. 12, 1998 in Seattle.
MURRAY STATE -- Named Brian Hagens equipment manager.
NEW ORLEANS -- Announced the resignation of Mike Lopriore, trainer.
Promoted Debbie Knight, assistant trainer, to trainer.
Named Greg Bruce executive director of the athletic association, and Betsy Becker women's volunteer assistant volleyball and basketball coach.
OKLAHOMA STATE -- Announced Darren Tawwater, catcher, will transfer to Texas Christian.


Restaurants
City Cafe
In many respects, City Cafe is a prototypical summer-in-the-city restaurant: cool and casual, with whitewashed walls, white tiles, servers in white aprons, an outdoor cafe and an Upper East Side clientele that appears to spend a significant percentage of its seasonal income on Bain de Soleil.
Moreover, the food is quite good.
One could not make such a statement about the cooking several years ago, when City Cafe was just another stylish space turning out shaky American fare.
Earlier this year, however, the owners, Eric and Cathy Miller, signed on an enterprising new chef, Marc Salonsky.
Mr.
Salonsky has spent time at several leading Manhattan restaurants, including the former Maurice in the Parker-Meridien Hotel on West 57th Street and Petrossian on Seventh Avenue.
Judging by the food at City Cafe, Mr.
Salonsky seems more comfortable, indeed happier, in this less rarefied setting.


Flat Screen Venture Set By Motorola
Motorola Inc., in a move to gain entry to the $4.6 billion world market for flat-panel display screens, said today that it would acquire 20 percent of In Focus Systems Inc. for $22 million.
The companies agreed to form a joint venture to produce the liquid crystal displays in the United States.
"Our game plan is to increase the contrast and speed, so you can put video or TV on flat panels," said Steven R. Hix, chairman of In Focus, based in Tualatin, Ore.


For Children
'Wee Willie Winkie'  Walter Reade Theater 165 West 65th Street Manhattan (212) 875-5600 Recommended ages: 7 and up Tomorrow and Sunday
"Wee Willie Winkie," based on the Rudyard Kipling story, was, it is said, Shirley Temple's favorite movie.
Playing her roseate self as Winkie, Miss Temple does what she did best: makes you cry, despite any strong-minded vows not to.
In the movie, which takes place in colonial India, she also single-handedly stops a group of Pathans in the Khyber Pass from warring with a Scottish regiment.
Indeed, for Americans of an earlier generation Miss Temple was a sort of childhood inamorata; is it possible that children nowadays could be just as charmed?
Probably yes (with the help of some overwhelming war scenes).





Dinkins Pact Cuts Homeless In the Projects
The New York City Housing Authority won greater discretion to select which homeless families will move into its public housing projects under an agreement with the Mayor's office announced yesterday by Deputy Mayor Cesar A. Perales.
Under the agreement, fewer homeless families will move into the projects each year and the authority will be better able to screen out unwanted tenants, he said.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.56
5.69
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.06
5.30
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.16
3.12
5.31
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.97
5.94
7.57
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.32
7.31
8.04
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.33
8.35
9.03
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.27
6.25
6.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Handley Sees Pluses Beyond X's and O's
On the last full day of the Giants' training camp, Coach Ray Handley assessed his team today.
He said that he liked much of what he saw and he indicated that he considered the Giants a playoff team.
"I think we have capabilities," he said.
"My concern has been to see more competition, so I have no complaint. I wanted more consistency on the practice field and in game preparation. I've been relatively pleased, but I'm not where I want to be to open the season.


Lift the Ban on Gay Soldiers
The following editorial appears in the Aug. 24 issues of Army Times and Air Force Times.
The newspapers are independent of the military.
This is the first time they have commented on this issue in an editorial.
Sex in the military services has become a matter of strong public interest, and that is creating pressure for changes in the way military men and women relate to one another.


G.O.P. Trails on Night 3 of Ratings Race
Roughly 27 million Americans watched the Republican National Convention Wednesday night, slightly fewer than watched the third night of the Democratic National Convention in July.
Almost 8 million viewers saw the convention on NBC, slightly more than 7 million watched it on ABC and just over 6 million watched on CBS, according to Nielsen Media Research.
Another 4 million viewers watched the convention on PBS, and 1.6 million households tuned in on CNN.


Books of The Times; A Freudian Theory On France's Revolution
The Family Romance of the French Revolution  By Lynn Hunt  Illustrated. 213 pages.
University of California Press. $20.
In "Totem and Taboo" (1913), Freud attempted to explain the origins of the social contract through the story of the primal horde.
As he told it, this prehistoric gathering of human beings was dominated by a fierce, possessive father, who kept all the women for himself and drove away his sons as soon as they grew up.
"One day the brothers who had been driven out got together, beat their father to death, and devoured him, and thus put an end to the patriarchal horde. United, they dared and managed to do what would have remained impossible for the individual."


Convention Summary
PRESIDENT TACKLES THE 'E' ISSUE
On the final night of the Republican National Convention, President Bush tackled the thorny subject of the economy in his acceptance speech, promising new, across-the-board tax cuts next year as an expression of "regret" that he had broken his "no new taxes" pledge of 1988.
Vice President Dan Quayle, in his acceptance speech, continued his aggressive quest to reintroduce himself to the American electorate, presenting himself as a proud warrior for traditional values and morality itself.
BUSH GETS A POLL BOUNCE
A new CBS News poll taken Tuesday and Wednesday indicates that the convention may be giving the President a "bounce." The poll showed that Gov.
Bill Clinton's lead had narrowed to nine percentage points, half of what it was last week.
Trying to steal back some of that thunder, Mr.
Clinton went on the road, telling audiences in Michigan to disregard what the Republicans were saying about him.
FACING THE FLIP SIDE OF FAMILY VALUES
All week, Republicans have tried to define "family values" as something that they have and that Bill and Hillary Clinton do not.
But there is some fear that the strategy could backfire, dividing housewives and working women within the party.
More than two dozen women interviewed in Atlanta yesterday were evenly split on whether the family-values appeal made by Marilyn Quayle and Barbara Bush on Wednesday night was heartwarming or cynical.
In Morris County, N.J., other women wondered why Mrs.
Bush and Mrs.
Quayle had not spoken more of abortion rights and health care, among other subjects.


Mets Sign Wilson Stepson
The focus is on the future for the Mets, and the long-term perspective grew a bit brighter today when they signed Preston Wilson, their first-round choice in the 1992 draft.
The 18-year-old outfielder, selected ninth over all by the Mets in June, hit .530 with 22 homers and 86 runs batted in in 36 games in his senior high school season in Ehrhardt, S.C.
His seven grand slams equaled a national prep record.
Wilson is believed to have signed for a bonus of close to $600,000.


To Get to 47, the Jets Will Whittle While They Work
With National Football League teams having to trim their rosters to 60 players by next Tuesday and to 47 players by Aug. 31, Saturday night's game against the Giants will probably be the last opportunity for some Jets to get off the proverbial bubble before it bursts.
Here's how the Jets' roster shapes up now and here are some of the choices that the Jets' coaches must make in the next couple of weeks:


Arts Endowment Acts Like Censor
To the Editor:
We are deeply troubled by your representation of the National Endowment for the Arts Visual Arts Fellowship Panel in Sculpture and the meeting of the National Council that announced the endowment would shift funds from sculpture fellowships to regional arts councils (Arts pages, Aug. 1).


Uncovered Short Sales Rise 2.8% on Big Board
The number of shares sold short and not covered between mid-July and mid-August on the New York Stock Exchange rose for the fifth straight monthly period, breaking its record high, the Big Board reported yesterday.
The short positions, which traditionally indicate pessimism about the condition of the market among investors, ended the period at 907.1 million shares.
That was an increase of 2.8 percent from the 882.6 million shares reported in the previous period, meaning that short interest has climbed 31.3 percent since March, when the figures began their recent growth.


At the Bar; Biting the hand that fed him, a Federal judge criticizes the judicial selection process.
Whenever a spot opens on the United States Supreme Court, a short list of candidates quickly appears.
And in recent years, the name of Judge Roger J. Miner of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in New York has invariably been among the possibilities.
Always, someone else has gotten the nod, with some clearly political factor -- ethnicity, race, ideology, friendship with a White House chief of staff from New Hampshire -- playing its part.
Merit mattered but at least since the choice of Justice Benjamin Cardozo has rarely been absolutely determinative.


Art in Review
'Quotations' 'The Second History of Art' Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art Ridgefield, Conn.


2 Studies Link Extinctions To Impact of Space Objects
Two teams of scientists are reporting new evidence that speeding objects from space struck the Earth 370 million and 65 million years ago, possibly disrupting the global climate and causing mass extinctions.
The report on the 370-million-year-old impact raises to three the number of celestial collisions linked to major extinctions of life on Earth.


'Family Values' and Women: Is G.O.P. a House Divided?
Family values, the 1990's version of apple pie and motherhood, has taken on a far more ominous meaning this week at the Republican National Convention.
Republicans have tried to define family values by suggesting that they have them and that Bill and Hillary Clinton do not.
But by painting Mrs.
Clinton as an unwifely feminist with undue influence on her husband's policy-making -- Gloria Steinem with the claws of Madame Nhu -- Bush strategists may have unleashed an issue that is dividing members of their own party at the same time it is distinguishing their party from the Democrats.


Victory in Sex-Bias Suit Would Only Do So Much
Any day now, Nancy O'Mara Ezold should hear whether she can return to work at her former law firm, Wolf, Block, Schorr and Solis-Cohen.
Another question is: What kind of place would she be going back to?
Ms.
Ezold left the firm three years ago and sued it for sex discrimination, winning a case that has drawn national attention as the first to be tried against a law partnership.
The case is now on appeal and a decision is imminent, but even if Ms.
Ezold wins the right to return and become a partner, some doubt her ability to do so because of the bad feelings stirred up by the case.


Trying to Cook Up Sound Bites, Speakers Choke
They said, when George Bush was elected President in 1988, that he would usher in an anti-rhetorical age.
No one expected it to be this anti.
After the Democratic National Convention in New York, it hardly seemed possible that politicians could come up with lines worse than "they wiggled, they waffled, they wavered" or "it's time for them to go."


Bank Fee Is in Doubt After Death at F.D.I.C.
William Taylor, one of the nation's senior banking regulators, died today.
The death of the widely respected chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation raised serious concerns in Washington about the direction of the agency in the next few months as it is headed by an interim chairman.
Lawmakers and senior Administration officials said today that Mr.
Taylor's death had robbed the agency of its influential leader just as it embarks on an important period of writing new regulations.
In particular, it throws into doubt his plan to increase the insurance premiums that banks and savings associations pay to protect depositors.


An Absolute Stroke Of Luck for TBWA
A decision by TBWA Advertising Inc. to purchase an advertisement on the back cover of Forbes magazine produced a serendipitous bonus: a separate appearance on the issue's front cover.
The Aug. 31 issue of Forbes, which carries the magazine's annual survey of mutual funds, features on its front cover an illustration of a family of bears reading that same issue of Forbes.
The front cover of the tiny magazine in the illustration reproduces the front cover of the issue.
The back cover of the tiny magazine in the illustration reproduces the back cover of the issue -- an ad for Absolut, called "Absolut Standard," showing a bottle of the vodka made of gold.


Review/Pop; Cries, Shouts and Yodels, But Enigmas in the Songs
David Byrne started his show at the Beacon Theater on Wednesday night with a good idea.
The stage, cleverly lit by just one or two lights that gave a slightly industrial look, offered up Mr.
Byrne alone.
Playing his acoustic guitar and accompanying himself with occasional rhythms from a drum machine, he performed a set of tunes that were beautifully spare.
Taken from all over, the songs -- "Cowboy Mambo (Hey Look at Me Now)," "Nothing but Flowers," "Road From Nowhere," "Girls on My Mind," among others -- worked perfectly, with just Mr.
Byrne's voice to scratch out the melodies.
His singing vocabulary, full of strangled cries, shouts, a yodel or two and all sorts of textures, seemed stronger than ever, ideal for the often enigmatic songs.
As soon as his band appeared, however, Mr.
Byrne's material sank under the weight of bad arrangements and an overloud sound system.
And a lack of dynamic change -- usually a sign that the music's genesis is the recording studio and not the stage -- rendered the songs similar.


In Algeria, Not French, But Arabs Suffered
To the Editor:
Re "Still Aching for Algeria, 30 Years After the Rage" (Toulon Journal, July 20):


Teaching Mercy to Republicans
Mary Fisher is rich, white and Republican -- not the image that springs to mind when people think of AIDS.
But what most set her apart when she addressed the Republican National Convention in Houston this week was her compassion.
At a convention where ill will abounded, she offered a brave and uplifting call for understanding.
"People with H.I.V. have not entered some alien state of being," said this 44-year-old mother of two who is infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
"They are human. They have not earned cruelty and do not deserve meanness."


Can Favorites Leave Travers High and Dry?
The forecast for the 123d running of the Travers Stakes, the "midsummer Kentucky Derby," indicated clear and cool weather for Saturday and a lightning-fast track that will pose the classic test of speed versus distance for the prime 3-year-old colts in the land.
They will have to run a mile and a quarter carrying 126 pounds before a crowd of 50,000 that is expected to cram the stately old Saratoga Race Course.
The winner will get 60 percent of the purse of $1 million, plus major credentials on the road to the Breeders' Cup and the championship of racing's 3-year-old division.


Must Doctors Always Do Something?
To the Editor:
After reading your news article on the risks associated with the drug ritrodrine, used to prevent premature births (front page, July 30), I was left with a flood of emotions.


CRYSTAL BRANDS SELLS ITS MEN'S CLOTHING UNIT
Crystal Brands Inc. said yesterday that it had signed a definitive agreement to sell its men's tailored clothing business for about $55 million to the Plaid Holdings Corporation.
Crystal Brands, which makes apparel under such names as Evan-Picone, Gant, Izod, Lacoste and Polo by Ralph Lauren for Boys, said it expected to complete the sale to Plaid Holdings, the parent company of J. Schoeneman Inc., by Sept. 28.
"The sale of our men's tailored clothing business represents an important strategic step for Crystal Brands," said Richard Kral, the company's chief executive.
"We intend to become a more focused, brand-oriented marketer, offering higher value products for today's more casual life style." In July, Crystal Brands sold its 50 percent stake in Lacoste Alligator S.A. to Sporloisirs S.A. and terminated its license to market products under Lacoste's "crocodile" trademark for $31.5 million.


An Embarassing Way to Spend Your Birthday
It would cost the Yankees about $77,000 to release Shawn Hillegas and swallow the remaining six weeks of his one-year, $295,000 contract.
Joseph Molloy, the team's managing partner, might think about writing that check today.
Start after dreadful start, it has become painfully obvious that the Hillegas experiment has flopped.
The Yankee right-hander did not last beyond the fourth inning last night as the sixth-place California Angels clipped him for nine hits and six runs and grabbed a 9-5 victory at Yankee Stadium.
Falling behind 6-0 and being booed off the field was not the way Hillegas wished to celebrate his 28th birthday.


RESULTS PLUS
FOOTBALL  Bono to the Rescue  Another week, another dash of heroics for the San Francisco 49ers' Steve Bono.
Against the Chargers in San Diego last night, Bono threw a 15-yard pass to rookie Mark Seay with 3 minutes 43 seconds left to pull the 49ers to within 14-13.
Then he completed seven of eight passes in a 71-yard drive that culminated in a game-winning touchdown run that made the final score 20-14.
Bono, playing the second half in place of Steve Young, completed 14 of 21 passes for 155 yards and one touchdown.
Young completed nine of 14 for 96 yards.
Last Sunday, Bono threw for two second-half touchdowns to beat the Washington Redskins in London.  (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Christie Avoids Lewis  Linford Christie and Carl Lewis stayed away from each other at an international meet yesterday in Berlin, and while Christie posted an impressive victory in the 100 meters, Lewis finished third in the 200.
Christie, the Olympic champion from Britain, won the 100 in 9.99 seconds, beating Leroy Burrell of the United States, second in 10.04.
Lewis finished third in the 200 in 20.16 as Frankie Fredericks of Namibia drew away to win in 20.01.
Fredericks, the Olympic silver medalist, pulled away in the final 15 meters.
Mike Marsh of the United States, the Olympic champion, was second in 20.14.(AP)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Watch; View From the Booth: A Faulty Bush Speech
It was George Bush's moment to speak directly to the American people.
With the cameras focused mercilessly close in, he looked confident and determined.
He spoke forcefully.
And he had a bad word to say for just about everyone: Congressional leaders, Bill Clinton, Mario Cuomo, yes, even the King.


Pssst! Want to Buy a Bridge Cheap?
It seemed like a bargain at the time: a six-ton steel bridge, almost new, on sale for only $91,700.
Now, it's a white elephant that won't go away.
Five years ago, Greenburgh bought the bridge, built for temporary use over a railroad, from the state.
The town planned to put the bridge up across the Saw Mill River so Greenburgh's overcrowded animal shelter could move to a larger site that lacked public access.
Then a developer bought a nearby tract, promised to put in a road, and the bridge was forgotten.


A Year After a Coup Attempt, Yeltsin's Ardor Hasn't Faded
A year after his triumphant victory over the plotters of a hard-line coup, President Boris N. Yeltsin said today that he -- unlike his old rival, Mikhail S. Gorbachev -- is in no danger of being thrown from power, either by his friends or by his enemies.
"I have always said, and I repeat it today, that there is no chance of a putsch No. 2," Mr.
Yeltsin said at a news conference, recalling with some relish that the Soviet President's fall had come at the hands of his own hand-picked associates.


TODD SETTLES DISPUTE OVER NOMINEES TO BOARD
Todd Shipyards said yesterday that it had settled pending litigation and a proxy contest over nominees to its board.
One of the stipulations of the settlement is that Todd's executive vice president and general counsel, Stephen Silverman, will step down from those positions.
The agreement also calls for the board to nominate and recommend 10 people as directors.
Five will be selected by the current directors and Burton Borman, the chairman and chief executive.
The other five will be selected by the shareholders group that had challenged the process.
The company's annual meeting is scheduled for Oct. 1.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; No New Plans? Read My Book, Perot Says
Like a nearly forgotten boomerang traveling a long, looping arc, Ross Perot, the Dallas billionaire, is trying to return to the Presidential race, if not as as candidate, then at least as an influence.
Since July 16 when he abruptly pulled out of the Presidential race, Mr.
Perot has been financing a grass-roots organization called United We Stand, America that has continued to collect signatures on nominating petitions so that the Texas computer services magnate would qualify for the ballot in all 50 states.


Honeywell Patent Suit Is Settled
Honeywell Inc. announced yesterday that it had settled with seven camera makers it had accused of infringing its patented technology for autofocus lenses, and would be paid more than $124 million.
The agreements were negotiated separately with Canon Inc., the Eastman Kodak Company, Konica, the Kyocera Corporation, Matsushita, Nikon and Premier, Honeywell said.


Gentle Addiction Of Collecting Photographs
Often the decision to start collecting photographs isn't even a conscious one.
A person may be intrigued by an old photograph at a flea market and buy it for the bathroom wall, or an amateur photographer may enroll in a workshop and decide to buy a print of an image by the instructor.
From there, though, the challenge of seeking out new and exciting images and of trying to learn more about them can become deeply involving.
Many photography collectors find themselves caught up in learning about the history of the medium, making the rounds of the galleries and following the careers of favorite artists.
But no matter how they come to photography, beginning collectors have a remarkable range of resources available to them.


Uncertainty in Connecticut G.O.P. Stronghold
This is the kind of town that looms large in the Republican vision of America.
It has shady streets lined with white clapboard houses, a picturesque town green, and a fondness for self-history that reaches back to pilgrim days.
But the order of Milford masks the dramatic changes of the last few years.
More women are working outside the home than ever before; many people have lost the jobs they had at local factories that once seemed so secure, and managing the requirements of a municipality -- from traffic to sewage -- has grown more difficult as revenues have fallen.


Patents; A Microwave Camera Aids Pilots in Fog
A MILITARY electronics company based in San Diego has developed a microwave camera that it says will allow aircraft pilots to peer through fog and see the runway.
Invented at the Thermotrex Corporation, a subsidiary of the Thermo Electron Corporation in Waltham, Mass., the camera creates an image based on the microwave radio signals emitted by most objects on the ground.
Unlike visible light, these weak microwaves can penetrate fog and clouds.
Company officials say the signals vary with the composition and the location of each object, making it possible to assemble a coherent picture from what seems at first to be a confused jumble.


Gentle Addiction Of Collecting Photographs
Often the decision to start collecting photographs isn't even a conscious one.
A person may be intrigued by an old photograph at a flea market and buy it for the bathroom wall, or an amateur photographer may enroll in a workshop and decide to buy a print of an image by the instructor.
From there, though, the challenge of seeking out new and exciting images and of trying to learn more about them can become deeply involving.
Many photography collectors find themselves caught up in learning about the history of the medium, making the rounds of the galleries and following the careers of favorite artists.
But no matter how they come to photography, beginning collectors have a remarkable range of resources available to them.


Krone Won't Ride in Travers
Julie Krone, still suffering from a viral infection and a cracked rib, canceled her mounts at Saratoga Race Course today for the third time this week and also withdrew from Saturday's Travers Stakes as the rider on Lee n Otto, the 30-1 long shot.
The 29-year-old jockey, who led all riders in winning races at Belmont Park's recent spring and summer meeting, said she expected to return to the races on Sunday.
"I hurt my rib last Saturday when Teddy C. reared in the gate," she said.
"But it wasn't in a dangerous area. I rode six winners in two days with it. The rib wasn't anything. It was the virus that killed me."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; Bush Pulls Close in Poll, but Not With Women
The Republican National Convention propelled President Bush into a competitive position with Gov.
Bill Clinton today, but the newly renominated Mr.
Bush also confronted the sudden re-emergence of a split between men and women in support of his ticket, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll.
The poll, taken overnight among 500 registered voters, seemed to put the Presidential race in a virtual dead heat, although the results were considered somewhat less reliable than most polls that question more people and last several days.


GUIDEPOST
Quick Fixes in the Kitchen
The experienced cook knows how to rescue many near-disastrous cooking errors in the kitchen.
And the quick fixes do not require much skill, just some simple information.
Problem: The homemade mayonnaise loses its texture and gets too thin.
Solution: Put two teaspoons of warm water in a clean bowl.
Slowly pour the mayonnaise into the bowl, whisking to incorporate the water.
The mayonnaise will thicken.
Problem: The mayonnaise or hollandaise sauce is curdled.
Solution: Whip in a blender or food processor (although its texture will not be as smooth as it was).
Problem: Hands reek after chopping garlic or onion.
Solution: Rub with fresh lemon juice.  Problem: Breath smells of onion.
Solution: To eliminate almost all taste and smell of onion, chew a mouthful of parsley.
Problem: You are planning to cut apples or avocados to serve later and do not want them to turn brown.
Solution: Sprinkle with lemon juice.  Problem: There is too much salt in the sauce.
Solution: Add some lemon juice and stir well.
Or add a few chunks of raw, peeled potato, cover the pot and let the liquid simmer a bit so that the potato absorbs the salt.
Remove potato.
Problem: The meat or chicken is undercooked, and the guests are waiting.
Solution: Cut into serving pieces, spread in pan and put in oven at 400 degrees. (Sources: "Trucs of the Trade: 101 Tips, Hints and Recipes From America's Greatest Chefs," edited by Frank Ball and Arlene Feltman, to be published in November by HarperCollins; "The Joy of Cooking" by Irma S. Rombauer and Marion Rombauer Becker, Bobbs-Merrill Company, 1975; "The Kitchen Survival Guide" by Lora Brody, William Morrow &amp; Company, 1992.)


U.S. Encounters Snags In Airlift to Aid Somalia
The United States plan for a Pentagon airlift to famine-stricken Somalia has run into problems a week after it was announced, with relief officials asserting that it was put into effect hastily and without adequate preparations.
American soldiers sent to Kenya have been forced to wait a week before delivering the food because of conflicts between the American authorities and officials of the International Committee of the Red Cross.


Judge Rules Against U.S. In Tenant Suit
Not even the powerful Federal agency set up to rescue the savings and loan industry has the authority to override New York City's legendary rent-control laws, a Federal judge in Manhattan ruled yesterday.
Judge Robert L. Carter ruled that the Federal agency, the Resolution Trust Corporation, cannot evict tenants from the rent-controlled and rent-stabilized apartments that it is acquiring in the savings and loan bailout.


Net Worth? A Couple of Fish at the Bay


Billiard Master Reposes in Self-Exile
A MAN looked up from the green felt table in the heart of Brooklyn and asked Jean Balukas if she were going.
No, she said with the slightest of smiles.
Miss Balukas plans to attend a baby shower tomorrow, the day of the finals of the United States Open Pocket Billiards Championship at the Roosevelt Hotel in Manhattan.


Alarm on Tainted Dust Near Williamsburg Bridge
A painting crew sandblasting the Williamsburg Bridge repeatedly rained sand, dust and lead-paint chips into Brooklyn earlier this summer before city officials suspended the project under pressure from the state.
The maintenance of the aging bridge has been halted for more than a month, and in the community beneath it, residents are anxious about findings of "elevated" and potentially dangerous levels of lead in dust under and around the bridge.


Patents; Applying Math To Tire Traction
The Ford Motor Company has invented a computer algorithm for an advanced traction-control system that prevents a car from spinning its wheels if a driver steps too hard on the gas.
Traction-control systems, still in their infancy, are the opposite of computerized anti-lock brakes, which stop a car from sliding into an uncontrollable skid.
A basic traction-control system, available on some luxury cars, monitors wheel rotation to determine when the wheels are spinning faster than the car is moving, and then slows the engine enough to let the tires regain their grip.


Union Workers at State House Protest Record Layoffs
Hundreds of state workers rallied outside the State House today in a one-day strike against the Department of Human Services to protest layoffs.
A department spokeswoman, Winnie Comfort, said the walkout did not disrupt services.


RATNERS CLOSING MANY U.S. AND BRITISH JEWELRY STORES
The jewelry chain Ratners Group P.L.C., whose holdings include Kay Jewelers in the United States said that it would close hundreds of its British and American stores as it struggles with financial troubles that handed it big losses last year.
Ratners, in a long-delayed financial report, announced that it lost L122.3 million, or $236.8 million, before taxes for the fiscal that ended Feb. 1.
That compared with a pretax profit of L112.1 million a year earlier.
Ratners said its loss came on sales of L1.13 billion, or $2.19 billion, compared with L1.11 billion for the previous fiscal year.


Drop in Dollar Chokes Off Rally in Bonds
Treasury bond prices sank yesterday as the dollar fell to a record low against the German mark.
The dollar's decline quashed a rally the bond market had been staging in response to President Bush's speech to the Republican convention on Thursday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Acceptance Speech; Vote Is In From Lovers of Golden Oratory, and the Verdict: Bush Is No Demosthenes
Students of classical rhetoric who compared President Bush's 58-minute acceptance speech Thursday night with the 54-minute speech by his rival last month at Madison Square Garden said they found the contest a drag and a draw.
Although some observers have given Mr.
Bush's speech high marks on the political scoreboard, those who studied it as an example of dialectic and oratory agreed that the President deserved, like Governor Clinton, no more than a grade of C.


Traffic Alert
Madison Avenue between 23d and 45th streets will be closed from noon to 2 P.M. tomorrow for the Pakistan Day parade; Madison Avenue between 23d and 26th streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to 8 P.M. for the Pakistani street fair.
Thirty-fourth Street between Broadway and Eighth Avenue will be closed from 11:30 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. tomorrow for Macy's Tap-O-Mania.


3-Day Rally Soothes Battered Japanese Investors
Heavy Government intervention to stabilize Japan's faltering financial system turned what had been a long stock market rout into a spectacular rally this week.
But when asked whether this really marked the end of the two-and-a-half-year crash and signified that the economy had regained its footing, most stock market analysts answered with a definite maybe.
The analysts generally expressed some skepticism over how long the burst of buying would last, since it had been set off by vague Government promises of a rescue operation for the financial system -- the third time in five months the Government has tried to bolster the economy by promising new measures.


A Baseball Glove Made To Help With Throwing
A NEW design for baseball gloves capitalizes on a simple idea: players are more accurate if they throw to a target.
In this case, the target is the glove itself.
The Neumann Tackified Glove Company of Hoboken, N.J., recently introduced black leather gloves with white leather palms called the Neumann Target Series.


John Sturges, Film Director, Is Dead at 82
John Sturges, the director of action films like "The Magnificent Seven," "The Great Escape," "Gunfight at the O K Corral" and "Ice Station Zebra," died on Tuesday at French Hospital, near his home in San Luis Obispo, Calif.
He was 82 years old.
He died of emphysema, said Roberta Soules, his sister-in-law.


Religion Notes
Secret Files
The Mormon Church has confirmed what its critics have been charging: that it keeps files on members who criticize church policies and passes the information along to the critics' local church leaders.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
The dollar plunged to record lows against the German mark.
The decline dragged down the American bond and stock markets and raised fears of economic disruptions both in the United States and Europe.
The slide, attributed to the weak economy and more attractive interest rates abroad, is an unwelcome development for President Bush, who has asked voters to trust him as the better steward of the nation's economy.  [ Page 1. ]
Stock prices plunged as a falling dollar and worries that an economic recovery would be stifled by higher interest rates set off a wave of computer-driven sell programs.
The Dow fell 50.79, or 1.5 percent, to 3,254.10, its lowest close in four months.  [ 36. ]


Classical Music in Review
Kalichstein-Laredo-Robinson Trio Mostly Mozart, Avery Fisher Hall


Giants Face Jets: Ho-Hum or Go to War
The Giants are treating their preseason game against the Jets at Giants Stadium tonight as just another preseason game.
"We've prepared just like we prepared for the other preseason games," said Ray Handley, the Giants' coach.
"Winning is important, but we want to see progress. The substitution pattern won't change based on how the game is going."


Patents; Electric Current Disinfects Blood
Dr.
Steven Kaali, a gynecologist at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, has patented what he believes is a way to kill viral infections by exposing blood to weak electric currents.
The basic principle is simple: electric current as strong as that used by a cardiac pacemaker will immobilize a virus but appears weak enough to leave the much larger blood cells unharmed.


COMPANY NEWS: Yes, They Have Small Chiquitas; Marketing Turns Castoffs Into Top Lunch Bananas
Chiquita Brands says less can be more.
So it is test-marketing a line of bananas, called Chiquita Jr., that were once considered undersized.
"The perception was that neither the consumer nor the retailer would pay for these small bananas -- that bigger was better," said Jane Garvey, national marketing manager for Chiquita Brands, which is based in Cincinnati.


Honeywell Patent Suit Is Settled
Honeywell Inc. announced yesterday that it had settled with seven camera makers it had accused of infringing its patented technology for autofocus lenses, and would be paid more than $124 million.
The agreements were negotiated separately with Canon Inc., the Eastman Kodak Company, Konica, the Kyocera Corporation, Matsushita, Nikon and Premier, Honeywell said.


Corrections
A Man in the News profile yesterday of the Vice President, and the headline with it, rendered his name incorrectly.
He is James Danforth Quayle, not James Danforth Quayle 3d.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Opens Fall Campaign, Attacking
Offering himself as the 1992 version of Harry S. Truman, President Bush today opened his general election drive in the former President's home state with a torrent of fighting words at Gov.
Bill Clinton, Congress and the press.
At spirited rallies before flag-waving partisans at the water's edge in Gulfport, Miss., and then at a country-and-western theme park here in the Ozarks, Mr.
Bush pronounced the Republican National Convention a success and said the race was already tightening.


Placing the Homeless: No Easy Solutions
The New York City Housing Authority's program to place homeless families in its housing projects is just one part of the city's large-scale effort to find permanent homes for the residents of its sprawling shelter system.
Since 1988, more than 7,000 homeless families have found homes in the 180,000 apartments in the projects, city officials said.
The city has housed 30,000 homeless families through other programs operated by the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development.
About 28,000 of those families have gone into apartment buildings that the city took over when the owners defaulted on their taxes.
The buildings are generally managed by the city, though some are run by nonprofit groups.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AEROMEXICO, Mexico City, is starting a cost reduction program as well as a program to expand its charter flight services in the United States and Canada.
The results of the reduction are expected to save the airline about $3 million a month.
BELL BANCORP INC., Chicago, has been authorized by its board to buy back 295,972 of its common shares, or 5 percent of its stock outstanding, over the next six months on the open market.
REYNOLDS METALS CO., Richmond, will issue $43 million in bonds to finance a new solid waste disposal facility in Arkansas.
The tax-exempt bonds will be issued by Clark County, Ark., to pay part of the cost of the facility.


Yankees Still Can't Fill Howe's Void
A search for reasons why the Yankees have collapsed so thoroughly in the last two months could start in the bullpen.
Steve Howe is not there.
He has been suspended from baseball and is contemplating becoming a carpenter in Montana while waiting for his grievance to be heard.
His former bullpen mates have had a tough time nailing down victories in his absence.
When the Yankees lost Howe on June 8 for violating major league baseball's drug policy, they knew it would be impossible to replace the dominant left-handed reliever.
With each passing game, the Yankees are discovering how much they miss having Howe's heat in the late innings: They had a 27-26 record with him around and are 28-41 without him.


Bush Speech Is Criticized By Cuomo
Lest anyone misinterpret President Bush's convention-speech swipe at Mario M. Cuomo as a throwaway line, the New York Governor charged today that the Republicans were using him and his state to reinforce the country's ethnic and racial prejudices.
"It is not me," Mr.
Cuomo said in a telephone interview from the Executive Mansion in Albany.
"It is New York. We represent everything they're opposed to. They use us as the prototypical liberal bastion. They use us to show you the homeless, the African-Americans in trouble. They do it very subtly -- the ethnics, the violence.


Pssst! Want to Buy a Bridge Cheap?
It seemed like a bargain at the time: a six-ton steel bridge, almost new, on sale for only $91,700.
Now, it's a white elephant that won't go away.
Five years ago, Greenburgh bought the bridge, built for temporary use over a railroad, from the state.
The town planned to put the bridge up across the Saw Mill River so Greenburgh's overcrowded animal shelter could move to a larger site that lacked public access.
Then a developer bought a nearby tract, promised to put in a road, and the bridge was forgotten.


Icahn Is Said to Make Offer To Support T.W.A. Pensions
Carl C. Icahn, the chairman of Trans World Airlines, and the airline's creditors have made major concessions to make the airline's pension fund viable and to guarantee jobs for its pilots, according to people involved in the talks.
They said the concessions were an effort to reach an agreement on a reorganization plan that would enable the airline to emerge from bankruptcy.


Benny and the Mets?


Broad Decline for the Dollar
In addition to falling to a new low against the mark, the dollar fell against other currencies yesterday.
In late European trading, the dollar was quoted at 1.4375 marks, down from 1.4520 late Thursday.
In New York, the dollar closed at 1.4315 marks, down from 1.4470.


Let's Reject Concept of Dogs as Designer Jeans or Sports Cars
To the Editor:
Larry Shook in "Bad Dogs" (Op-Ed, Aug. 8) raises the important issue of the increasing frequency of genetic diseases in pure-bred dogs.
However, he misses the point when he suggests that this should be dealt with by having the American Kennel Club refuse to register such animals or by forcing the pet store to cover the owner's associated medical expenses.


CHRONICLE
Auctions evoke memories: A 37.4-carat emerald once owned by Marlene Dietrich is about to be auctioned by Christie's, and with the gem goes a tale.
Besides being a symbol of glamour for half a century, Dietrich, who died last May, liked to cook.
One evening, while she was visiting Katherine Cornell, she decided to bake a cake.
As she wrestled with the ingredients, she slipped off the emerald and never gave it a thought until the job was done.
Only then did she find the stone had disappeared.
And it did not turn up until one of the dinner guests bit down, hard.


Critic's Notebook; Surtitles In Opera: Hindrance Or Help?
Midway through a recent weekend at the Glimmerglass Opera in Cooperstown, N.Y., a colleague pointed out to me that the company was not just using surtitles but two kinds of surtitles.
In Mozart's "Magic Flute," singers sang and spoke in German; audience members looked up at the printed projections to see which English words meant which German ones.
In Britten's "Turn of the Screw," singers sang in English and listeners looked up to figure out what words they thought they had heard.
Having to translate German into English seemed a normal process, but I wonder if it really made much sense at all.
Given the nature of opera, on the other hand, translating English into English made more sense than I want to admit.


Who's Behind Hysteria in the Maine Woods?; Alaska's Park Pennies
To the Editor:
"City Dwellers Want U.S. Park Funds to Go East" (front page, July 27) makes a good point: that the public really does need more accessible open spaces.


Aid for the Rich, Not the Economy
George Bush's acceptance speech echoed the same theme as virtually every other Republican leader at the Houston convention: The problem with the economy is not President Bush's program but an obstinate Congress that refuses to go along.
According to this argument, the difference between economic stagnation and growth is a matter of tax cuts proposed by Mr.
Bush and rejected by Congressional Democrats.
The theme may make for effective sound bites.
But it is nonetheless absurd.
The tax cuts proposed by Mr.
Bush have more to do with rewarding wealthy friends than jump-starting the economy.
Had Congress granted his every wish, including the vague ones he announced in Houston, the overall economy would barely have noticed.


Pictures Knock British Crown Askew
Photographs published in British newspapers showing the Duchess of York topless and entwined with a wealthy businessman from Texas have unleashed condemnation of the former Sarah Ferguson and tilted the atmosphere surrounding the House of Windsor from circus to crisis.
More photographs were published today, providing rich grist to the British tabloids.
The pictures have shown the Duchess, who is separated from Prince Andrew, the Duke of York, lounging in only a bikini bottom by a pool at a villa in the French Riviera last week with John Bryan, a 37-year-old American who for months had described himself as her financial adviser.
In some of the pictures the two are seen embracing, and in one they seem to be kissing while standing in front of one of the Duchess's two daughters, 2-year-old Eugenie.


Classical Music in Review
Cecilia Bartoli  Mezzo-Soprano, Mostly Mozart Avery Fisher Hall


Saberhagen Erases Fears, Not The Pain
The pleas came from his father, his mother, his wife, his agent.
Their concern was for their peace of mind as well as for his future.
Bret Saberhagen listened but did not act.
See another doctor?
Get another opinion?
Absorb more radiation and cold comfort?
And what if the diagnosis was different and maybe more dire?
Was he prepared to handle an announcement that the cause of the problem with his right index finger was debilitating arthritis and that the question of him pitching again was a wide-open one?


U.S. Warns Chinese of Duties
The Bush Administration announced today that it would impose customs duties of up to 100 percent on $3.9 billion worth of imports from China unless that nation quickly opened its markets to American goods.
The threat of sanctions follows inconclusive trade talks in Beijing this week.
The duties would affect everything from shoes and silk shirts to ginger, beer and even hog guts, which are used as sausage casings.
It is the largest such list ever prepared by the United States Government.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the success of American International Group misstated some of the company's results.
Its new life insurance premiums grew 39 percent in Malaysia and 24 percent in Thailand last year.
The figures did not represent earnings increases.


Miller Theater to Open With Juilliard Quartet
A concert by the Juilliard Quartet, with the pianist Gilbert Kalish, the soprano Dawn Upshaw, the flutist Samuel Baron and others will open the season of the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater at Columbia University, Broadway at 116th Street, at 8 P.M. on Oct. 1.
On the program are works by Brahms, Charles Ives, Elliott Carter and Earl Kim.
Tickets are $20; $10 for students and the elderly.
Among the more than 30 events in the theater's fifth season are to be classical, jazz and contemporary music concerts and literary readings.


Black Journalists Tell of Facing New Job Pressures
Reporters and editors who gathered here for a convention of the National Association of Black Journalists said the Los Angeles riots highlighted both the growing opportunities for blacks in the field and the problem of balancing questions of profession and race.
Indeed, many black reporters, editors and producers say they face mounting job pressures and complexities that they never anticipated, stemming from their emergence into newsrooms, radio stations and television stations that are still dominated largely by whites who have little familiarity with issues that concern blacks.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: With the Convention Over, Americans Pause to Talk Politics; In a Reagan Democrat Area, Signs of Unease Over Bush
If President Bush is to be re-elected he must retain the Reagan Democrats who deserted their party in the 1980's.
And here, deep in the heart of Reagan Democrat country, in northern Orange County suburbs hit hard by the recession, it is anything but certain that he can do so.
"He's out of touch," said Pat Kinda, a housewife preparing dinner on Thursday evening as the President prepared to accept the Republican nomination in Houston.
She said she had eagerly voted for Ronald Reagan, and less eagerly for George Bush four years ago.


Vacant Exxon Job Is Filled
The Exxon Corporation said today that Rene Dahan would become president of the Exxon Company International, filling the job held by Sidney Reso, who was abducted and killed earlier this year.
Mr.
Dahan, 50 years old, has been executive vice president of Exxon International since March 1991.
The subsidiary, based in Florham Park, N.J., is responsible for all of Exxon's oil and gas operations -- except exploration -- outside North America.


Christians in Lebanon Strike to Protest Vote
Christian areas of Lebanon were paralyzed today by a three-day strike called to protest the timing of the country's first general elections in 20 years.
Balloting is expected to begin on Sunday, but leaders of the biggest Christian group, the Maronite Catholics, want the voting delayed until Syrian troops withdraw from Beirut and surrounding areas.
The withdrawal is scheduled for next month under a national peace plan.


Vacant Exxon Job Is Filled
The Exxon Corporation said today that Rene Dahan would become president of the Exxon Company International, filling the job held by Sidney Reso, who was abducted and killed earlier this year.
Mr.
Dahan, 50 years old, has been executive vice president of Exxon International since March 1991.
The subsidiary, based in Florham Park, N.J., is responsible for all of Exxon's oil and gas operations -- except exploration -- outside North America.


RATNERS CLOSING MANY U.S. AND BRITISH JEWELRY STORES
The jewelry chain Ratners Group P.L.C., whose holdings include Kay Jewelers in the United States said that it would close hundreds of its British and American stores as it struggles with financial troubles that handed it big losses last year.
Ratners, in a long-delayed financial report, announced that it lost L122.3 million, or $236.8 million, before taxes for the fiscal that ended Feb. 1.
That compared with a pretax profit of L112.1 million a year earlier.
Ratners said its loss came on sales of L1.13 billion, or $2.19 billion, compared with L1.11 billion for the previous fiscal year.


Drop in Dollar Chokes Off Rally in Bonds
Treasury bond prices sank yesterday as the dollar fell to a record low against the German mark.
The dollar's decline quashed a rally the bond market had been staging in response to President Bush's speech to the Republican convention on Thursday.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days: Gov.
Bill Clinton  MONDAY: 7 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America," interview. (Channel 7 in New York.)


INSIDE
A U.S. Trade Threat to China
The Administration threatened to impose import duties of up to 100 percent unless China opened its markets quickly to American goods.
Page 33.
Photos Hit Nerve in Britain
Publication of embarrassing photographs of the Duchess of York and a man from Texas have thrown Britain's royal family into crisis.
Page 3.
Linked Through Their Grief
Months after her daughter died in a car driven by a drunken teen-ager, a Bronx woman remembers the girl through her friends.
Page 23.


Few Texas Oil Gushers for Bush
Texas oil executives provided a financial gusher for George Bush's 1988 bid for the White House.
They counted the Republican candidate, who was a West Texas oilfield executive before he entered politics 30 years ago, as one of their own.
But now, with drilling in the nation's oil and gas fields depressed, 400,000 jobs lost during 12 years of Reagan and Bush Administrations, and frustration with Washington's acceptance of big oil imports, many Texas oil executives insist that the Bush camp cannot take them for granted this time in the race against Gov.
Bill Clinton.


NBC Dismisses Newsman
NBC News has canceled the contract of the correspondent Arthur Kent in a dispute over assignments, the network has announced.
Mr.
Kent, who won acclaim for his reporting of the Persian Gulf war, criticized network news executives recently for suspending him after he declined an assignment to cover the conflict in Yugoslavia.
The network tried to buy out Mr.
Kent's contract, which extended through 1995, but terminated the agreement yesterday.
Mr.
Kent has threatened legal action.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4  DOLLAR SKIDS TO RECORD LOW
The dollar plunged to record lows against the German mark, dragging down the American bond and stock markets and stirring fear of further damage to the U.S. economy.  1  SNAGS IN AIRLIFT TO SOMALIA
The plan for a U.S. military airlift to famine-stricken Somalia has run into problems.
Relief officials assert that the U.S. put the plan into effect hastily without adequate preparations to guard the food from looters or rival fighters.  1  IRAQ INVITES U.N.
TO VISIT SHIITES
Baghdad offered to let members of the United Nations Security Council inspect the southern marshes inhabited by thousands of Iraqi Shiite Muslims who are said to be under armed attack by the Iraqi Army and Air Force.  4  NO THREAT TO ME, YELTSIN SAYS
A year after the victory over the plotters of a hard-line Soviet coup, President Yeltsin said that he -- unlike his old rival, Mikhail Gorbachev -- was in no danger of being thrown from power in Russia.  1  PHOTOS OF 'FERGIE' JOLT BRITAIN
British newspapers published more photographs that showed the Duchess of York entwined with a Texas businessman at a pool in France.
The pictures stirred criticism of the former Sarah Ferguson and of the British royalty as an institution.  3  PALESTINIAN DELEGATES BALK
Plans to resume the Mideast peace talks were jeopardized when Palestinian delegates postponed their trip to Washington, saying they had been "humiliated" by Israeli soldiers at the border crossing to Jordan.  2  How will Israel's new Prime Minister relate to American Jews?  2  U.S.
FEARS BALKAN BRUSHFIRE
Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger said the U.S. was deeply concerned that the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina could spill southward, engulfing other territories like Macedonia and the province of Kosovo in Serbia.  3  The new leader of the Bahamas pledges to fight drug traffic.  3  Cairns Journal: A wave of Japanese tourists unsettles a resort.  4  National 5-9  CLINTON COUNTERATTACKS
Stumping in Detroit, Governor Clinton accused President Bush of using lies and distortions to sidestep responsibility for the nation's economic woes and to paint the Democrats as unworthy of public trust.  1  FOR BUSH, UPS AND DOWNS
A New York Times/CBS News Poll found that the exposure of the Republican National Convention had given the President a significant lift, putting him in a competitive position against Governor Clinton.
But it also found that he was suddenly now faced with a split between women and men in support of his ticket.  1  In Truman's home state, Bush went on the attack.  8  Speech experts gave Bush's acceptance address a C.  6  In Bush's speech, Elvis was part of the ammunition.  6  How the Republican convention played across the nation.  7  AGAIN, MEET ROSS PEROT
Like a nearly forgotten boomerang traveling a long, looping arc, Ross Perot is trying to return to the Presidential race -- if not as as candidate, then at least as an influence.  8  THE CHANGING FACE OF BOSTON
It is a city in the throes of rapid ethnic change.
According to the 1990 census, nearly 4 of every 10 residents of Boston are members of minority groups, not including the Hispanic population, which is also increasing.
The numbers have been changing so rapidly that many Bostonians believe that whites will be a minority before the decade is out.  5  NEW CALIFORNIA FIRE RAGES
Firefighters brought the fire in California's historic Gold Rush region under control, but another wildfire, 200 miles to the north, posed a new and even greater threat.  9  GAIN AGAINST CYSTIC FIBROSIS
Researchers produced a gene-altered mouse with cystic fibrosis, a step that provides the first animal model for testing drugs and other therapies for the disease.  9  Religion Notes: The Mormons and their secret files.  9  Black journalists met in Detroit for their annual gathering.  5  Metro Digest 23  LEAD WORRIES IN BROOKLYN
A painting crew sandblasting the Williamsburg Bridge repeatedly rained lead-paint chips into Brooklyn earlier this summer before city officials suspended the project under pressure from the state.
In the community beneath the bridge, residents are anxious about findings of "elevated" and potentially dangerous levels of lead under and around the bridge.  1  Business Digest 33  Consumer's World 46  New air fares mean fewer bargains for the elderly.
Baseball glove that's a better target.
Captured by photo collecting.
Price Tag  Guidepost  Arts/Entertainment 11-15, 44  Theater: Lypsinka returns.  11  Film: "Christopher Columbus: The Discovery.  11  Music: The surtitle debate.  11  David Byrne rocks.  15  Television: Critic's Notebook 44  Obituaries 10  Professor H. Stanley Bennett; advanced cell-structure analysis.
John Sturges, a film director.
Sports 27-31  Baseball: New Jersey Little Leaguers gain World Series.  27  Yankees fall to the Angels, 9-5.  27  Yankees can't fill bullpen void.  29  Saberhagen in never-never land.  29  Column: Berkow on LeRoy Walker.  27  Football: Giants and Jets prepare for faceoff.  27  Golf: Long putts make difference in Met Open.  31  Horse Racing: Speedsters are Travers favorites.  31  Tennis: Ivanisevic wins battle of servers.  31  Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  Aid for the rich, not the economy.
Teaching mercy to Republicans.
The Queen's carrot.
Give Oregon health plan a chance.
Letters  Russell Baker: Bush's big bash.
William Rathje and Cullen Murphy: Poor, misunderstood garbage.
Stephen B. Goddard: Curing America's road fever.
John Schall: Recycling, minus the myths.


34 Million View Final Session
About 34 million Americans watched the Republican convention on Thursday night, roughly the same number that watched the final night of the Democratic convention in July.
ABC's Thursday night convention coverage, which ran 149 minutes, had 9.5 million viewers.
CBS's coverage, which ran 154 minutes, had 7.8 million viewers and NBC's, which ran 118 minutes, attracted 10 million viewers, according to Nielsen Media Research.
An additional 5.1 million viewers tuned into the convention on Thursday night on PBS, and 1.5 million watched on CNN.


NBC Dismisses Newsman
NBC News has canceled the contract of the correspondent Arthur Kent in a dispute over assignments, the network has announced.
Mr.
Kent, who won acclaim for his reporting of the Persian Gulf war, criticized network news executives recently for suspending him after he declined an assignment to cover the conflict in Yugoslavia.
The network tried to buy out Mr.
Kent's contract, which extended through 1995, but terminated the agreement yesterday.
Mr.
Kent has threatened legal action.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; CLINTON SAYS BUSH IS UNTRUSTWORTHY ON JOBS AND TAXES
Gov.
Bill Clinton accused President Bush today of using lies and distortions to sidestep responsibility for the nation's economic woes and to paint the Democratic opposition as unworthy of public trust.
Mr.
Clinton, who saw his once-commanding lead in public opinion surveys shrink as the Republican convention took center stage this week, used today's speech and remarks afterward to direct his sharpest criticism yet at Mr.
Bush and to try to recapture the public's attention from the Republicans.


Economic Fears Cut 50.79 From Dow
Stock prices plunged yesterday as a falling dollar and worries that an economic recovery would be stifled by higher interest rates set off a wave of computer-driven sell programs.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 50.79 points, or 1.5 percent, to 3,254.10, its lowest close in four months.


Woman, 78, Found Slain in Apartment
A 78-year-old Brooklyn woman was found stabbed and beaten to death last night in her apartment inside a housing project for the elderly, the police and neighbors said.
The body of the woman, Lerona Manning, was discovered just before 8 P.M. by her nephew in the apartment, at 393 Powell Street in the Woodson Houses in Brownsville, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.
Ms.
Manning had been stabbed once in the back, said Sgt.
Michael Morris of the housing police.


NFL TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Washington Redskins
If past omens are precedent, to keep their Super Bowl express on track the Redskins need a victory tonight over the Raiders in Los Angeles.
The Skins, who are 0-3 in exhibition play, had a 1-3 preseason record last year before turning in a 14-2 season on their way to the Super Bowl championship.
After losing their first three games by a total of 4 points, the Redskins will have a stronger lineup tonight.
Quarterback Mark Rypien, who missed the first two games in a contract dispute and played only briefly in the third, is expected to see a lot of action in the Coliseum.


Bridge
The 10th World Team Olympiad begins today in the small Italian town of Salsomaggiore, southeast of Milan.
Sixty teams are due to compete in the Open Championship and 36 teams in the Women's Championship.
The United States squad of Bob Wolff, Bob Hamman, Eric Rodwell, Jeff Meckstroth and Seymon Deutsch will try to defend the open title they won four years ago in Venice.
Their sixth player is Michael Rosenberg, replacing Jim Jacoby, who died 18 months ago.


Economic Fears Cut 50.79 From Dow
Stock prices plunged yesterday as a falling dollar and worries that an economic recovery would be stifled by higher interest rates set off a wave of computer-driven sell programs.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 50.79 points, or 1.5 percent, to 3,254.10, its lowest close in four months.


Palestinians on the Way to Talks Stumble Over Israeli Travel Curbs
Plans to resume the Middle East peace talks on Monday were jeopardized today when Palestinian delegates angrily postponed their trip to Washington, saying they had been "humiliated" by Israeli soldiers at the border crossing into Jordan.
An Israeli military spokesman denied the charge, and accused the Palestinians of creating "a provocative act."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Sent Jim Thome, third baseman, to Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
Recalled Jesse Levis, catcher, from Colorado Springs.
National League  MONTREAL EXPOS -- Placed Bret Barberie, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Jerry Willard, catcher-first baseman, from Indianapolis of the American Association.


Giorgio Perlasca, 82; Helped Jews Flee Nazis
Giorgio Perlasca, an Italian businessman who saved more than 3,000 Jews from deportation to Nazi concentration camps in World War II, died on Aug. 15 at his home in Padua, Italy.
He was 82 years old.
Mr. Perlasca died of a heart attack, The Associated Press reported.


Agency Is Held Liable For False Advertising
A damage award of nearly $1 million won by one razor blade company from another for false advertising could extend to the advertising company that created the copy, a Federal judge ruled yesterday in Manhattan.
The unusual ruling was made by Judge Kimba M. Wood, who in October had ordered Wilkinson Sword Inc. to pay $953,000 in damages to the Gillette Company.
That award was based on what the judge had ruled were false claims by Wilkinson that its Ultra Glide razor was better than Gillette's Atra Plus blades.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
WILLIAMSBURG DUSTED WITH LEAD PAINT
A painting crew sandblasting the Williamsburg Bridge repeatedly rained sand, dust and lead-paint chips into Brooklyn earlier this summer before city officials suspended the project under pressure from the state.
The maintenance of the aging bridge has been halted for more than a month, and in the community beneath it, residents are anxious about findings of "elevated"' and potentially dangerous levels of lead in dust around the bridge.
Page 1.
A REPRIEVE FOR COUNCIL PRESIDENT
Mayor Dinkins and the City Council agree that the office of City Council President should be abolished.
They just can't agree how to do it.
An effort to put a referendum on the November ballot that would abolish the office failed because Council leaders and the administration could not agree on the details.
Page 25.
POLICE SHOOTING CALLED JUSTIFIED
A police detective who fatally shot a robbery suspect in May, sparking angry demonstrations in Brooklyn, will not be prosecuted.
District Attorney Charles J. Hynes said, "There is no evidence that the police conduct in this incident was anything but justified." A spokesman for Mr.
Hynes said the office had been unable to find anyone who disputed the police account and that the shooting was so clearly justified that the case was not presented to a grand jury.
Page 25.
REGION
A SURPLUS IN HARTFORD
Connecticut will close the books on its first fiscal year with a state income tax with a surplus of almost $113 million, according to an estimate from the legislature's budget office.
The projection was released only two days before the one-year anniversary of the income-tax law, prompting angry denunciations all over again by tax opponents who said it only proved that the state was worsening the recession by taking too much money from residents.
Page 26.
CUOMO RESPONDS TO BUSH CRITICISM
Lest anyone misinterpret President Bush's convention-speech swipe at Mario M. Cuomo as a throwaway line, the New York Governor charged today that the Republicans were using him and his state to reinforce the country's ethnic and racial prejudices.
Page 26.
A DAY OF PROTEST IN TRENTON
Protesting the biggest layoff of state workers in New Jersey history, hundreds of union members rallied outside the State House in a one-day strike against the Department of Human Services.
Page 26.
A GUILTY PLEA IN ALBANY COUNTY
Albany County's former executive, James Coyne, pleaded guilty to three felony counts of making false statements on bank loan applications.
In exchange, the Government agreed to drop the other charges in a 21-count indictment.
Mr.
Coyne could receive up to six years in prison and a maximum fine of $750,000.
Page 26.
FOR SALE: ONE BRIDGE, ALMOST NEW
It seemed like a bargain at the time: a six-ton steel bridge, almost new, on sale for only $91,700.
Now, it's a white elephant that officials of Greenburgh, N.Y., are desperate to get rid of.
Page 26.
Two New Jersey beaches stay closed.
Page 26.
About New York by Douglas Martin 25


Executives
AMERICAN TRANSPORTATION TELEVISION NETWORK, New York, named William G. Barker Jr. chief financial officer.
ARMCO ADVANCED MATERIALS CO., Butler, Pa., a unit of Armco Inc., named Robert Visokey president.
AUTOMATIC DATA PROCESSING INC., Roseland, N.J., appointed Arthur F. Weinbach executive vice president.
INTERNATIONAL LEISURE ENTERPRISES INC., Phoenix, named Randall L. Pullen president.
CHICAGO PNEUMATIC TOOL CO., Utica, N.Y., a unit of Atlas Copco A.B., named Necip Soyak president and chief executive.
QUANTUM RESTAURANT GROUP, Roslyn Heights, L.I., promoted Thomas J. Baldwin and Neal B. Egger to senior vice presidents.
SCIENCE MANAGEMENT SERVICES GROUP, Basking Ridge, N.J., a consulting unit of the Science Management Corp., appointed Dennis J. Pallai president.


Brooklyn Police Cleared In May Slaying of Suspect
A police detective who fatally shot a robbery suspect in May, resulting in angry demonstrations in Brooklyn, will not be prosecuted, District Attorney Charles J. Hynes announced yesterday.
"There is no evidence that the police conduct in this incident was anything but justified," Mr.
Hynes said in a written statement closing the investigation of the shooting by the detective, Kevin McKeon.


Shipbuilder Warns Navy
The American Ship Building Company has said it may file for bankruptcy protection by the end of September if the Navy does not pay money needed to finish a construction contract.
The company's chairman is George M. Steinbrenner, owner of the New York Yankees.


Thomas S. Brush, 70; Active as Arts Patron
Thomas Stewart Brush, a former newspaper executive and a patron of the arts, died on Thrusday at his home in Lakeville, Conn.
He was 70 years old and also kept a residence in Manhattan and a summer home in the Bay of Islands, Ontario.
He died of a heart attack in his sleep, his family said.


CRYSTAL BRANDS SELLS ITS MEN'S CLOTHING UNIT
Crystal Brands Inc. said yesterday that it had signed a definitive agreement to sell its men's tailored clothing business for about $55 million to the Plaid Holdings Corporation.
Crystal Brands, which makes apparel under such names as Evan-Picone, Gant, Izod, Lacoste and Polo by Ralph Lauren for Boys, said it expected to complete the sale to Plaid Holdings, the parent company of J. Schoeneman Inc., by Sept. 28.
"The sale of our men's tailored clothing business represents an important strategic step for Crystal Brands," said Richard Kral, the company's chief executive.
"We intend to become a more focused, brand-oriented marketer, offering higher value products for today's more casual life style." In July, Crystal Brands sold its 50 percent stake in Lacoste Alligator S.A. to Sporloisirs S.A. and terminated its license to market products under Lacoste's "crocodile" trademark for $31.5 million.


For Jersey Little Leaguers, 13 Is a Splendid Number
A trip to the Little League World Series hardly seemed possible for the 31 players who first tried out for the Hamilton Township team in southern New Jersey two months ago.
But today, with an 8-0 victory over Manchester South of New Hampshire at Breen Field here, the New Jersey team advanced to the national tournament next week in Williamsport, Pa.
The squad, which has a 16-1 record, is the first team from New Jersey to reach the Little League finals in 13 years.





Grain and Soybean Prices Are Higher In Quiet Trading
Grain and soybean futures settled higher in quiet trading yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade.
Wheat futures were aided by the feeling in the market that President Bush will announce new export subsidy offers for wheat when he makes a campaign stop at the Illinois State Fair tomorrow.


DOLLAR, IN PLUNGE, HITS ALL-TIME LOW AGAINST THE MARK
The dollar, plagued by a weak economy and more attractive interest rates abroad, plunged to all-time lows against the German mark yesterday.
The decline dragged down the American bond and stock markets and raised fears of economic disruptions both in the United States and Europe.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 1.5 percent, or 50.79 points, to close at 3,254.10, while the bond market gave up gains it made in the last two weeks.
The sharp fall in the markets is an unwelcome development for the President, who in his acceptance speech on Thursday night asked voters to trust him as the better steward of the nation's economy.


COMPANY NEWS;
A Boeing Company worker has been awarded $1.16 million for emotional distress and discrimination she suffered because of a repetitive-stress injury.
The jury at King County Superior Court in Seattle did not find the aerospace giant liable for the injuries caused to the employee's hands but found that Boeing did not accommodate her.
The worker, Janice Goodman, now 56 years old, had a job working with microfilm in Boeing's Kent plant, 25 miles south of Seattle.
The job required her to place papers under a camera lens and push a button to photograph them several thousand times each day.
Ms.
Goodman had mild arthritis when she started the job.
By 1987 she was wearing a splint on her right hand, and on both hands the following year.
She left Boeing in 1989 and says she is no longer able to work.
A Boeing spokesman, Russ Young, said the company would review a transcript of the trial before deciding whether to appeal the verdict.


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Bush's speech at the Republican National Convention misstated a finding of a CBS News poll taken Tuesday and Wednesday.
Once undecided voters were pressed to voice a preference between Mr.
Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton, they supported Mr.
Clinton 51 percent to 40 percent, not 41 percent to 40 percent.


Thomas S. Brush, 70; Active as Arts Patron
Thomas Stewart Brush, a former newspaper executive and a patron of the arts, died on Thrusday at his home in Lakeville, Conn.
He was 70 years old and also kept a residence in Manhattan and a summer home in the Bay of Islands, Ontario.
He died of a heart attack in his sleep, his family said.


COMPANY NEWS: Yes, They Have Small Chiquitas; Marketing Turns Castoffs Into Top Lunch Bananas
Chiquita Brands says less can be more.
So it is test-marketing a line of bananas, called Chiquita Jr., that were once considered undersized.
"The perception was that neither the consumer nor the retailer would pay for these small bananas -- that bigger was better," said Jane Garvey, national marketing manager for Chiquita Brands, which is based in Cincinnati.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about attacks on Gov.
Bill Clinton by speakers at the Republican National Convention misstated the home state of Senator Pete V. Domenici in some copies.
He represents New Mexico, not Arizona.


In Shared Grief, a Mother Learns to Cope; A Woman Finds Her Daughter's Spirit in the Young Friends Who Mourn Her
Ann Wren knows in her heart that conversations with her daughter, Ann, are never monologues, even though the child's voice was stilled in a crushing split second last November.
Ann was 15 years old when she and five friends died when their car slammed into a tree along a rolling, curving stretch of Webster Avenue in the Bronx.
The driver had been drinking.


U.S. Worries Balkan War Could Spread
Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger said today that the United States was deeply concerned that the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina could spill southward, engulfing wider territories in the Balkans.
"I think there's a real chance that this conflict can spread," he said.
"It's what has terrified us all from the very beginning. It's been nothing but one escalation after another."


Your Taxes; A Small-Business Withholding Plan
THE Bush Administration is proposing to simplify one of the most vexing tax regulations faced by small businesses.
But the effort has come under an unforeseen barrage of criticism from small business advocates in industry, in Congress, and within the Administration itself.
At issue is the notoriously complex regulation that governs how frequently companies must give the Government the money they withhold from wages.
The rule is so hard for the average business to cope with that the General Accounting Office estimates one-third of all businesses in the nation fail to comply with it in any given year.
Virtually everybody agrees that the current system for making payroll tax deposits is in need of reform.


Projects' Have-Nots Fear Have-Nothings
Wednesday, the police came again.
"We had a riot here last night," said Estelle Olivera, a 26-year-old pregnant mother of two who lives in a crowded three-bedroom apartment in Borinquen Plaza in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn.
"There were about 40 cops outside."


Critic's Notebook; Woody Allen As Metaphor In Campaign For President
For the uncertain television voter in this season of the family, the political choice was sharpened this week.
The election came down to a contest between the score or more Bushes and the dozen or so Farrow-Previn-Allens who populated the tube during the days of public embraces in Houston and domestic disruption in New York City.
Ms.
Farrow's family was reportedly valued at $7 million.
The value of Mr.
Bush's was the White House.
At the sight of that screen of Bushes at the Astrodome on Wednesday night, hard-nosed political commentators went gooey.
David Gergen, who usually maintains a sober mien on the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour," could scarcely contain himself.
It was a very important moment, he kept saying, incredibly important.
Professional skepticism gave way to open-mouthed awe as the grandmother of all First Ladies presided over the mother of all photo opportunities.
It was repeated Thursday with the Quayle family and balloons.


Plan to End Council Presidency Put on Hold by Disagreements
The Mayor and the City Council both agree that the office of City Council President should be abolished.
They just cannot agree how to do it.
An effort to put a referendum to abolish the office on the November ballot failed yesterday because Council leaders and the administration could not agree on the details.


Review/Film; It's Goodbye, Columbus, As Torquemada Waves
"Christopher Columbus: The Discovery," produced by the same wags who brought us "Superman: The Movie" and "Santa Claus: The Movie," is not quite a nonstop hoot, but it is pretty funny far more often than it intends to be.
It opened in theaters here yesterday.
Surprisingly little is known about Columbus and his life.
Yet the film makers' imaginations seem to have fallen over the edge when they place Tomas de Torquemada, Spain's most notorious inquisitor, on the quay to wave his pudgy little hand at the departing Nina, Pinta and Santa Maria.
Torquemada?
Shouldn't he be pulling out the fingernails of heretics instead of attending bon voyage parties?


Phone Theft Insurance Is Broadened
As telecommunications becomes more sophisticated, so does theft of telephone services.
To help ease the losses from such crimes, the Travelers Corporation next week plans to offer the first broad insurance policy covering losses when criminals tap into certain corporate telephone systems and steal long-distance calls.
Most industry consultants agree that annual costs from all types of telephone fraud might exceed $2.2 billion.
The cost of the kind of fraud covered by the Travelers policy, involving the telephone systems known as PBX's, or private branch exchanges used by many large companies, might exceed $1 billion, according to Telecommunications Advisors Inc. in Portland, Ore., a consultant specializing in fraud.


Fed Division On Rate Cut
Most Federal Reserve System leaders favored cutting interest rates when they met June 30 and July 1 if new signs of economic weakness appeared, minutes of the session released today show.
The minutes showed that the panel was divided on the interest rate cut, which occurred July 2.
The cut occurred after the Labor Department reported that the civilian unemployment rate bounded to 7.8 percent in June from 7.5 percent in May as the number of nonfarm jobs fell by 63,000.


Who's Behind Hysteria in the Maine Woods?; Monterey Safeguarded
To the Editor:
An ad from members of the environmental community criticizing the recently announced designation of the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary makes accusations that do not reflect the hard-fought safeguards for this treasured portion of California's coast (Op-Ed page, July 22).
To counter a few of the more obvious misrepresentations:


Phone Theft Insurance Is Broadened
As telecommunications becomes more sophisticated, so does theft of telephone services.
To help ease the losses from such crimes, the Travelers Corporation next week plans to offer the first broad insurance policy covering losses when criminals tap into certain corporate telephone systems and steal long-distance calls.
Most industry consultants agree that annual costs from all types of telephone fraud might exceed $2.2 billion.
The cost of the kind of fraud covered by the Travelers policy, involving the telephone systems known as PBX's, or private branch exchanges used by many large companies, might exceed $1 billion, according to Telecommunications Advisors Inc. in Portland, Ore., a consultant specializing in fraud.


CHRONICLE
The SULTAN OF BRUNEI, the leader of the small but oil-wealthy country on the island of Borneo, has once again been ranked as the richest billionaire in the world, according to Fortune magazine's annual list of the very, very wealthy.
The Sultan and his family are worth about $37 billion, the magazine said, with a fortune that includes real estate, oil and gas fields, and what is said to be the largest collection of Rolls-Royces: 153.


Relief on Auto Alarms
To the Editor:
"Wailing About Wails" (Topics item, Aug. 12) echoes the feelings of New Yorkers on the usefulness and nuisance of car alarms.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has signed a bill I sponsored that outlaws the sale of new car alarms that sound for more than three minutes or that can be set off by other than direct physical contact.


Grain and Soybean Prices Are Higher In Quiet Trading
Grain and soybean futures settled higher in quiet trading yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade.
Wheat futures were aided by the feeling in the market that President Bush will announce new export subsidy offers for wheat when he makes a campaign stop at the Illinois State Fair tomorrow.


Observer; Bush's Big Bash
Woody Allen and Fergie, the Duchess of York, were lucky.
The stories of their messy family lives reached Houston too late for God's angry Republicans who had loosed their terrible swift swords upon foes of Bushness and Quaylitude.
Has there ever been such a joyful public bashing of the irrelevant by adults presumed capable of running a large, heavily armed institution?
The bashers will doubtless reply, "Where were you when the Democrat Party was dishing it out in New York?"


Two Long Putts Make the Difference for Mielke
Mark Mielke hit putts of 34 feet and 51 feet on two of the last three holes in the Met Open today and came away with a one-stroke victory over Rick Vershure, his playing partner, in the $75,000 tournament.
A combination of Mielke's hot putting and Vershure's loss of composure on the last three holes provided a four-shot swing, and Mielke, the head pro at Lawrence Golf Club on Long Island who started the day with a one-stroke lead over the second-place Vershure, regained his edge to finish with a 69 and a total of three-under-par 207 on the 6,648-yard Nassau Country Club course.


No Headline
It was appalling to me that a man that has the Presidency of the United States is so desperate to hold onto his job that he would say something that absolutely flew in the face of the plain truth. -- GOV.
BILL CLINTON.  [ 1:6. ] They say Clinton has a good reaction squad.
We're going to give them plenty to react to, every single minute. -- PRESIDENT BUSH.  [ 1:4. ]


Fed Division On Rate Cut
Most Federal Reserve System leaders favored cutting interest rates when they met June 30 and July 1 if new signs of economic weakness appeared, minutes of the session released today show.
The minutes showed that the panel was divided on the interest rate cut, which occurred July 2.
The cut occurred after the Labor Department reported that the civilian unemployment rate bounded to 7.8 percent in June from 7.5 percent in May as the number of nonfarm jobs fell by 63,000.


Sports of The Times; Walker's Olympic Battle
A vision came to mind: LeRoy Walker, that good and well-intentioned man, trying single-handedly to fend off the barbarians at the gate with a track baton.
This was mentioned to Walker, who has been nominated to be president of the United States Olympic Committee.
He thought for a moment and then offered another image: "I've got my finger in the dike of idealism, but I don't know how long I can keep it there until we're overwhelmed by the flood of the commercialism."


Doubts Voiced on Bush Plan For Taxpayer to Cut Deficit
The President's idea to force the Government to spend less by allowing the public to earmark tax payments for debt reduction implies spending cuts far more severe than are politically feasible, various budget analysts said today.
The proposal was thus seen as highly unlikely to get the necessary approval of Congress, particularly as currently dominated by Bush adversaries, these skeptics said.


New Leader in the Bahamas Pledges Closer Ties With Washington
The new Prime Minister of the Bahamas said today that he planned to intensify the war against drugs and liberalize laws on foreign investment, adding that his country's relations with the United States "can only get warmer" as a result of his party's victory in Wednesday's election.
But he also expressed some divergences from Washington on refugee and legal issues.


EQUITABLE LIFE GETS $550 MILLION LINE OF CREDIT
The Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States has received a short-term $550 million backup line of credit from a 13-member syndicate of domestic, European and Japanese banks led by the Chase Manhattan Bank.
Concerns over the company's real estate portfolio made it difficult to raise a $600 million line of credit and the company lowered the amount to $400 million two weeks ago.
Most of the $600 million line would have matured in three years.
By shortening the maturity to less than a year and improving other terms for the banks, Equitable was able to bring higher commitments.
"We are very pleased with the level of interest, particularly in light of the current difficult business environment," said Richard H. Jenrette, chairman and chief executive of Equitable Life and its parent, Equitable Companies Inc.


Prof. H. Stanley Bennett, 81, Dies; Advanced Cell-Structure Analysis
Dr.
H.
Stanley Bennett, an internationally known anatomist, cell biologist and professor emeritus at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, died Aug. 9 at the Quadrangle retirement community in Haverford, Pa.
He was 81 years old.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


EQUITABLE LIFE GETS $550 MILLION LINE OF CREDIT
The Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States has received a short-term $550 million backup line of credit from a 13-member syndicate of domestic, European and Japanese banks led by the Chase Manhattan Bank.
Concerns over the company's real estate portfolio made it difficult to raise a $600 million line of credit and the company lowered the amount to $400 million two weeks ago.
Most of the $600 million line would have matured in three years.
By shortening the maturity to less than a year and improving other terms for the banks, Equitable was able to bring higher commitments.
"We are very pleased with the level of interest, particularly in light of the current difficult business environment," said Richard H. Jenrette, chairman and chief executive of Equitable Life and its parent, Equitable Companies Inc.


Richard A. Armstrong, A Retired Editor, 62
Richard A. Armstrong, former executive editor of Fortune magazine, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old.
Mr. Armstrong died of respiratory failure, said his wife, Nancy.


Richard Silverman, 50, Election Polling Expert
Richard F. Silverman, a computer expert who helped develop the systems used to project winning candidates on election nights, died on Thursday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 50 years old and lived in Queens.
He died of myasthenia gravis, his family said.


Serb Vows to Close Camps
The leader of Serbian forces fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina pledged today to close Serbian prison camps, return property his army has seized by force, and allow relief convoys free access to Sarajevo and other encircled towns.
The Serbian leader, Radovan Karadzic, whose units are besieging Sarajevo and conducting widespread campaigns of "ethnic cleansing," also said he was prepared to accept an immediate cease-fire if his Croatian and Muslim enemies would.
Past cease-fires have been broken repeatedly.
Mr.
Karadzic issued his promises as he prepared to depart for the London conference.


Government Loyalists Capture Afghan Town


Jazz and Rock Outdoors
Free, outdoor performances of jazz, rock-and-roll, rhythm-and-blues, salsa and reggae by performers from the metropolitan area, are planned from noon to dusk on Sunday at the amphitheater in the Vietnam Veterans Park, 55 Water Street, in lower Manhattan.
The event, sponsored by Citifest, is called the Basta Music Festival.
It will also feature demonstrations of double-dutch jump roping and acrobatics, children's entertainment, vendors and medical information booths.
Spectators should bring their own seating.
Information: (212) 663-1520.


A Baseball Glove Made To Help With Throwing
A NEW design for baseball gloves capitalizes on a simple idea: players are more accurate if they throw to a target.
In this case, the target is the glove itself.
The Neumann Tackified Glove Company of Hoboken, N.J., recently introduced black leather gloves with white leather palms called the Neumann Target Series.


Rabin and Pro-Israel Group Off to Testy Start
Israelis' attitudes toward American Jewry have always been an ambivalent blend of gratitude and resentment, and Yitzhak Rabin, the country's only native-born Prime Minister, is no exception.
After a blistering dressing-down that the new Prime Minister gave to pro-Israel lobbyists in Washington last week, inevitable questions have been raised about the future course of his relations with influential Jewish groups in the United States.


Carol Vaness Recital
The soprano Carol Vaness is to present a recital of songs and arias by Mozart, Rossini, Barber, Verdi, Chausson and Poulenc on Sept. 6 as part of the Tannery Pond Concert Series at the Shaker Village in Mount Lebanon, N.Y.
Ms.
Vaness, who will sing the three starring female roles in "Les Contes d'Hoffmann," to open the Metropolitan Opera season on Sept. 21, will be accompanied by the pianist Christian Steiner, the artistic director of the Tannery Pond series.
Tickets: $13 and $16.
Information: (518) 794-8836.


Francisca Kallir, 93, An Art Gallery Owner
Francisca Kallir, a co-owner of the Galerie St.
Etienne, a New York art gallery specializing in paintings by Grandma Moses and by Austrian and German Expressionists, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 93 years old.
Mrs.
Kallir (pronounced kah-LEER) was born in Oberau in what is now southern Germany.
A countess by birth, she was named Francisca zu Lowenstein.
She attended schools in England and Germany and in 1922 married Otto Kallir, who owned an art gallery and a publishing house in Vienna.


The Queen's Carrot
The late summer fields are filled now with a pretty and graceful wildflower that has given a kind of botanical immortality to a queen who was not at all pretty.
Queen Anne of England, whose only recorded grace was a "harmonious voice," was fat and plain.
Her namesake, Queen Anne's lace, is delicate and a marvel of floral intricacy.


Cairns Journal; Hoping Tourists Will Say Sayonara
Capt.
James Cook discovered the endless beaches and dense rain forests here along the Great Barrier Reef in 1770.
The Japanese rediscovered them sometime in the late 1980's, and that, the locals say, is when everything began to change.
On the main street of this once isolated town, advertisements are in both English and Japanese.
With Japan's offices emptying for August, the glass-bottomed tour boats bobbing up and down over the reef are filled with what the Australians call "YOL's," the "young office ladies" who fly in from Tokyo to ooh and ahhh at the tropical fish below.


Broad Decline for the Dollar
In addition to falling to a new low against the mark, the dollar fell against other currencies yesterday.
In late European trading, the dollar was quoted at 1.4375 marks, down from 1.4520 late Thursday.
In New York, the dollar closed at 1.4315 marks, down from 1.4470.


Review/Theater; Psychodrama With a Desperate Grin
Sylvia DeSayles, Kay Stevens, Fay McKay, Carol Jarvis, Dorothy Squires and Libby Morris are hardly names that, when dropped, produce a universal nod of recognition.
But in the performance artist John Epperson's newest show, "Lypsinka! Now It Can Be Lip-Synched," these nearly-forgotten singers are placed in a vocal pantheon side by side with Ethel Merman, Connie Francis and June Christy.
"Lypsinka! Now It Can Be Lip-Synched," which plays at the Ballroom through Sept. 6, is the newest one-man show starring Mr.
Epperson as his drag alter-ego, Lypsinka.
The hourlong performance offers further proof, as if any were needed, that yesterday's pop culture never really dies.
And if it happens to involve a sequined pop diva with a taste for loud costumes and brassy music, it will probably sooner or later find its way into Mr.
Epperson's museum of pop trash.


Give Oregon Health Plan a Chance
Health Secretary Louis Sullivan rejected Oregon's application to reform its Medicaid program because, he claimed, the plan would discriminate against the disabled.
But he provided only flimsy evidence to back up the charge, inviting suspicion that the decision had more to do with election year politics than legal niceties.
Indeed, Gov.
Barbara Roberts charges that the Administration rejected the plan before it granted Oregon an ample opportunity to respond.
The Administration gets a chance to explain itself next week when it meets in Oregon with state officials.
If it can't produce a bill of particulars, the Governor deserves to be granted her request that President Bush overturn the rejection.


Who's Behind Hysteria in the Maine Woods?
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 2 news article on Mainers who are worried the Federal Government will take their land for a wildlife refuge implies that there is a genuine threat this might happen.
There isn't.


Critic's Notebook; Woody Allen As Metaphor In Campaign For President
For the uncertain television voter in this season of the family, the political choice was sharpened this week.
The election came down to a contest between the score or more Bushes and the dozen or so Farrow-Previn-Allens who populated the tube during the days of public embraces in Houston and domestic disruption in New York City.
Ms.
Farrow's family was reportedly valued at $7 million.
The value of Mr.
Bush's was the White House.
At the sight of that screen of Bushes at the Astrodome on Wednesday night, hard-nosed political commentators went gooey.
David Gergen, who usually maintains a sober mien on the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour," could scarcely contain himself.
It was a very important moment, he kept saying, incredibly important.
Professional skepticism gave way to open-mouthed awe as the grandmother of all First Ladies presided over the mother of all photo opportunities.
It was repeated Thursday with the Quayle family and balloons.


As Truman Said, Let's Quote Roosevelt
President Bush concluded his acceptance speech on Thursday night at the Republican National Convention in Houston by invoking the memory and the remarks of Harry S. Truman, the rough-and-tumble President after whom he hopes to model his campaign this fall.
The only problem: President Truman, who made the remarks when he accepted the Democratic Party nomination in Philadelphia in 1948, was quoting almost verbatim the remarks of another President, Franklin D. Roosevelt, when he accepted his party's nomination in Chicago in 1932.


Iraq Says U.N. Can Inspect Shiites' Area in South
Iraq offered today to let Security Council members inspect the southern marshes inhabited by tens of thousands of Shiite Muslims who are said to be under armed attack by the Iraqi Army and Air Force.
Abdelghani Abdelghafour, the chief of the Foreign Relations Bureau of the governing Baath Party, was quoted by Baghdad radio as making the offer, which he said would also show United Nations members the suffering caused by sanctions imposed on Iraq after it invaded Kuwait in August 1990.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.18
3.37
5.55
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.07
5.38
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.16
3.16
5.46
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.03
5.97
7.68
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.34
7.32
8.12
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.34
8.33
9.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.31
6.27
6.98
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday, about the Gap's falling stock price, misstated the changes made by Levi Strauss in its wholesale jeans prices.
It says it has raised them, not lowered them.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: With the Convention Over, Americans Pause to Talk Politics; If These Are Typical Voters, The President Is in Trouble
Forget the polls and columnists and odds makers.
If there are such things as typical voters, a Mr. and Mrs.
Taxpayer with the pulse of the electorate for all its rage and ambivalence, they are James and Bonnie Szalkie.
They are Midwestern Rust Belt, blue-collar Bush Democrats, ripe for Republican talk about family values and a strong America but on edge about the economy and an Administration they feel has lost touch with the Kmart crowd.


Treat Hypertension With Right Mix of Drugs
To the Editor:
"Treating Hypertension Without Giving Up Sex" (letter, Aug. 1), by Dr.
Elliot Wineburg leaves the impression that all medications used in high blood pressure management cause impotence, and that nondrug measures are usually effective.


Shipbuilder Warns Navy
The American Ship Building Company has said it may file for bankruptcy protection by the end of September if the Navy does not pay money needed to finish a construction contract.
The company's chairman is George M. Steinbrenner, owner of the New York Yankees.


COMPANY NEWS;
A Boeing Company worker has been awarded $1.16 million for emotional distress and discrimination she suffered because of a repetitive-stress injury.
The jury at King County Superior Court in Seattle did not find the aerospace giant liable for the injuries caused to the employee's hands but found that Boeing did not accommodate her.
The worker, Janice Goodman, now 56 years old, had a job working with microfilm in Boeing's Kent plant, 25 miles south of Seattle.
The job required her to place papers under a camera lens and push a button to photograph them several thousand times each day.
Ms.
Goodman had mild arthritis when she started the job.
By 1987 she was wearing a splint on her right hand, and on both hands the following year.
She left Boeing in 1989 and says she is no longer able to work.
A Boeing spokesman, Russ Young, said the company would review a transcript of the trial before deciding whether to appeal the verdict.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday showing the earnings of five airlines mislabeled the scale.
The numbers were in millions of dollars, not billions.


Degree Varies as Arabs Assist Bosnia's Muslims
On the hard-scrabble front lines in the mountains of central Bosnia and Herzegovina, Jasmin Bosnjakovic has met soldiers from the Middle East who say they have come for jihad -- holy war -- on behalf of Bosnia's besieged Muslims.
The mujahedeen, or freedom fighters -- whose presence is confirmed by the Bosnian Government -- have a religious fervor that is alien to Mr.
Bosnjakovic, a green-eyed 27-year-old foot soldier whose casual attitude toward the Islamic faith is typical of Bosnia's secularized Muslims.
But like most of the amateur soldiers in his country's improvised defense forces, he is happy to get help, whatever its source.


Rebecca L. Walzer, Keith S. Goldfeld
Rebecca Leah Walzer, a daughter of Michael and Judith B. Walzer of Princeton, N.J., was married there last evening to Keith Stuart Goldfeld, the son of Stephen and Laura Goldfeld of Princeton.
Rabbi Edward Feld performed the ceremony at the Institute for Advanced Study, where the bride's father is a professor of social science.
Ms.
Walzer, 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She teaches creative writing and computer programming at the Urban Academy High School in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her mother is the provost of the New School for Social Research in New York.


Britain: Underground, But Not Forgotten
The rise of rave culture in recent years has pushed rap in Britain to the background or, in some cases, the underground.
Where rap is often confrontational and a product of black culture, the rave scene is celebratory and multiracial, which, in part, accounts for its broader appeal in Britain.
Though rap peaked in popularity in 1987, a substantial audience remains; indeed, British rap fans often pick up on things sooner than the mainstream audience in the United States, as they did with the North American groups De La Soul, P.M.
Dawn and Dream Warriors.
There's also a resilient underground of British rappers, like Stereo M.C.'s, Blade, M.C.
Buzz B, Subsonic 2 and Hijack.


Miami: Beauty and Some Beastliness
Madonna has just bought a bayside mansion, and Beautiful People flock to see and be seen on South Beach in Miami, the glitzy coastal city on a roll.
But a human rights organization, Americas Watch, claims in a new report that bombings, death threats and vandalism incited by anti-Castro exile groups and condoned by government officials and business leaders have turned Miami into a city of political repression and intellectual intolerance to rival some regimes in Latin America.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending Aug. 8  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 480,000
161 West 15th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,150-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; dining area, 12-ft. ceilings, exposed-brick walls; maintenance $1,150, 60% tax-deductible (Brokers: Delson/Ginsberg-Stribling &amp; Associates)  Greenwich Village 800,000
1 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. duplex-co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, den, marble baths, balcony, Washington Sq.
Park view; maintenance $2,260, 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: Ann Weintraub Real Estate/Eyewitness Views)  SoHo 647,000
63 Crosby Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, 14-ft. ceilings, north exposure; maintenance $1,000, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Eychner Associates)  TriBeCa 245,000
65 North Moore Street  1,100-sq.-ft. open-loft condo; 1 bath, exposed-brick walls, 11-ft. ceilings, south exposure; common charge $198, taxes $2,400 (Brokers: Tabak Real Estate-Eycher Associates)  Upper West Side 320,000
175 West 93d Street  (Westwind)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,550-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, remodeled kitchen, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,042, 63% tax-deductible (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)  BRONX  Parkchester 35,000
1514 Metropolitan Avenue  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 720-sq.-ft. condo in a prewar building; dining area, south exposure; common charge $240, taxes $420 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Riverdale 480,000
650 West 261st Street  5-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, detached house; dining room, family room, 2 fireplaces, Jacuzzi, 2-car garage, 75- by 110-ft. lot; taxes $2,800 (Broker: Trebach Realty)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill 255,000
205 Warren Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a converted schoolhouse; dining area, den, 1,200-sq.-ft terrace, 18-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenace $490, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Cobble Heights Realty)  Park Slope 225,000
86 Prospect Park West  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining room, Jacuzzi, original moldings and details, 2 exposures, Prospect Park view; maintenance $519, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn A. Donahue)  Sheepshead Bay 194,000
2579 East 19th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached brick house; dining room, finished basement, rear deck, new roof, 2-car garage, 17- by 97-ft. lot; taxes $1,195 (Brokers: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  Elmhurst 190,000
86-10 Elmhurst Avenue  2-family, attached brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each unit; finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Kremer Realty)  Glendale 170,000
81-29 Woodhaven Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick and stucco house; dining room, enclosed-front porch, semi-finished basement, 2-car garage, 21- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $800 (Broker: Dix Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Old Town 210,000
63 Sparkill Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, Tudor; entry foyer, dining room, Florida room, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, 50- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $1,450 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  Pleasant Plains 170,000
6508 Amboy Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, wood-framed colonial; dining room, fireplace, full basement, 3-car garage, 1/4-acre lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/ Appleseed Agency)


Where Burpee First Tilled
HOW could you not love a company that invented the Fordhook bush lima bean, the Big Boy tomato, the Roly Poly zucchini?
"I had a dream about Roly Poly," said George C. Ball, holding up a zucchini that looked like a large green apple.
"I dreamed I was eating it. This is the first zucchini you will not want to give away."


Homeowners React to Spread of Rabies
THIS summer, Keith McGlinchey's has seen his business increase substantially.
One assignment alone involved removing 45 raccoons that had infiltrated a pool-maintenance house at a beach club.
Mr.
McGlinchey is a state nuisance wildlife control agent or, more simply, a trapper.
He is 1 of 17 in the county who have passed tests to be licensed by the Department of Environmental Conservation to remove wild animals from backyards, cellars, attics and garages.


U.S. Finds No Proof of Mass Killing at Serb Camps
Two weeks after President Bush ordered American intelligence agencies to determine whether Serbian forces were systematically killing prisoners at detention camps in Bosnia, Administration officials say they have found no evidence to authenticate such allegations.
Intelligence officials, noting that Mr.
Bush renewed the order last week, said they had "redoubled and tripled" their efforts to establish what had been happening in detention camps for Croats and Muslims in areas seized by Serbian forces since April.


Present at the Re-Creation
RUSSIA TRANSFORMED: BREAKTHROUGH TO HOPE
Moscow, August 1991. By James H. Billington. 202 pp. New York: The Free Press. $19.95.


No Sidewalks To Roll Up
ALMOST everybody who summers on Fishers Island, N.Y., will tell you, even before you ask them, that there's no nightlife there.
No restaurants, no clubs, no scene, no nothing.
Existing in its own self-imposed Summer of '42, the verdant slice off the coast of New London, Conn., is so small that local telephone calls require dialing only four digits.
Last Friday was the middle of the high season, and it was as busy as it gets.
The streets were deserted.
Henry Luce 3d quietly flew into the airport in his private plane, but nobody noticed.
Thomas Armstrong Jr., the son of the former director of the Whitney Museum of American Art, drove around in a BMW with license plates that said "INSANE." The old brick movie theater, where there's just one show a night, was half full. (Tickets were $4.) Outside, beat-up station wagons ("island cars") sat empty with the keys still in them.


Vincent, Preparing for a Fight, Vows Not to Quit
The clash between Baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent and a group of owners opposed to him has erupted into the open.
The conflict, which has been raging behind the scenes for months, reached a boiling point with a series of letters last week that ended with Vincent vowing never to resign.
At the request of the dissident owners, the two league presidents, Bill White of the National League and Bobby Brown of the American, asked Vincent in a letter to call a meeting at which his opponents were expected to ask him to resign or be fired.


Times Sq. Subway Station Plan Is Canceled
The postponement of a plan to build four giant office towers in Times Square has forced the New York City Transit Authority to abandon a $165 million project to renovate the ramshackle Times Square subway station, dealing another blow to efforts to revitalize the neighborhood.
The Transit Authority's proposal for the labyrinthine station, the second busiest in the subway system, had depended on an investment of $90 million from the office towers' developers, the Prudential Insurance Company of America and Park Tower Realty.
But now that the recession has prompted state and city officials to release the developers from their obligation to construct the towers anytime soon, the subway project is neither financially nor structurally feasible.


The American Way of War
To the Editor:
The Civil War was a struggle of armies who learned to fight by fighting.
They learned well.
By the middle of the war, commanders were directing forces on a scale unseen since the days of Napoleon, in terrain far more difficult than that found on European battlefields.
The best of Civil War generals performed masterfully.
Von Moltke's Prussian troops would have been hard pressed had they had to face the democratic Union Army of 1865.
JONATHAN J. MARGOLIS Boston


Lori E. Hirschberg, Shawn D. Danziger
Lori Ellen Hirschberg, the daughter of Arthur A. Hirschberg of Paramus, N.J., and the late Karen Hirschberg, was married last evening to Shawn David Danziger, a son of Lawrence and Lois Danziger of Paramus.
Rabbi Aryeh Gotlieb performed the ceremony at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Danziger, 26 years old, is a third-grade teacher at South Mountain Elementary School in South Orange, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Maryland and received a master's degree in elementary education from New York University.
Her father is the president of Vo-Toys Inc., a maker and importer of pet products.
Her stepmother, Dr.
Margret Wolf-Hirschberg, is an associate professor of nursing at New York University, where she is also the director of continuing education in the division of nursing.


Hold the Mayo
To the Editor:
In the past, someone of Marilyn Monroe's stature might be honored with a sandwich carrying her name at the legendary Stage Door Deli, but she has transcended the ordinary.
Just take some crab, shrimp, lettuce leaf, Yukari sauce, wrapped with dried seaweed and one gets a Marilyn Monroe Maki as served at the New Tokyo on East 18th Street in Manhattan.
MARK MELLETT New York


Less Banana More Appealing?
At last, Chiquita bananas are living up to their name.
They always sounded as if they ought to import cute little bananalets and leave jumbo-sized bananaramadamas for competitors with rotund names like Dole to supply to pratfall artistes and soda jerks on the split shift.
Instead Chiquita, like everyone else, sold mostly the standard nine-inch number, and consigned the short end of the bunch to mushy things like baby food.
But now the company has discovered what many parents have long known: A nine-inch banana is way too much for a 30-inch 2-year-old.
It won't fit into an eight-inch lunch box without folding.
And it's more than one official serving on any diet for a 40-inch-waist.


The First Steps in Preventing Pests
HOUSEHOLD insect and animal pests pose obvious health and building hazards.
Getting rid of established pests is usually a job for professional exterminators, but homeowners can take the first step in any pest-control strategy by keeping pests from entering a house.
The key to combating pests is to make the house and yard unattractive by eliminating moisture, food and easy access or habitation.


The F.D.R. Memorial, Redux
Shortly before his death in 1974, the renowned architect Louis I. Kahn put the final touches on his design for a Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial in an island park directly facing the United Nations.
It remains one of the noblest unbuilt projects in New York -- a great tree-lined promenade leading to a sculpture court and a 72-foot "room" open to the sky on the southern tip of Roosevelt Island.
But work ceased on the project in 1975, during the city's last fiscal crisis.
Happily, the Kahn project has been resuscitated by the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute, which has begun raising the $15 million needed to complete the memorial.
There is no comparable monument in America to the President who brought hope and jobs to millions during the Great Depression, and then guided the alliance that defeated Nazi Germany and imperial Japan.
What more suitable site than an esplanade across from the U.N., in the state where F.D.R. began his rise?


The American Way of War
To the Editor:
Caleb Carr lets his moral revulsion at Bedford Forrest as millionaire slave trader and Imperial Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan interfere with a fair analysis of Forrest's military talents and his relation to the American military tradition.
Forrest consistently defeated much larger and better-equipped forces.
He was a commander of whom Sun-tzu, or for that matter General Giap, would have been proud, and he stands outside the American mainstream of mass annihilation.


A 'Comedy of Errors' With a Built-In 'Boing'
Barring last-minute carnivals, and assuming some fly-by-night circus doesn't decide to set up its patchwork tent in the Sheep Meadow, "The Comedy of Errors" is as festive as any sight you'll encounter in Central Park this summer.
It has been put together by the Brazilian director Caca Rosset, who clearly believes in giving an audience lots to look at.
To a play that already has a tendency to behave like a fleet of bumper cars, he has added airborne acrobats, undulating harem girls, hyper- active doctors in black robes and pointy hats, nuns less pious than their folded hands would indicate, a crippled fishmonger, bawds galore and the medieval equivalent of the Keystone Kops.
He has also cast Karla Burns as Nell, the cook.


Time and Tide Wait for . . .
To the Editor:
Although perhaps lacking the renown of Jacob Druckman, I am likewise a composer, primarily of scores for documentary films and the theater.
The time frame for completion of these projects, while not operas, is typically measured not in years but weeks, often days.


Molly Peacock and Michael Groden
Molly Peacock, the president of the Poetry Society of America, and Michael Groden, a Joyce scholar, were married Friday in Port Angeles, Wash.
Mark K. Baumann, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the Port Angeles courthouse.
Ms.
Peacock, 45 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the author of three books of poetry.
This fall she is to be a visiting professor of poetry at Columbia University and writer-in-residence at Bucknell University.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton and received a master's degree in writing from Johns Hopkins University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did her husband's.


Doubts Plague Mortgage Plan For Firefighters and the Police
WHEN the Residential Mortgage Investment Program was signed into law by Gov.
Jim Florio in January, it was hailed by all concerned.
It permitted police officers and firefighters to tap into their pension system for mortgages carrying very low interest rates.
But since then, the program has created confusion and dissension in the ranks of the state's 35,000 uniformed employees.


For Fans, The Honeymoon Is Really Over
Forty years ago next month the first real "Honeymooners" sketch went out over America's airwaves.
Jackie Gleason had done proto-"Honeymooners" segments on the DuMont network's "Cavalcade of Stars," but only on Sept. 20, 1952, when "The Jackie Gleason Show" had its premiere on CBS, did the Kramdens and the Nortons -- Ralph and Alice, Ed and Trixie -- first appear together.
In one of what "Honeymooners" scholars consider the 39 classic episodes of the program, those produced during the 1955-56 season, Ralph Kramden undertakes a particularly outlandish venture: an attempt to be young and hip.
He sports a size-54 candy-striped blazer, a straw hat and a collegiate letter sweater, and he spouts phrases -- like "voh-doh-dee-oh-doh" and "23 skiddoo" -- that had grown dusty and musty even by the 1950's.
The spectacle of the portly, strait-laced Kramden trying to be "with it" is too absurd even for the doggedly loyal Ed Norton, and he laughs derisively.
"What's so funny?" Kramden asks indignantly, to which Norton replies, "How can anyone so
round
be so
square
?"


Jennifer Caspar, Eric W. Altshule
Jennifer Anne Caspar, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Caspar 3d of Avon, Conn., was married there yesterday to Eric William Altshule, the son of Ellie Altshule of Santa Monica, Calif., and Perry Altshule of Encino, Calif.
The Rev.
Lawrence Bock performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ann.
Ms.
Caspar, 25 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in urban planning at George Washington University.
She and her husband graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the deputy general counsel and corporate secretary of the Travelers Corporation in Hartford.


The First Steps in Preventing Pests
HOUSEHOLD insect and animal pests pose obvious health and building hazards.
Getting rid of established pests is usually a job for professional exterminators, but homeowners can take the first step in any pest-control strategy by keeping pests from entering a house.
The key to combating pests is to make the house and yard unattractive by eliminating moisture, food and easy access or habitation.


Over and Out
In a season filled with fashion options, where should you opt out STRETCH minis.
If you want short, wear shorts.
LONG, FULL skirts.
Narrow is nicer.
DINKY handbags.
Bigger is better.
POWER suits.
Instead, dress like a dandy.
The red, red mouth.
Go passionately purple or blushingly beige.
BIKER shorts.
They've cycled out.
BUSHY brows.
Arched and defined is now divine.
DESIGNER devotion.
It's much more fun to mix labels -- and prices.


THE REPUBLICAN RAID ON MASSACHUSETTS
I agree with most of Weld's ideas.
But rather than taking television sets away from prison inmates, why not restrict their TV fare to news programs, political discussions, documentaries, etc.
We want to educate them, not entertain them.
SYLVAN SUSSER
Roslyn, L.I.


TV Tour Guide to the New L.A.
LOS ANGELES -- "Is that your
real
name?"
Darren Star gets asked that a lot.
So would you if at the age of 29 you had created and produced TV's adolescent phenomenon "Beverly Hills 90210," and then at 31 created and produced your second hit series, "Melrose Place," whose cast of unknowns is already splashed across the covers of People magazine, TV Guide and Entertainment Weekly.


Mets Aren't in Position to Contend
The 1992 record is irredeemable and the roster is in pieces.
So, the Mets' working plan for 1993 is a volatile project, rife with guesswork, perhaps colored by management's ego and haunted by the specter of National League realignment.
The questions reach far and extend everywhere, to Eddie Murray's age, Bret Saberhagen's health, Howard Johnson's trade value and David Cone's selection of a future workplace.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 16 about the conversion of a former Bloomingdale's in Stamford, Conn., misidentified the city's assessor.
He is Frank Cohen.


Hillary Bachmann And Dale Miller
Hillary Ann Bachmann, the daughter of Thomas A. Bachmann of Clinton, N.J., and S. Prudence Bachmann of Flemington, N.J., was married yesterday to Dale Edward Miller, the son of Mrs.
Ross A. Miller of Darien, Conn., and the late Mr.
Miller.
The Rev.
Alfred M. Niese Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of St.
John on the Mountain in Bernardsville, N.J.
Mrs.
Miller, 27 years old, is a merchandise coordinator at Tiffany in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Tulane University.
Her father is the senior vice president of the Tucker Anthony investment banking concern in New York.
Her mother is a marketing manager for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in Bedminster, N.J.


Cambodian Riviera Revival Threatens Poor
Sitting on a wooden stump amid the charred rubble of what had once been the seaside playground of Cambodia's rich and powerful, Hun Souk wondered what would become of her now that the rich and powerful were finally returning to Kep.
Mrs.
Hun Souk was a servant in one of Kep's grand seaside villas when the soldiers of the Khmer Rouge marched into the city in the mid-1970's, evacuated most of its residents and began blowing the place up.


Pro-Choice Means Women Can Make Decisions; An Issue of Life
To the Editor:
I wholeheartedly agree with the thesis in "Beyond Topic A" (The Week in Review, Aug. 2), that the battle over abortion is bleeding resources away from other issues important to women.
But this otherwise excellent article is flawed because you interview only representatives of pro-choice groups and accept without challenge their contention that those opposed to abortion do not care about women's rights or opportunities.


NEW YORK: Sweater Sense
The simple, classic sweater is the base of some of autumn's most elegant clothes.


THE REPUBLICAN RAID ON MASSACHUSETTS
Christopher Lydon's assertion that "one of the dirty little secrets of Massachusetts politics is the suspicion that the Irish are not ready for self-government in this most Irish of American states" is news to me.
How much more edifying and accurate it would have been for him to have pointed out that perhaps one reason that there has been only one governor "of Irish blood" in the last 40 years is that the citizens of Massachusetts have elected people of diverse ethnic identities to the governorship: Italian, 10 years, Greek, 12 years, and Yankee, 14 years.
The proper description of Massachusetts is pluralistic.


Casual and Overlooking Lake Montauk
WATER views abound on Long Island, but restaurants have been slow to take advantage of them.
This year, things are changing, for 1992 may be the year of the nautical view.
In the spring, Starr Boggs moved his Westhampton restaurant to the beach, and diners have been enjoying meals accompanied by crashing surf and smashing sunsets.
On the North Shore, the Crescent restaurant in Bayville has been wowing crowds with its picture-postcard beach vistas.
The latest winning water views are at the new Waterfront on Lake Montauk in Montauk.
Go at dusk, when lights start popping on around the shore.


Children's Books
WEEPING WILLOW
By Ruth White. 246 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


A Rare Visit From Cuomo
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who threatened to revamp the New York Racing Association earlier this year, made his first visit to the Saratoga Race Course in nine years today and said that he supports racing in New York State and had no intention of selling or closing Aqueduct race track in Queens.
"I have no plans to close Aqueduct," he said before watching the 123d Travers Stakes.
"Remember, I'm from Queens."


Alabama Is Back in Hunt After Pronounced Absence
Can Alabama win a national championship?
"It's nice to be picked high," Coach Gene Stallings said in response to being chosen to win the Western Division of the Southeastern Conference.
"But it's not realistic. We're inexperienced at quarterback, and we are still a year or two away from being the kind of football team that can dominate both sides of the line.


Substance, Not Volume
To the Editor:
The Styles section reminds me of an argument.
In an argument, some think that the louder you speak, the more winning the argument.
In the Styles section, the larger the print, the larger the pictures, the more important the story.
Regrettably, it just isn't so.


For the Peace of Asia, U.S. Should Stop Peddling Plutonium
To the Editor:
In "America Isn't Asia's Cop" (editorial, Aug. 10), you argue convincingly for "a new system of regional security." With the waning of the United States and Soviet presence in Asia, new conflicts, alliances and power brokers will replace the old.


With Graft Report Due, More Desert Brazil's Chief
President Fernando Collor de Mello of Brazil, shaken by a corruption scandal, appears dangerously isolated as demonstrators demand his resignation daily, newspapers predict Cabinet resignations next week and his congressional support disintegrates in face of impeachment calls.
"We are in front of a cadaver," Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a respected centrist Senator, told Sao Paulo's largest newspaper, Folha, today, referring to the President's political prospects.


Rounding Up What Was Once the West
WHEN an Americana collector, Michael Friedman, was a little boy, he would not go to sleep without his gun and his boots on.
"No self-respecting cowboy would," the 49-year-old father of two says today.
Little did the young suburban buckaroo realize that he would someday assemble a vast collection of authentic and Hollywood cowboy items, and write a 300-page book on the subject to boot.
"Cowboy Culture," recently published by Schiffer Publishing Ltd., sold half its first printing in the space of two weeks, at $79.95 a copy.


Laurel Beckett, Hoke Slaughter
Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Beckett of Ardsley, N.Y., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Laurel Jean Beckett, and J. E. Hoke Slaughter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward R. Slaughter Jr. of Charlottesville, Va.
Ms.
Beckett, 30 years old, and her fiance, 31, both graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University.
She is an assistant vice president in New York of Sotheby's, the auction house.
Her father is a broker at the securities firm of A. G. Edwards in White Plains.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the dwindling number of young people who deliver newspapers misstated the plans of The Pittsburgh Press and The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
The carriers for those papers have not yet been dismissed; the papers plan to dismiss them over the next two years.


Pro-Choice Means Women Can Make Decisions
To the Editor:
While I respect Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and appreciated his pro-America, pro-change, pro-choice address at the Democratic National Convention, I must take issue with his "Reducing Casualties in the Abortion Battle" (Op-Ed, Aug. 5).


In the Desperation of Somalia, Even the Proud Flee
For 18 months, Sheik Bukkah Malim, hung on in his country, watching with grief as brothers, sisters and children were killed in the civil war.
Then as plundering gunmen made food perilously scarce for the survivors, he did what he thought he would never consider.
He boarded a rusty bus with his two wives and eight children and rode a 200-mile, bandit-ridden route, joining a million other Somalis who have fled the chaos and famine that have destroyed their homeland.


INSIDE
Company Rebuffed on L.I.
Many towns dream of having a big corporate headquarters on the tax rolls, but Brookville, L.I., wants no part of Canon U.S.A. -- a decision that has upset business leaders.
Page 37.
Off With Their Wigs?
Has Britain's justice system, cloaked in robes and crowned with perukes for centuries, been subject to cruel and unusual punishment?
Page 12.
Newark Police Kill 2 Youths
Two teen-agers riding in a stolen car were shot and killed by the police in downtown Newark after one of the youths pulled a gun on an off-duty officer, the police said.
Page 37.
COLLEGE FOOTBALL '92HE&gt;
As college football enters a season of change, there's a question whether its watchword will be coalition or chaos.
SportsSunday, section 8.


Miss Conneen, J. C. McMahon
Maureen C. Conneen of Ridgewood, N.J., and James T. Conneen of Tenafly, N.J., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Irene Conneen and James Conrad McMahon, a son of Peter and Patricia McMahon of Glen Rock, N.J.
Ms.
Conneen, 26 years old, is an employee-benefits specialist in Washington for Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is the chairman of A. T. Hudson &amp; Company, a management-consulting concern in Oradell, N.J.
Her mother is a social worker at Catholic Community Services in Paramus, N.J.


A Death in Long Island
THIS CRAZY THING CALLED LOVE
The Golden World and Fatal Marriage of Ann and Billy Woodward.
By Susan Braudy.
Illustrated. 484 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


As Global Talks Stall, Regional Trade Pacts Multiply
Colombian roses will be more available in Venezuela, Israeli shoes will be more common in Central Europe and Mexican watermelons will be cheaper in the United States.
The reason: a striking proliferation of regional free-trade deals.
Countries around the world have signed and ratified more such agreements in the last five years than in the preceding decade.
And an even larger batch of regional deals, including the North American Free Trade Agreement that was formally announced by the United States, Mexico and Canada 11 days ago, have been recently struck by negotiators and are at various stages of approval.


Corrections
The Streetscapes column on Aug. 16 about a Columbus Avenue sidewalk project misstated the number of bluestone pieces between 66th and 88th Streets.
There are 65.


Kathy Sulkes, Robert Lipsyte
Katherine Lorraine Sulkes, the daughter of Mrs.
M.
Mark Sulkes of Port Washington, L.I., and the late Mr.
Sulkes, was married yesterday evening in New York to Robert Michael Lipsyte, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney I. Lipsyte of Monroe, N.Y.
Lois Kellerman, a leader of the Brooklyn Society for Ethical Culture, officiated at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Ms.
Sulkes, who is known as Kathy and is keeping her name, is a freelance television news and documentary producer.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father was president of Diners Club International and a consultant for Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.


Essential Eggplant
I saw my first eggplant in 1974 at Fuller's Market in Granville, Ohio.
The shiny, purple orbs were piled next to the beefsteak tomatoes and sweet corn that Paul Bennett, a local gardener and poet, had grown.
With their curling stems and thick ruffled leaves, they looked like something out of "Jack and the Beanstalk." And they must have scared everyone else as much as they did me, because that purple pyramid remained intact while the tomatoes disappeared and the corn dwindled to orphaned, pale husks and strands of forsaken silk.
Ohioans have definite ideas about summer dinner.
And that summer we were more definite than usual.
Watergate fallout was everywhere.
WCOL played Don McLean's "American Pie" so often that even the rednecks were starting to believe it.
The rest of us were finding out that being right doesn't necessarily feel right.
Everyone cleaved to the familiar, which didn't include eggplant.
The only reason I bought one was that Paul Bennett seemed so sad looking at his undiminished supply.


Baker's Deputy, Now Acting Secretary, Presses Ahead With a Full Schedule
Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the career diplomat whose conservative pinstripes do little to dampen his exuberant personality, takes over as Acting Secretary of State on Sunday with neither illusions nor regrets.
"I am nothing if not clear about who I am," he said in an interview on Thursday in the opulent Deputy Secretary's suite, which he will keep when he assumes direction of the State Department at one of its busiest moments in recent times.
Across the foyer, the office of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, who moves to the White House as chief of staff, will remain empty.


Shinn Considers Giants
The Charlotte Hornets' owner, GEORGE SHINN, will travel to San Francisco to meet with city officials tomorrow concerning a possible bid for the Giants.
Shinn and SPENCER STOLPEN, president of the Hornets and Shinn Enterprises, will meet with Mayor FRANK JORDAN of San Fransisco and potential investors in the team.
Then they will attend the Giants' game against the Mets.
Stolpen described the meetings as "probably the most critical" to Shinn's decision about whether to be part of a bid to buy the Giants. (AP)


Dream Team's Special Charge
To the Sports Editor:
Poor Stephen King.
He has been stuck inside too long, grinding out consecutive bestsellers.
He's beginning to think everything in life fits into a horror venue.


Rounding Up What Was Once the West
WHEN an Americana collector, Michael Friedman, was a little boy, he would not go to sleep without his gun and his boots on.
"No self-respecting cowboy would," the 49-year-old father of two says today.
Little did the young Connecticut buckaroo realize that he would some day assemble a vast collection of authentic and Hollywood cowboy items, and write a 300-page book on the subject to boot.
"Cowboy Culture," recently published by Schiffer Publishing Ltd., sold half its first printing in the space of two weeks, at $79.95 a copy.


Clia Saltzman, Scott A. Tierney
Cornelia Biddle Saltzman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Saltzman of Aspers, Pa., was married yesterday in Washington to Scott Andrew Tierney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Tierney of Camden, Me.
The Rev.
Anne Amy performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's, Lafayette Square.
Mrs.
Tierney, 25 years old, is called Clia.
She graduated from Harvard University, as did her husband, and until recently she taught at the Town School for Boys in San Francisco.
She is to begin studying for a master's degree in special education this month at San Francisco State University.
Her father teaches writing at Gettysburg (Pa.) College.
Her mother, Cornelia B. Saltzman, teaches English as a second language at the Center for Human Services in Gettysburg.


Deborah Emily Harwick, Edward Patrick Glavin
Deborah Emily Harwick, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond D. Harwick of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to Edward Patrick Glavin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice D. Glavin of Lindenwold, N.J.
The Rev.
Harry E. Chase officiated at the Tenafly Presbyterian Church.


POSTINGS: East Harlem Block; 30 More Affordables
One of the oldest community development corporations in New York City, Hope Community Inc., has opened a 30-unit affordable housing complex called Hope Place at 415 East 115th Street in East Harlem.
The development is an important phase in a community-planned strategy to revitalize 115th Street between First and Pleasant Avenues.
Thus far, three buildings with 62 units have been completed by the 24-year-old organization, each with the help of more than $500,000 in low-interest loans and grants from the Local Initiatives Support Corporation, as well as $1.1 million in equity from the New York Equity Fund.
"This is one more thing on a whole block that is turning around," said Joan Lebow, a spokesperson for the Local Initiatives entity.


Lendl's Workday Ends Early With Victory Over Chang in Volvo
Ivan Lendl, Connecticut's not-quite-native son, motored here from his Greenwich mansion this balmy afternoon, upset third-seeded Michael Chang in straight sets in their Volvo International quarterfinal, and then zoomed back home again in plenty of time to unwind with a half-round at his favorite golf course.
Things went far less pleasantly for top-seeded Stefan Edberg, who had to tangle with fellow serve-and-volley specialist Guy Forget for a full three sets before winning a 6-3, 6-7 (7-3), 6-4 slugfest.
Absolute winners, most of them fired cross-court with his feet scrambling and his body in mid-air, were needed before Edberg finally took the fight out of the seventh-seeded Forget, winner of their last three meetings.


One Year Later, an Uneasy Peace in Crown Heights


Rebecca C. Parkhill, Robert Jolyon Willett
Rebecca Crowley Parkhill, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Craig Parkhill of Sudbury, Mass., was married there yesterday to Robert Jolyon Willett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Willett of London.
The Rev.
Deborah Pope-Lance performed the Unitarian Universalist ceremony at the First Parish Church.
Ms.
Parkhill, 25 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and is a divinity student at Yale University.
Mr.
Willett, also 25, a Brown graduate, is a graduate student at Yale's School of Organization and Management.


Paris Couture
Yves Saint Laurent's Fall couture collection was a rare 30-minute moment.
That's all it took for the designer to sum up real-life dressing.
Superb suits had long, slightly fitted jackets.
For evening, they came with lace-and-sequined bralike tops underneath.
Evening dresses in lovely colors flowed sinuously.
The collection, neither matronly nor especially youthful, was reassuring.
The Chanel show, designed by Karl Lagerfeld, exhibited style of a wildly different genre.
It set in motion a notion of madly romantic -- even audacious -- fashion.
Corsets that pinched the waist, curved the hips and popped up the bosom formed the top half of evening looks, while their seaming inspired the lines of suit jackets.
Wool as gossamer as cobwebs replaced chiffon.
Accessories pushed the limits of whimsical fantasy.
This collection will surely set style.


Marital Gamble


On Deck: Baseball Pros
To the Sports Editor:
Concerning the controversy of whether to send more pros to the Olympics, I say absolutely yes, and we should start with the baseball team.
Baseball is our game and our national pastime.
Under the present setup we are just not getting the job done.
We have come to the point where Cuba, Taiwan and Japan medal in Olympic baseball while the United States team sits on the sidelines thinking up excuses.


NEW YORK: Suit Spoofs
MEN'S WEAR for women is not new.
But the latest is done with plenty of style -- and a lot of wit.


Corrections
A report in the Postings column on Aug. 9 about resurrecting a residential project in Roslyn, L.I., misidentified its architect.
It is Lawrence M. Rosenbloom Architect, formerly called RAL Design.


Body Language
The French sculptor Auguste Rodin was destined to battle public opinion.
Assailed for the erotic candor of his work (especially his renderings of women fully aware of their sexuality), discredited for his unorthodox treatment of traditional subjects and accused of being everything from a homosexual to the exploiter of his model, muse and mistress Camille Claudel -- nonetheless Rodin (1840-1917) managed to redefine the nature and purposes of sculpture.
RODIN: Eros and Creativity (Prestel/Te Neues, 15 East 76th Street, New York, N.Y. 10021, $69.95) is an intriguing study of the artist's discourse on the erotic.
The editors -- Rainer Crone, who teaches art history at Columbia University, and Siegfried Salzmann, director of the Kunsthalle in Bremen, Germany -- have assembled photographs of more than 50 sculptures depicting erotic themes, as well as 32 superb drawings in pencil and watercolor wash.
Each sculptural piece has been exquisitely photographed in black and white from multiple angles, to highlight selective details.
In an exceptionally lucid essay, the journalist and critic Ginger Danto discusses the emotional ramifications of Rodin's carnal depictions.
In another, the art historian Ursula Heiderich examines the creative symbiosis between Rodin and Claudel, including its destructive aspects.
Less ambitious in scope and more generic in design, RODIN AND HIS CONTEMPORARIES: The Iris &amp; B. Gerald Cantor Collection (Cross River/Abbeville, $45) presents photographs by David Finn of 25 sculptures owned by the art collectors Iris and B. Gerald Cantor, as well as works by Rodin's contemporaries, including a selection of late 19th- and early 20th-century paintings.
Each series of glossy color plates is introduced by a brief but helpful foreword, as well as biographical information about its maker, written by Marie Busco, one of the authors of "Painting and Sculpture at Lincoln Center."


Cage Merely An Inventor? Not a Chance.
Living abroad, one realizes how great an international impact John Cage actually had.
European newspapers have been full of carefully considered obituaries for the composer, who died of a stroke in New York on Aug. 12, just a few weeks short of his 80th birthday.
Some papers enlisted critics in several different fields to assess his importance.
But even if his two most famous works were an idea and a collection of essays, Cage was first of all a composer.


Life Atop the Hills of Beverly
THE pool at the Beverly Hills Hotel is not a place to swim, sunbathe or relax beneath the tall palms.
Instead, you work at being seen.
Guests here exude power.
The few people who actually do go into the pool manage to swim a few laps with their heads held wholly above the water.
Phones ring constantly in the tiny cabanas (all situated on the west side of the pool) and their occupants rise regally from chaises to answer them with a certain air of ennui. .
It's all right, in fact, to clip your fingernails or rub more zinc oxide on your nose while on with someone.
An actor's voice, deep and smooth, comes over the intercom intermittently to page people; soon a figure can be seen gliding over to a house phone.
In late mornings groups of sunglassed, Armani-clad men might gather beneath one of the umbrella-covered tables.
I, however, sit with my crossword puzzle and thesaurus.
And, yet, after only a couple of days, I have as much power as any of the cabana people.


A Man's Castle


Woody Allen Tells His Side to a Magazine
Woody Allen says that he did not see "any great moral dilemma" in becoming the lover of Mia Farrow's daughter, that he took nude photographs of the 21-year-old woman as "a lark," and that he never molested his 7-year-old daughter, according to Time magazine.
In an interview on Friday with an editor of the magazine, Mr.
Allen, who is locked in a custody battle with Ms.
Farrow, his companion of 12 years, also said that he was never "any type of father" to Ms.
Farrow's adopted children, "in any sense of the word."


Lisa Baliatico, Christopher Botta
Lisa Ann Baliatico, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond A. Baliatico of Montvale, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher Charles Botta, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Botta of Allendale, N.J.
The Rev.
George S. Macho performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Nativity in Midland Park, N.J.
Mrs.
Botta, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is the supervisor of sales administration at Clinique Laboratories in New York.
Her father is the vice chairman and chief executive in New York of Swarovski Jewelry U.S.
Ltd., an Austrian maker of crystal jewelry.


Dream Team Nightmare
To the Sports Editor:
Stephen King's "Dream Team: Just Another Horror Show" (The Times, Aug. 9) illuminated my personal Olympic nightmares.
Ugly Americans once again stomping some poor weaker countries and calling it sport.
It's the Vietnam syndrome playing itself out in the 90's.


Making a Difference; Saving Wang, a Challenge Even for Superman
Richard W. Miller's track record over the years as a turnaround artist has been impressive, but he may have met his match, judging by last week's bankruptcy filing by Wang Laboratories.
Before joining Wang in 1989, he played major roles in putting the Penn Central Corporation and RCA's consumer electronics division back on their feet.
In fact, when General Electric acquired RCA in 1986, Mr.
Miller successfully managed the merging and restructuring of the combined G.E. and RCA consumer electronics division.


Janetta L. Jones, Scott Chrysler Jr.
Janetta Lynn Jones, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John G. Jones of Shreveport, La., was married yesterday to Scott Guy Chrysler Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Chrysler of Oyster Bay, L.I.
Canon Robert T. Hollett officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cornwall, N.Y.
Mrs.
Chrysler, 22 years old, is an administrative assistant at the New York law firm of Hughes Hubbard &amp; Reed.
Her father is president of U-Haul of Louisiana in Shreveport.


In With the Old Guard . . . Out With the New
You might call it the house that Miles Standish and Roger Williams built.
Or the house where Eileen and John J. Slocum live.
Whatever.
The Slocums -- he formerly a career diplomat in the United States Information Agency and a descendant of Standish; she a Republican delegate and a descendant of Williams -- opened the doors of their Newport, R.I., house to some 900 guests last weekend for a debutante dance for their granddaughter Sophia Trevor.
And three generations of Newport danced . . .


Q and A
Renovation Rents  Question: I am considering purchasing a six-unit multifamily dwelling in White Plains.
The building is subject to the Emergency Tenant Protection Act rules.
Four of the six units are vacant and two existing tenants pay below-market rents.
If I renovate the empty apartments, could I establish new rents for them? . . .
Dominick Accurso, White Plains Answer: Yes.
You can pass on to new tenants the expense of authorized improvements at a rate of 1/40th of the cost of the improvements each month.
The increases become a permanent part of the rent and do not expire when you have recouped the renovation costs.


Clothes Horse, Dearest
To the Editor:
I can only hope that you receive thousands of letters to this effect.
Your Styles section's lead article declaring that a child is "the best fashion accessory"  [ "Walking the Edge," Aug. 9 ]  revolted me.
That poor child, who at 10 was dressed like a prop and hardly squirmed through hours of fashion shows, should have a cause of action against his parents for child abuse.
Children are not accessories: they are individuals with rights and needs.


Ms. McLoughlin, Stephen Swartz
Karen Margaret McLoughlin, a daughter of Joan F. McLoughlin of Westerleigh, S.I., and the late Donald F. McLoughlin, was married Tuesday to Stephen Arthur Swartz, the son of Frances Swartz of West Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Norman Swartz.
The Rev.
Beverly R. Bates, a nondenominational minister, performed the ceremony at the Royal Waikoloan Resort Hotel in South Kohala on the island of Hawaii.
Mrs.
Swartz, 34 years old, was until recently a telecommunications analyst for the Bank of New York.
She graduated from the City University of New York.
Her mother is an assistant branch manager for the Richmond County Savings Bank in Grasmere, S.I.


A Careful Approach to Controlling Pests
THE bugs are here.
The inclination is to get rid of them the quickest way possible.
But increased environmental awareness, a good thing, is making most gardeners think twice about the use of any chemical on their grounds.
More practical now appears to be a system called integrated pest management, which includes targeting particular nuisance insects.
When insect pests are getting the upper hand, and something has to be done, it must be done wisely.
One of the first rules is to identify correctly the insect to be controlled.
Then the method for its control can be selected.
Blanket spraying should be a thing of the past.


Ms. Schrobsdorff, Jorgen Wahlsten
Susanna Mary Schrobsdorff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joachim A. Schrobsdorff of Cape May, N.J., was married yesterday in Gargnas, Sweden, to Anders Jorgen Wahlsten, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gunnar Wahlsten of Stockholm.
The Rev.
Olof Erikers performed the ceremony at the Gargnas Lutheran Church.
Mrs.
Wahlsten, 29 years old, is the news desk editor at the Paris bureau of Time magazine.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is a professional photographer in Cape May.
Her mother, MaryAnn Schrobsdorff, is a registered nurse in Cape May.


New Year's Revolution: Bowls Try Banding Together
Not so long ago, when all those representatives of bowl games set out each autumn in their brightly colored blazers to seek teams, they were united only in a distrust of their competitors, a willingness to be entertained and a desperate need to find a respectable clothier.
But now the Orange, Cotton, Sugar and Fiesta Bowls have banded together with six conferences and Notre Dame in an effort to introduce the concepts of dignity and organization to the college football season.
The merger of all those loud jackets into a Rainbow Coalition could eventually mark 1992 as the year in which chaos began to give way to order on New Year's day and night.


West Africa: A King Yields To a New Messenger
To judge from the copious radio play, rap is catching on in the Ivory Coast and elsewhere in Francophile Africa.
"Certainly, among those under the age of 25 or so, rap has become chic, despite the fact that most people don't speak English," said Yves Zogbo Jr., the M.C. for "Video Style," a weekly television program that features a heavy dose of American rap.
Several clubs in Abidjan, the capital, put on rap nights, in which, linguistic differences aside, local musicians imitate their favorite hip-hop artists.
Both those on stage and in the audience are apt to wear the universal rap uniform of baseball cap cocked to the side, half-laced sneakers and huge medallions.


The American Way of War
To the Editor:
Since Appomattox, 127 years of blinkered addicts, them what fought it and them what tell it, have it all wrong.
Caleb Carr, all by his lonesome, has, at long last, exposed the lack of sensitivity and the want of political correctness displayed by those brutish louts who conducted the American Civil War.
Oh, my goodness me!
Mr.
Carr has forced me from my blissful state of denial and has challenged me to confront my co-dependence upon the likes of Douglas Southall Freeman, Shelby Foote and -- oh, my heavens! -- that blinkered addict Bruce Catton.
Sigh.
The 90's are sooo difficult!


Kander and Ebb's 'World' With Banjos and Skates
THREE years ago, a revue of Kander and Ebb songs had its beginnings in a New Jersey theater.
Then, a misconceived and overdone production diminished its real charms.
But wait: this is an out-of-town hit-or-miss story that led to an Off Broadway hit, or pretty near.
Pared down to essentials and polished to a high-grade show business gloss, "And the World Goes 'Round" opened almost two years later in New York.
The reviews were terrific.
Awards followed and the show ran almost a year; surprisingly, no longer.
More surprisingly, its investment was not recouped.


Several Angels From the 70's Plan to Strum Harps of Gold
Several alumnae of "Charlie's Angels" are planning to return to television, but not for another series.
Instead, they will be in commercials and infomercials.
They will be following in the footsteps of Jaclyn Smith, who played Kelly Garrett and who has been promoting a fragrance called California and her own clothing line, Jaclyn Smith Collections, which has been sold in Kmart stores since 1985.


BEST SELLERS: August 23, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
6
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
2
3
24
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
3
2
13
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
4
4
6
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $20.) Life at a Maine summer retreat.
5
5
10
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
6
6
7
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Random House, $21.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
7
9
12
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) A "Star Wars" novel.
8
8
9
SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $22.) Continuing the story of the crowd that frequents an ultrachic Beverly Hills store. (LP)
9
15
122
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
10
10
5
IMZADI, by Peter David. (Pocket, $20.) Comdr. William Riker in a "Star Trek" adventure.
11
11
15
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones. (LP)
12
7
6
EYE OF THE STORM, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) An American is hired by the British to thwart an attempt to kill Margaret Thatcher.
13 *
12
2
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife share new visions while taking pictures of old bridges in Iowa.
14
1
RUM PUNCH, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $21.) A crime thriller involving the Feds, a ruthless gun dealer, a flight attendant and a bail bondsman ripe for romance. (LP)
15
8
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) A vaquero's adventures.
16 *
14
18
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
17 *
13
14
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Dirk Pitt goes on a mission to Africa.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
13
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
1
8
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
3
3
10
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
4
11
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses the environment.
5
5
3
THE LAST TSAR, by Edvard Radzinsky. (Doubleday, $25.) The life of Nicholas II and his family, and their assassination in 1918.
6
7
6
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
7
1
MARILYN: THE LAST TAKE, by Peter Harry Brown and Patte B. Barham. (Dutton, $23.) Did intrigues in Hollywood boardrooms and in the Kennedys' circle lead to Marilyn Monroe's death?
8
6
9
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who created Wal-Mart.
9
9
2
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
10
8
16
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
11
10
15
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How powerful monied interests dominate the Government.
12
12
30
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
13
11
8
A BRILLIANT MADNESS, by Patty Duke and Gloria Hochman. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress talks about living with manic-depressive illness.
14
13
37
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
15
14
10
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $20.) Essays on the pleasures of living extravagantly during the high-flying 1980's.
16 *
5
THE HAPPY ISLES OF OCEANIA, by Paul Theroux. (Putnam, $24.95.) An 18-month exploration of the South Pacific in a kayak.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
27
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
1
3
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) The head of the Children's Defense Fund offers rules to live by for her own children and others'.
3
3
38
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
4
5
6
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
5
4
37
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) This courageous, many-layered posthumous work by the author of "A River Runs Through It" offers to wrest truths of artistry, of mortality and of tragic form from the story of 13 men killed in a Montana forest fire in 1949.
UP IN THE OLD HOTEL: And Other Stories, by Joseph Mitchell. (Pantheon, $27.50.) Stories, profiles and articles written for The New Yorker between 1938 and 1965 by a reporter of genius.
ANCESTRAL VOICES, by Etienne van Heerden. (Viking, $21.) First published in Afrikaans in 1986, this dark, portentous novel broods on a nation's history through the generations of the Moolman family, a bigoted, jealous, strange, spectacular lot.
VIRGIN TIME, by Patricia Hampl. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) A literary account, by the author of "A Romantic Education," of a personal journey, through pilgrimage and conventual life, into a Roman Catholic heritage she had thought to be dead.
THE VOLCANO LOVER: A Romance, by Susan Sontag. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) One of our paramount critics extends her neck without damage in this grand, vigorous, witty and moral historical novel about Lord Nelson, his lover Emma Hamilton, her husband and Neapolitan society in the 18th century.
THE GREAT DEEP: The Sea and Its Thresholds, by James Hamilton-Paterson. (Random House, $23.) An intricate, scholarly, painful survey of the oceans and their imperilment by humanity.
THE LINCOLN COUNTY WAR: A Documentary History, by Frederick Nolan. (University of Oklahoma, $49.95.) Mr.
Nolan's primary research and thoughtful treatment capture the spirit of a justly infamous episode of rotten behavior in the West.


N.R.A. Is Politically Armed and, to Florio, Dangerous
When Gov.
Jim Florio ushered one of the nation's strictest gun-control measures through the Democratically controlled State Legislature in 1990, the National Rifle Association knew exactly what it had to do: devote enough money and manpower in the 1991 elections to help produce a Republican majority committed to rolling back the law.
After spending nearly $250,000 in 1991 to support its candidates and undermine others, the N.R.A. is tantalizingly close to reaching its goal.
The Legislature has all but eviscerated the state's ban on assault weapons and is working hard to hold enough votes to override the veto that Mr.
Florio has vowed to exercise in the next month.


Results Plus GOLF Norman Gains Ground Greg Norman secured a place among the leaders and Jose Maria Olazabal a spot among the survivors in the weather-delayed finish of second round play in the International tournament in Castle Rock, Colo. Norman, one of 71 players stranded on the course by an electrical storm Friday afternoon, returned yesterday morning to complete second round play. Norman, who hasn't won in more than two years, scored 10 points under the modified Stableford scoring system used for this event. Medal scores do not count in the event, only point totals. Golfers earn 5 points for eagle, 2 for birdie, zero for par, minus 1 for bogey and minus 3 for double bogey or worse.


Kara McLoughlin, John Hillebrecht
Kara Marie McLoughlin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward S. McLoughlin of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to John Michael Hillebrecht, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Hillebrecht of White Plains.
The Rev.
John McLoughlin, a cousin of the bride, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Anne's Church.
Mrs.
Hillebrecht, 27 years old, graduated from Duke University.
She is studying for an M.B.A. at Columbia University.
Her father is a salesman in New York for Samsung America, a men's clothing manufacturer.
Her mother, Mary Jo McLoughlin, is the executive director of the Patrina Foundation, a New York philanthropy that supports women's education.


Miss Noonan, Mr. Witherington
Margaret Mary Noonan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Noonan of Hampton, N.H., was married there yesterday to Robert Blake Witherington, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Witherington of Athens, Ga.
The Rev.
Richard Wegman performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal.
Mrs.
Witherington, 29 years old, teaches English as an adjunct at the Fashion Institute of Technology and La Guardia Community College in New York.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in the teaching of English as a second language from Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was an agent for the Internal Revenue Service in Portsmouth, N.H.
Her mother, Frances H. Noonan, is a secretary in the office of the superintendent of schools in Hampton.


Japan: Hammer Wannabes Spouting Nonsense
American rock music has always been hugely popular in Japan, so it was inevitable that Japan would give birth to gyrating, hip-talking Hammer wannabes.
The country's most popular rappers, Scha-dara-parr, make fun of themselves by spitting out, in Japanese: "We hold our microphones in an M.C. pose, popular words but the content is nonsense."
Nonsense or not, the music is catching on among young people.
Rap started in Japan about five years ago, and today perhaps 40 groups do it.
But only four or five are very successful.
The biggest hit so far has been "Towering Nonsense," by the three young men in Scha-dara-parr (a name with no meaning), which has sold a respectable 50,000 CD's.
Takagi Kan's "Fruit of the Rhythm" has also sold well, with fans snapping up 17,000 copies of the CD.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
PATERSON hits the big two-oh-oh this year, and the city is throwing itself quite a birthday bash.
And why not?
How often these days does anyone get the chance to celebrate an idea?
Remember the familiar story about Alexander Hamilton's founding the Society for Useful Manufactures to harness the thundering power of the Great Falls of the Passaic and begin America's first industrial city?
Falling water and a complex system of canals would turn the pulleys to run the machines to make the products that the manufacturers would sell at a profit so they could turn around and make more products, and so on.
America's first jobs bill.


Conversations/Hanan Ashrawi; A Palestinian Negotiator Fighting The 'One-Upmanship of Suffering'
THE Israeli-Palestinian conflict has long been a search for who wronged whom first.
Who threw the first stone, fired the first shot, violated the first human right, killed the first victim?
And, always, who has the greater claim on the world's conscience as history's orphan?
It sometimes can get wearying, and Hanan Ashrawi, spokeswoman for the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks, agrees -- up to a point.


Miss MacIver, Mr. Neiva de Figueiredo
Elizabeth Andrews MacIver, a daughter of Marjorie O. MacIver of New Canaan, Conn., and the late George A. MacIver Jr., was married in Cambridge, Mass., yesterday to John Neiva de Figueiredo, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joao T. Neiva de Figueiredo of Rio de Janeiro.
The Rev.
Preston B. Hannibal performed the Episcopal ceremony at Memorial Church at Harvard University.
Mrs.
Neiva de Figueiredo, 28 years old, graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in history at Harvard.
She is a doctoral candidate in business history at Harvard, where her husband received an M.B.A. and is a doctoral candidate in business economics.
Her father was an insurance manager at the International Business Machines Corporation in Armonk, N.Y.
Her mother is the financial manager of the First Presbyterian Church in New Canaan.


Lebanon to Hold First Elections in 20 Years


Leaving the Cities Farther Behind
LATE on a recent hazy summer afternoon in Madison, Marian Darling sat in her quiet Cape on a pristine street near Hammonasset Beach State Park and fondly recalled the late 1960's.
It was a time of great hope, said Mrs.
Darling, an athletic-looking woman with wavey white hair and blue-gray eyes.
Her family had taken part in civil rights marches in Washington, D.C., and her son had been a conscientious objector during the Vietnam War.
"But it all seems to have gotten so much worse," she murmured, as a Baroque concerto played in the background.
"I'm just so disappointed."


Kander and Ebb's 'World' on Tour
THREE years ago, a revue of Kander and Ebb songs had its beginnings in a New Jersey theater.
Then, a misconceived and overdone production diminished its real charms.
But wait: this is an out-of-town hit-or-miss story that led to an Off Broadway hit, or pretty near.
Pared to essentials and polished to a high-grade show business gloss, "And the World Goes 'Round" opened almost two years later in New York City.
The reviews were terrific.
Awards followed and the show ran almost a year; surprisingly, no longer.
More surprisingly, its investment was not recouped.
With scenic and technical embellishments added and the first article of the title dropped, "The World Goes 'Round" gave the premiere performance of a 10-month national tour at the Westport Country Playhouse on Tuesday.
The joyful news is that, here and now, the show is at its sparkling best.
And maybe this time, given an expanded design for Broadway-size theaters and an augmented orchestra, the producers will have a hit, commercial as well as artistic.
This would be only fair, for the revue has evolved from a contrived concept piece to an ideal showcase for the John Kander (music) and Fred Ebb (lyrics) mostly upbeat, mostly unfamiliar songs from mostly unacknowledged musicals: "70, Girls, 70," "The Happy Time," "The Rink," "The Act," "Kiss of the Spider Woman" (still in progress) and "Flora, the Red Menace" (their first collaboration).
And unlike its pre-New York exposure, the selections here are being interpreted more distinctively and arranged more inventively, with a greater emphasis on detail that downplays associations to the most celebrated delineator of Kander and Ebb material: Liza Minnelli, a connection originally perpetuated to the detriment of the collaborators and the performers.
Now, witness an ingenious arrangement of "Cabaret," with scatting and five-part harmony, affectingly introduced by Joel Blum -- by a
man
, it must be reinforced -- and a delightful multilingual version of "New York, New York."
The cast consists of enormously accomplished singers and dancers: Mr.
Blum and Marin Mazzie (who were replacements in the New York production), John Ruess and Shelley Dickinson.
It is to the considerable credit of Scott Ellis's spiffy and terrifically paced staging that it evokes an infectious spirit of ensemble and allows each performer the chance to make an individual impact.
And then there is Karen Ziemba.
It is to no one's discredit that Ms.
Ziemba is a singular sensation; even ensembles are entitled to their stars.
Note the name, if you are acquaintance with the musical theater's shining new stars is not up to the minute.
The only remaining member of the show's original cast, Ms.
Ziemba, aglow after her recent triumph in the New York City Opera's new production of "110 in the Shade" has a pliable, radiant capacity to be frazzled, cool, comedic and casually sexy.
Indeed, Ms.
Ziemba's very presence can be so smoldering that it seems redundant to frame her entrance for "All That Jazz" with smoke.
Mr.
Blum is lithe, wistful, funny and ardent.
Observe his tender, loving paean to Sara Lee pastries, and his endearing self-effacement and masterly hoofing in "Mr. Cellophane," a hymn to a nonentity.
Mr.
Ruess has an all-purpose voice that can float a pianissimo or resound with full-bodied rich tones.
Ms.
Mazzie and Ms.
Dickinson alternate between the torchy and the zany with attractive ease.
The choreography of Susan Stroman, which embraces an extensive dance vocabulary, from boogie-woogie to balletic, enhances and supports the songs without calling attention to itself.
That's when it is very subtle, but when it is showy, it is absolutely smashingly showy, pulling out banjos, crutches or skates, and capping the production with a sweeping pas de deux for Ms.
Ziemba and Mr.
Blum, in a wordless suite from "Cabaret."
In a funny number, the cast gives a pleasurable demonstration of the sheer pain of dancing.
At every turn, Ms.
Stroman puts a fresh spin on traditional musical comedy dancing.
Most impressively, Mr.
Ellis and Ms.
Stroman, who were the show's director and choreographer since its inception, have so refined their work that it honors the essence of the Kander-Ebb oeuvre in the purist way.
A recurring reprise of a phrase or two from the title number, to give it continuity.
Even lesser moments -- "Coffee in a Cardboard Cup," "Arthur in the Afternoon," "Sara Lee" -- are stylishly done, without the musial comedy cutesiness that once afflicted them.
Finally, near its end, one can proclaim the summer's best musical production, and a first-class show for Westport's season.
And now theatergoers can get a jump on those in Cincinnati, Los Angeles, Ohio, California, Texas -- and all stops on what should be a triumphal tour.
"The World Goes 'Round" at the Westport Country Playhouse, 25 Powers Court, just off the Post Road East (Route 1).
Box office: (203) 227-4177.
Performances through Saturday.


In Wake of Death, Belmont Shuns Talk of Race
In the summer of 1986, eight white youths armed with baseball bats beat two Puerto Rican men who had wandered into a park in the Belmont section of the Bronx.
A few days later, two Yugoslav brothers were beaten by a group of black and Hispanic youths.
Two hundred police officers were called in to patrol the neighborhood that calls itself the Bronx's Little Italy, in a season of racial tension that left deep and ugly scars.
Last week, when a 35-year-old Puerto Rican man was beaten to death by a mob of 15 white men a few blocks from the 1986 incidents, many in Belmont hastened to say the killing was only a singular, though cruel, act of violence.
Family members of the slain man, Carmelo Rivera, as well as police and community leaders, say the incident should not be painted with the same broad brush stroke of racial hatred as the events of 1986.


Luke Dommer Sr., 62; Led Group Opposed to Hunting of Animals
Luke A. Dommer Sr., who founded and led a national organization opposed to the hunting of animals for sport, died on Tuesday at the Veterans Administration Hospital in West Haven, Conn.
He was 62 years old and lived in New Fairfield.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Made in Heaven for Shoppers With Bad Taste
GIGI ELMS and Justin Vogel do bad taste very well.
Their month-old East Village store, Atomic Passion, is a highly styled celebration of screaming 1950's vulgarity.
This is the underside of 50's.
You won't find "signed" pieces here.
Good design is irrelevant.
It's a world of ballerina lamps ($85), bronze wagon-train clocks ($60), plaster Harlequin figures ($75 a pair), amoeba-shaped shadow boxes ($75 for a set of three), sparkly vinyl settees ($350 for a pair) and bad art (various prices).
Orange, turquoise and pink predominate.


More Than You Know
To the Editor:
Your articles in both Styles of The Times and The New York Times Magazine about what is fashionable and what fashion leaders wear speak to a much more complex psychological decision than the experts know.


Barbara Solomon, 73, Educator and Pioneer in Women's Studies
Barbara Miller Solomon, a Harvard educator and leader in women's studies, died Thursday at her home in Cambridge, Mass.
She was 73 years old.
She died of cancer, her family said.


Voice of the Katydid Is Heard in the Land
To the Editor:
I read with great surprise and disbelief "Silent Summer" (editorial, Aug. 16), about the strange weather that "appears to have confused katydids, which look like green grasshoppers with overgrown legs."


China and South Korea Planning To Establish Diplomatic Relations
China and South Korea signaled today that they would establish diplomatic relations in the next few days, turning their backs on decades of enmity dating to the Korean War and raising the possibility of a new pattern of economic and security relations throughout the region.
South Korea's Foreign Minister, Lee Sang Ock, will visit China on Sunday for three days of talks to discuss "the normalization of relations," officials announced today.
The visit and other signals strongly suggest that the two sides will soon establish diplomatic ties, perhaps as early as Monday.


Melissa Dunst, Mark Tender
Laurence and Diane Dunst of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Melissa Susan Dunst, to Mark Tender, the son of M. Matthew and Millicent Tender of New York.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Dunst, 25 years old, is an assistant producer for "Good Morning America" on ABC Television.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of L C F &amp; L, a New York advertising agency, where the bridegroom is an account executive.
The bride's mother owns Diane Dunst Promotion Inc., a promotions company in New York.


POSTINGS: Tara on Campus; Westchester Irish Center
A vision of Tara, the ancient seat of Irish kings, is obviously on the minds of a group of Irish investors who have signed a $14 million contract to purchase the 57-acre main campus of King's College in the Westchester village of Briarcliff Manor.
Their plan is to transform the campus into a site for Gaelic football and hurling games, as well as art and drama programs and a genealogy center.


A Tough Call: What to Reveal On Sick Banks
Few secrets are more zealously guarded than the relations between banks and their regulators.
Regulators do not talk publicly about the problems of specific banks, and even healthy banks are forbidden by law to disclose the good news in their regulatory report card.
Regulators have taken the attitude that knowledge about sick banks, like knowledge of how a sausage is made, is something the public is better off without.
They worry that labeling a bank as troubled will cause depositors to flee and insure the failure of banks that might have survived.


Corrections
A report in the Northeast Notebook column on Aug. 16 about a Wal-Mart store being built in Hinsdale, N.H., misidentified the owner of its site.
She is Deborah M. George of Los Angeles.


Aide to Indian Premier Held in Financial Scandal
Shaking the Indian Government at a time when the economy is already faltering, a billion-dollar financial scandal has enveloped an aide to Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao and led to his arrest.
The scandal and its economic and political fallout, including the resignations of a top investigator and of a Cabinet minister, have led to a further drop in investor confidence, crippling trading on India's stock exchanges.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  SEATTLE MARINERS -- Acquired Tim Leary, pitcher, and cash from the New York Yankees for Sean Twitty, outfielder.
Placed Erik Hanson, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Shane Turner, outfielder, to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
National League  PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Placed Wes Chamberlain, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to Aug. 19.
Recalled Tom Marsh, outfielder, from Scranton-Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
Football National Football League  NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Signed Gene Atkins and Brett Maxie, safeties, to two-year contracts.
Hockey National Hockey League  ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Signed Vitaly Prokhorov, left wing.
College  LSU -- Signed Sue Gunter, women's basketball coach, to a three-year contract.


Kara A. Looney, Eliot Putnam 4th
Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent J. Looney of Whitesboro, N.Y., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Kara Ann Looney, and Eliot Thwing Putnam 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Putnam Jr. of Wellesley, Mass.
Miss Looney, 27 years old, is an account representative in Boston for Marsh &amp; McLennan, the insurance company.
She graduated from Emmanuel College, and she and her fiance are candidates for M.B.A. degrees at Suffolk University.
Her father is the senior vice president of regional operations for the Utica National Insurance Group in Utica, N.Y.
Her mother, Carol A. Looney, teaches Spanish at the Waterville (N.Y.) Central School.


A Careful Approach to Controlling Pests
THE bugs are here.
The inclination is to get rid of them the quickest way possible.
But increased environmental awareness, a good thing, is making most gardeners think twice about the use of any chemical on their grounds.
More practical now appears to be a system called integrated pest management, which includes targeting particular nuisance insects.
When insect pests are getting the upper hand, and something has to be done, it must be done wisely.
One of the first rules is to identify correctly the insect to be controlled.
Then the method for its control can be selected.
Blanket spraying should be a thing of the past.


On Front Lines of Forest Fires, Prisoners Find a Calling
In steep canyon terrain, with walls of flame all around them, more than 800 California state prisoners cleared brush and timber from dusk to dawn this week and cut the fire lines that helped contain a treacherous 17,000-acre blaze here in rugged Mother Lode country.
Fighting wild land fires is dirty, dangerous and exhausting work.
But for the inmates here, and hundreds more at other fire camps up and down the hot, tinder-dry state, it beats the alternative: life inside the narrow cells and under the gun turrets of a state prison.


How G.O.P. Stirs Campaign Rumor Pot
To the Editor:
There's more to the "bimbo eruptions" story than you and Mary Matalin, the deputy Bush campaign manager who issued the press release that brought marital infidelity back into the campaign, would have us know (news article, Aug. 3).


What They're Wearing
All over New York, women are taking the new long look in stride -- often mixing new styles with clothing they already own.


Catherine Barto, C. John Meyer
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Barto Jr. of Wyckoff, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Catherine Moss Barto, to C. John Meyer, the son of Frances S. Meyer of New Port Richey, Fla., and the late Clarence J. Meyer.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Barto is an account supervisor at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Public Relations in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the president of RMB Designers Inc., an industrial engineering and design consulting company in Wyckoff.
Her mother, Norma M. Barto, who is retired, was the assistant vice president of R. C. Simpson Inc., a labor relations consulting concern in Ridgewood, N.J.


POSTINGS: For Hangar Fliers; A Museum for an Aerodrome
Pilots' shirttails still hang from the rafters of the gable-roofed building at the Bayport Aerodrome in Suffolk County, mementos of the days when it was the heart of operations at the airport, which is believed to be the last grass-strip airfield left on Long Island.
Although the structure has been closed for more than a decade, it is once again to be a center of activity, after a $4,500 restoration that is being undertaken by C. Lee Rosche, the assistant manager of nearby Long Island MacArthur Airport, with volunteer assistance.
He envisions it as both a modest museum, with airport memorabilia, and a lounge where pilots can "sit and shoot the breeze -- hangar flying, they call it."


Foreign Affairs; Bush Gets Tough On Iraq
The decision to close the skies to Iraqi aircraft below the 32d parallel makes good sense.
It protects Iraqi Shiites from Saddam Hussein's murderous ways.
It also could weaken Saddam.
His rush to invite U.N. inspectors for a firsthand look at the Shiite situation proves he understands the danger.
But check out the story behind the decision.
It shows the lengths to which President Bush will go to win re-election, and how far his foreign friends will lean to help him.
It also shows that crass political motives sometimes lead to good foreign policy.


Women Talk About What They Want
SOME time back, when my mother was in the market for her first new car, she called to say that she had been reading up on automobiles and she had been shopping around.
"I think I've found what I want," she said.
"But the best thing about it is that the salesman is a
woman
."


THE REPUBLICAN RAID ON MASSACHUSETTS
Weld may have been first in his class at prep school, read books in five languages, and so on, but he flunks street smarts.
An example is his remark about making prison "a walk through hell." He seems unaware that the majority of convicts have known violence all their lives and that the way to get their attention is not with more of the same.
Of those who earn a college degree while incarcerated, almost none return to prison.
Helping prisoners to improve their self-esteem and learn skills so they can get jobs is the only way that we will cut the endlessly escalating prison population.
ZELL DRAZ
Dover, Mass.


NEW YORK: Sixties Fantasy
Surprisingly, the flamboyant, colorful costumes of happy hippies are back on the scene.


THE REPUBLICAN RAID ON MASSACHUSETTS
How apt an image!
William Floyd Weld sits in his boat while the Commonwealth of Massachusetts sinks beneath the effects of a trickle-down economic policy and a failure to invest in its children and institutions ("Hostile Takeover: The Republican Raid on Massachusetts," by Christopher Lydon, Aug. 2).
We've seen Weld come up empty in the effort to get our public schools going again after years of budget cuts.
Since he took office, the public-transportation system has suffered; sick mental patients are being discharged on the streets; he has tried to dismantle a state health-insurance program for the working poor.


For Ferraro, Charges Buzz Just Out of Reach
On the morning after Geraldine A. Ferraro's devastating 49-state defeat as Walter F. Mondale's running mate in 1984, a reporter asked her if the scrutiny of her family finances that dogged her Vice Presidential campaign would keep her from seeking office in the future.
"Absolutely not," Ms.
Ferraro replied.
"That's all behind me now. Anything that I were to do in the future, I'm very, very careful about. I have hired good accountants, I'm hiring good lawyers and we will never again have the same mix-up as we had before. It's been done, it's been said, it's been gone over in the papers, I don't have to think about that anymore."


Mimi Lister and Sheldon Toney
MIMI LISTER, 28, and Sheldon Toney, 26, started dating six years ago when they were both students at Howard University.
Like the school year, their romance has had several long breaks.
"We split up for a year once, but we kept calling each other," Ms.
Lister said.
"In my mother's day, that was known as sweet hearting. People would break up but stay in contact by letter or phone to see if the relationship would spark up again. For us, it did."


Corrections
An article on Aug. 16 about Sayreville, N.J., referred incorrectly to the borough's library.
It was built new in 1970; it is not housed in a converted school building.


Karen Bookchin, Timothy Vislocky
Karen Bookchin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Bookchin of Pelham Manor, N.Y., was married yesterday to Timothy Vislocky, a son of Michael Vislocky and Patricia Kealy, both of Staten Island.
The Rev.
John A. Buehrens performed the Unitarian ceremony at the Rye (N.Y.) Country Club.
Ms.
Bookchin, 32 years old, is keeping her name.
A cum laude graduate of Brandeis University, she is the business manager at Pro-Media Public Relations in New York.
Her father is a professor of medicine at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
Her mother, Marilyn Bookchin, is a social worker at the Ridge Street Center in Rye Brook, N.Y.


On Sunday; White, Male, Middle-Aged And Wavering
Every Tuesday afternoon, about 100 business executives gather at the Knights of Columbus hall in this prosperous suburb.
The group is middle-aged, all white, virtually all men ("A few ladies," says Steven Salaway), with impressive resumes -- vice presidents, division managers, systems analysts.
Most are in the $70,000 to $120,000 salary range.
As a group they are not political, but individually, they tend to vote Republican.
These are the out-of-work Republicans.
It is why they meet, to share job leads.
Some, like Mr.
Salaway (bank vice president, $86,000) have been out two years.
Many Americans who voted for President Bush in 1988 are now jobless.
Unemployment is 9.8 percent in New Jersey, (a 10-year high); 9.4 in Michigan; 8.9 in California; 8.6 in Florida, all states that went for Mr.
Bush.


Moscow Nights
"Anna Karenina" the musical?
"It's a wonderful story," said the director Theodore Mann.
"It's like musicalizing the Bible." Well, if you put it that way.
For purists, Tolstoy's heroine is still the young wife to an older man in the rigid upper class of 1870's Russia, where a love affair with a dashing count is doomed.
The co-creators, Peter Kellogg (book and lyrics) and Daniel Levine (music) developed the show for two years.
With 17 songs and 90 costume changes for the cast of 15, it opens on Broadway Wednesday at Circle in the Square, where it is now in previews.


Katherine C. Bach, Steven Roy Kalin
Katherine Charlotte Bach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary I. Bach of Farnham, West Surrey, England, was married Thursday at a Municipal Registry Office in London to Steven Roy Kalin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Felix Kalin of Teaneck, N.J.
Mrs.
Kalin, 30 years old, and her husband, 28, are management consultants at McKinsey &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Durham University, and he graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
Both received M.B.A. degrees from Harvard University.


Oilers Are Up and Away, but Saints Are Sinking
It was not very long ago that whenever the Houston Oilers arrived in your town, you could count on a victory and a good time for all.
Houston still owns the National Football League's longest road losing streak, 23 games, which was finally ended in 1984.
But even through last season, the road-weary Oilers still struggled to erase lingering pessimism, within their ranks and without, on hitting the road.


The First Steps in Preventing Pests
HOUSEHOLD insect and animal pests pose obvious health and building hazards.
Getting rid of established pests is usually a job for professional exterminators, but homeowners can take the first step in any pest-control strategy by keeping pests from entering a house.
The key to combating pests is to make the house and yard unattractive by eliminating moisture, food and easy access or habitation.


Other Eyes, Other Ideas
FOR photographers who want state-of-the-art darkrooms or a few dozen extra eyes, camera clubs can offer a supportive environment to sharpen one's craft.
Deneen Grogan of Jersey City, N.J., for example, is a member of not one, but two clubs: the Camera Club of New York, 853 Broadway, at 14th Street, Union Square (212-260-7077), and the Palisades Camera Club in North Bergen, N.J. (201-861-2430).
"Each is unlike the other, and they contribute different things to my growth in photography," said Ms.
Grogan, 28 years old, a serious amateur with professional ambitions.


The First Steps in Preventing Pests
HOUSEHOLD insect and animal pests pose obvious health and building hazards.
Getting rid of established pests is usually a job for professional exterminators, but homeowners can take the first step in any pest-control strategy by keeping pests from entering a house.
The key to combating pests is to make the house and yard unattractive by eliminating moisture, food and easy access or habitation.


The American Way of War
To the Editor:
Caleb Carr's review of "A Battle From the Start" is mystifying because it really should have been on the Op-Ed page.
We do not turn to The Book Review to be lectured about whether a person's morals and ethical standards of 130 years ago stand up to the scrutiny of today's light.
Bedford Forrest was mean, violent and hateful, and had other less endearing qualities, but he was a brilliant cavalry officer who time and again defeated Union troops, usually with smaller forces.
He was not, as Mr.
Carr implies, charged with cutting the supply lines of Sherman during his march through Georgia.
But Forrest did perform the duties laid out for him with skill and extreme personal bravery.
The statement that his "military significance was negligible" defies all historical and scholarly writings since 1867 and is simply stupid.
JOHN S. MOREMEN Louisville, Ky.


WHY PARIS WORKS
If we weren't living at a time when czars and kings are finding new respectability and concepts like social responsibility are considered to be old-fashioned, I would be tempted to read Steven Greenhouse's article "Why Paris Works" (July 19) as a thinly disguised satirical piece.
I, too, love the Jardin du Luxembourg and the many other esthetic pleasures of Paris, but I think Greenhouse accepts this city's extreme gentrification too easily and ignores the human loss such elitism brings with it.
Paris and other great cities of democracies benefit enormously from a diverse population.
It's what makes them vibrant, stimulating places in which to live.
The contrasts of cultures, ideas and life styles make a city breathe.


A Thinking Man's Alternative?
To the Editor:
No one can fault Bernard Holland's judgment that esthetic evaluations should not depend on opinions about an artist's politics or group affiliations  [ "Social Causes as Weapons and Shields," Aug. 9 ] .


Women Get Into Political Football -- as the Ball
STANDING before a prime-time crowd that screamed their names in adulation, Barbara Bush and Marilyn Quayle led the Republican Party into a frenzy of family values on Wednesday night, taking turns before an audience of 23 million.
Signs bearing their names appeared among the faithful.
"Barbara for President" was one popular, if less than serious sentiment.
And cries of "Ma-ree-lyn" resounded just as loudly as any cheer ever sent up in the Houston Astrodome.
It was a galvanizing moment, the work of pros.


Reports of Falklands War Executions Spur Inquiry
Argentina and Britain are looking into reports that Argentine soldiers were summarily executed by British soldiers in the Falklands war in 1982.
The inquiries, announced this week by both countries, spring from accusations in a book written by a former British soldier who says he saw Argentine soldiers who had surrendered being pushed off a cliff and shot to death by British troops.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
125.80
125.98
136.90
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4295
1.4652
1.7480
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1928
1.1922
1.1354
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9550
1.9215
1.6775
U.S. Dollar per British PoundGold
$337.50
$335.30
$353.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


When Good Humor Joe Rings, White Plains Comes Running
IN this city, summer even with baseball in the parks, corn on the cob and backyard barbecues -- wouldn't be complete without the jingling of Joseph Villardi's Good Humor bells.
If you don't see Joe and his Good Humor truck, residents say, it must be winter.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
HOANG BREAKS THE LUCKY TEAPOT.
By Rosemary K. Breckler.
Illustrated by Adrian Frankel.
Houghton Mifflin. $13.95. (Ages 4 to 8) Little Hoang imagines there's a dragon hissing steam on the table.
His blue ball shatters the lucky teapot his family brought from Vietnam.
Hoang makes amends with care and grace.


The American Way of War
To the Editor:
Caleb Carr's review is most peculiar.
To say that American Civil War leaders hardly did "much more than persuade men to follow them into ill-advised engagements" is a startling assumption.
Sheridan's  campaign in the Valley of Virginia totally destroyed that area's ability to supply Robert E. Lee's army, and Forrest continually interrupted Federal supply lines in Tennessee.
Moreover, Helmuth von Moltke's inability to see the Civil War as anything more than "a horrifying collision of armed mobs" does not prove the writer's contention but merely shows the Prussian aristocrat's supercilious attitude toward the democratic United States.
HANS L. TREFOUSSE New York


Amanda Caplan, Craig L. Ewington
Amanda Susan Elizabeth Caplan, a daughter of Alan P. Caplan of San Francisco and Patricia S. Caplan of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday to Craig Leslie Ewington, a son of Trevor and Dulcie Ewington of Burnie, Australia.
The Rev.
Richard Faxon officiated at St.
James's Episcopal Church in Cambridge.
Mrs.
Ewington, 23 years old, was until recently a program assistant with Management Sciences for Health, an international public health organization in Newton, Mass.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College and will enroll as a doctoral candidate in Slavic languages and literature at the University of Chicago.
Her father is a lawyer in San Francisco.
Her mother is a consultant on alcohol- and drug-abuse treatment at Heritage Hospital in Somerville, Mass.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Denison Andrews of Cambridge and Deborah Cannovino of San Francisco.


Hollywood Audition Rites . . . And Wrongs
Imagine a job interview in which your prospective boss greets you from the bathtub, offering you the only seat in the room.
Imagine handing over your resume, only to be asked to whinny like a horse and romp around.
Or to writhe suggestively while your potential employer rates your technique.
The man in the bathtub was a 23-year-old Orson Welles, auditioning would-be Shakespeareans.
Women romped like a horse for Forrest Murray, executive producer of the recent thriller "Love Crimes." And Brian De Palma liked Melanie Griffith's technique so much that he gave her her first big film role, in the 1984 thriller "Body Double."


Seeing Foreign Policy In a Rear-View Mirror
THE striking thing about the discussion of foreign policy so far in this election season is the gap between the weighty issues at stake and the content of the debate.
It would be hard to recall a campaign in which so little has been said about so much by so many.
True, at last month's Democratic convention in New York, where Gov.
Bill Clinton devoted 141 words to foreign policy in his acceptance speech, Democrats debated foreign policy in the halls.
But it was not the traditional arguments between realists and idealists, interventionists and isolationists.
The debate almost seemed to be between people who believe that the country should have a foreign policy and people who believe that it should not -- that after the cold war, the focus had to be at home because domestic issues were so pressing.
At the Republican convention last week foreign policy figured in almost every speech, but not because there was any serious discussion of the issues.


New York City Plans to Regulate Companies That Operate Pay Phones


Nina Chapin, P. N. de Rochefort
Nancy Higgins Chapin, a daughter of Nancy N. Oliver of Rochester, Vt., and Aldus H. Chapin of Washington, was married yesterday to Pierre Nicolas de Rochefort, a son of the Count and Countess de Rochefort of New York.
The Rev.
John Pinder, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the Protestant ceremony at the Federated Church in Rochester.
Mrs. de Rochefort, 33 years old, is known as Nina.
She is the international relief services associate for Africa at the American NationalRed Cross in Washington.
She graduated from Clark University.
Her father is the president of the United Arts Organization of Greater Washington, which raises money for the arts.


France: Felicitous Rhymes, And Local Roots
All non-American rap may be derivative, given the form's unshakable identification with black urban youth in the United States.
Yet French rap comes by its own roots honorably, with real anger emanating from depressed minority neighborhoods and direct traditions of spoken music in the West African griots and North African muezzins of its former colonies.
If hearing rap in French strikes some Americans as inherently fancified, the language's felicitous rhymes make for some dazzling wordplay.
French rap enjoys earnest support from the Socialist Government of President Francois Mitterrand, mostly filtered through community centers.
Record labels have signed many French groups, and radio and television offer them (and their American inspirations) widespread exposure.


Crazy for Country Music
TWO guys are running for President.
One lost his father before he was born, was raised by an alcoholic, abusive stepfather, and has a gambling mother who has been married five times, to four men.
He's had to own up to some of the most publicized marital troubles of modern times, and has a brother who he helped land hard time for a coke rap.


2 Groups Plan Protest Against Haitian Policy
Two groups that deal with issues of importance to many blacks -- the N.A.A.C.P. and the policy group TransAfrica, are calling for a campaign of civil disobedience in September to protest what they view as the Bush Administration's "immoral" policy on Haitian refugees.
In letters sent to organizations and individuals around the country, the two groups are asking for volunteers to come to the White House on Sept. 9.


Data Bank/August 23, 1992


Corrections
A picture caption on Aug. 9 about bridge repairs in the Scarsdale area misidentified the bridge.
It was on Mamaroneck Road, not Wilmot Road.


Close to Home
CROSSED OVER
A Murder, a Memoir. By Beverly Lowry. 245 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


Susan M. O'Connell, Peter Carl Herdic
Susan Marie O'Connell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. O'Connell of Haworth, N.J., was married yesterday in New York to Peter Carl Herdic, the son of Jessie Herdic of Cape May, N.J., and the late Major Carl W. Herdic.
The Rev.
Joseph A. O'Hare, the president of Fordham University, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Blessed Sacrament.
Mrs.
Herdic, 28 years old, and her husband, 29, are graduates of Catholic University, from which he also received a master's degree in engineering.
He is a research engineer at the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington.


Michelle Ho and Eliot Kang
Michelle Mee-ae Ho, a daughter of Kihyon and Heang Ho of Glen Cove, L.I., was married yesterday to Choo Soon Eliot Kang, the son of Do Myung Kang of Lakewood, N.J., and the late Ho Ryun Kang.
The Rev.
Shepard A. Parsons performed the Congregational ceremony at the First Church of Christ in New Haven.
Miss Ho, who is 27 years old and is keeping her name, is a client service specialist in Philadelphia for Towers Perrin, an employee-benefits consulting concern.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the president of the Multi Group, a real-estate development company in Flushing, Queens.


Lawmakers Provide Plans on Constitutional Change to Keep Canada Unified
Political leaders have come up with a new package of constitutional changes intended to preserve Canada's unity, including a stronger Senate, shifts in authority from federal to provincial jurisdiction and eventual self-government by indigenous peoples.
"We have gained a country," said Bob Rae, Premier of Ontario.
He was among the 10 provincial premiers, territorial leaders and representatives of Indian and Eskimo groups who met with Prime Minister Brian Mulroney for most of this week in a do-or-die effort to rewrite the Constitution.


The Ups and Downs That Pace Mystic
THE Mystic Clipper, carrying passengers on a three-day cruise, headed down the Mystic River toward the Mystic drawbridge.
The bridge operator, Nick DiStasio, raised the bridge and announced that the pancakes were coming.
Pancakes?
"They toss them up like Frisbees," he said.
Sure enough, as the two-masted Clipper passed by Mr.
DiStasio's second-story cubicle that overlooks the bridge and the river, the crew hurled pancakes.
The passengers cheered; Mr.
DiStasio ducked.
He noted, however, that his fellow operator Bruce Sullivan likes to catch the pancakes.
"That's why we have that," he said, pointing to a net hanging on the wall.


Cultural Tour By Tibet House
A 21-day tour to Tibet is being sponsored by Tibet House, a New York-based organization dedicated to preserving the country's cultural heritage, from Oct. 17.
The tour will be led by Dr.
Heather Stoddard, director of the Tibetan Studies Center at the Institute of Oriental Languages at the Sorbonne University, Paris, who has traveled extensively there and speaks fluent Tibetan.
Visits to temples and monasteries are scheduled during the trip, which ends with a flight to Nepal and two nights in Katmandu.
The price of $5,600 includes air fare from New York, accommodations, all meals in Tibet, sightseeing and the services of a Tibetan guide, and a $600 contribution to Tibet House, which is tax-deductible to the extent allowed by law.
Information: Tibet House, 241 East 32d Street, New York, N.Y. 10016; (212) 213-5592.
The Jewish Museum in New York is sponsoring a seven-day tour to New Mexico that will explore the state's art, archeology and history and include lectures and visits focusing on Jewish settlement in the Southwest.
Speakers and guides for the tour, which goes to Santa Fe, Taos and Los Alamos, will include Dr.
Henry Tobias, author of "History of the Jews in New Mexico," and Dr.
Stanley Hordes, former state historian.
Art galleries and museums and the Bandelier National Monument, site of ruins of Pueblo Indian villages in cliffs, are on the program, and there will be a meeting with the Jewish community of Santa Fe at its sole synagogue.


Choruses Are Raising New Voices
THOUGH the performance of Dvorak's "Stabat Mater" is three months away, Tuesday is the registration deadline for new members of the Danbury Concert Chorus.
Some openings remain in all voices and rehearsals are on Tuesday evenings from 7:30 to 9:30 under the direction of Charles Matz.
Details are available by calling the Danbury Music Center at 748-1716.
Many other avocational choirs around the state have sent out similar audition calls, among them the New Haven and Fairfield County Chorales, and the Greenwich Choral Society.
The New Haven group, under Paul Mueller, will be working toward a Nov. 7 evening of opera excerpts in cooperation with soloists from Yale University's opera program; try-outs are scheduled for Sept. 11 and 12, with interested singers invited to call 248-7138 or 248-7344.


Q and A
France's Wineries
Q.
I will be in Chateauneuf-du-Pape, France, next month and would like to visit a
winery for a tasting.
Where can I find information about which vineyards are open to the public
? Are reservations required? -- Elizabeth Greathouse, Seattle


Wall Street; Tap Investment Advisers to Pay Their Police?
The folks who call themselves investment advisers could use lots more policing, say members of the House Energy and Commerce Committee.
And a dandy way to subsidize added regulation would be to hit the advisers up for bigger fees.
This month, the committee approved a bill that would demand more disclosure from advisers registering with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and tax them more heavily for the privilege of registration.
At the moment, advisers pay only a one-time, $150 fee, but the committee would like to see more, to be passed on to the S.E.C. to pay for a bigger inspection staff.





PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 23, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
19
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
2
30
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
6
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
4
8
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
5
7
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
6
10
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
7
30
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
8
2
AGAINST THE WIND, by J. F. Freedman. (Signet, $5.99.) A lawyer undertakes to defend a gang of bikers against a ruthless district attorney.
9
5
THE DUCHESS, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) An American woman, in Scotland to marry a duke, finds a mysterious man more attractive.
10
14
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
11
3
A WHOLE NEW LIGHT, by Sandra Brown. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman is invited to Acapulco by the business partner of her late husband.
12
2
BEACHES II, by Iris Rainer Dart. (Warner, $5.99.) The struggles of a superstar to raise a child amid the temptations of Hollywood; published last year in hard cover under the title "I'll Be There."
13
2
THE WILD ROSE, by Doris Mortman. (Bantam, $5.99.) The professional and romantic life of a woman pianist in Budapest and New York.
14
23
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
15
4
THE PIRANHAS, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket, $5.99.) A young man discovers the ways of Hollywood, Wall Street and organized crime.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
18
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
58
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
4
66
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
5
9
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
6
459
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
7
14
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
8
14
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series, as recollected by the actor who played Greg.
9
20
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by a producer.
10 *
130
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
54
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
102
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
83
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
18
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
5
22
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Grateful Faces Turn to the Sun as Hamptons Summer Wanes
Steven Goldstein set his alarm for 5:50 A.M. today, to allow plenty of time to catch the 7 A.M. bus from Manhattan to the beach.
Neither he nor his friend, Robin Timothy, had got three hours' sleep, but there was not a moment to lose.
The sun was shining and they could always doze on the sand when they arrived at 7:45.
After a season of overcast and rainy weekends, many New York City dwellers who paid thousands of dollars to share summer houses in the Hamptons seemed to feel similarly compelled to make up for lost time by squeezing all the pleasures of summer into the clear, dry one that was forecast.
By 9 A.M. it was 68 degrees and sunny and the parking lot at Cooper's Beach was nearly full.
Making the Most of It
Mr.
Timothy, a 28-year-old investment banker, proclaimed the beach a favorite spot for the self-confident crowd with no cellular phones and nothing to prove.
"There have been so few nice weekends we wanted to make the most of it," he said.
He brought No. 2 sunblock, a bacon-and-egg sandwich for breakfast and reading material that ranged from Sports Illustrated to The Economist.


After 2,935.8 Miles, Warady Is First to Finish Line
Looking every bit as fresh as someone who had just run 2,935.8 miles in 64 eight-hour days, 35-year-old David Warady breezed into Central Park yesterday morning to claim victory in the first Tour de Tired, or, to use its offical name, the Runner's World Trans America Footrace.
Warady, one of 28 ultramarathoners who left Huntington Beach, Calif., just south of Los Angeles, on June 20, was one of 13 survivors who made it to the finish line at Columbus Circle after traversing 13 states in stages ranging from 30 to 60 miles, in conditions that included temperatures of 120 degrees and mountainous climbs at 12,000 feet.


NASA Chief Faces a Huge Foe in Cost Cutting
NASA's new administrator, lean, mean and ready do things differently, may have met his match as he wrestles with plans he inherited for a monster project that is overweight, over budget and overly political in this election year.
The would-be orbiting outpost for astronauts, known as space station Freedom, could easily foil efforts at slenderizing.
The cold war's end and a lingering recession have produced a major slump in the aerospace industry that no politician wants to deepen right now with a new round of layoffs.
"He has made it very clear from the beginning that he's going to trim the fat out of NASA," said Jerry Grey, head of science and technology policy for the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, an engineering society based in Washington.
"But he's not going to make any major changes till after the election."


Faith Ann Getz, Victor Eli Rousso
Faith Ann Getz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore P. Getz of Glen Cove, L.I., was married last evening to Victor Eli Rousso, the son of Natalie Rousso of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Eli V. Rousso.
Rabbi Laurence Kotok performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Rousso, 27 years old, is a lawyer in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University and New York Law School.
Her father is the president of Meg Electronic Sales Inc., a manufacturers' representative in Great Neck.
Her mother, Marcia Getz, is a legal secretary in Great Neck.


Experts Fret Over Reach of China's Air Force
The Chinese Air Force has obtained the technology to refuel its jet fighters in midair, an ability that will allow it to extend its power beyond China's borders and is likely to alarm neighboring countries, diplomats and military experts say.
It will probably take several years of rigorous preparation and training before the air force can use its new technology effectively, the experts say.
But some add that by the end of the 1990's, in-flight refueling could significantly enhance the armed forces' clout.


TRAVEL ADVISORY;
Passengers on departing flights from Kennedy, La Guardia and Newark international airports will pay $3 more for their tickets from Oct. 1.
The Federal Aviation Administration has authorized the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates the airports, to collect a $3-per-passenger tax on all departing flights, with the proceeds dedicated to planning and design work on airport improvements.
The Port Authority said it has been authorized to collect the tax during a two-year period and may seek authorization to extend the period as construction begins on its airport projects.


But Is She A Womanist?
To the Editor:
I am sorry to disappoint Georgette Mosbacher, but she is not the creator of the term "womanist"  [ Egos &amp; Ids, July 19 ] .
Moreover, I doubt that her Republican colleagues and many of her potential and current customers will be pleased that she has joined Alice Walker in defining herself as a womanist.


Bonnie Jo Wurtzburger, Seth A. Harris
Bonnie Jo Wurtzburger, the daughter of Harriet H. Grube of Chicago and Ronald J. Wurtzburger of New York, was married in New York last evening to Seth Alan Harris, the son of Dara L. Levbarg of New York and the late Warren J. Hirschberg.
Rabbi Barri Green officiated at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Harris, 26 years old, is a photographer in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the president of Peerless Clothing International in New York, a men's clothing company with headquarters in Montreal.
Her stepfather, Edward F. Grube of Chicago, is a hospital management consultant.
Her stepmother, Paula Wurtzburger, is a partner in Woolco Foods, a food distribution company in New York.


Long Is Luxurious
Some like it short, but even more like it lengthier.
Long hair -- whether sleek or tousled -- extends the new slim silhouette.


Can Images of Bosnia's Victims Change the World?
When television brings us to scenes of killing and dying, it can make us survivors by proxy.
Actual survivors of death encounters take on a self-imposed responsibility to bear witness to what they have seen and felt as a way of insisting that the world stop the killing and prevent its recurrence.
Survivors by proxy are now capable of doing the same.
The recent images from Bosnia that we have seen on television and in newspapers and magazines have affected us at a number of levels involving both conscience and memory.
With cruelty and killing, certain pictures take hold in our minds in ways that condense and symbolize all of the pain and suffering.
The source of these indelible images can be either the actual experience of survivors or a still photograph or film.
Such images frequently involve children as the most vulnerable and unacceptable of victims, but may also include helpless, victimized adults.
Some of these images become general public property in representing a pathos accompanying 20th-century evil -- the naked Vietnamese girl running down a road with her clothes burning, the tiny Jewish boy with his hands in the air at Nazi gunpoint.


Maine, a Source of Inspiration
PINE trees, rocks, the unbelievably cold water around Mount Desert Island, lobster, L. L. Bean mail order: mention the State of Maine, and chances are that these images come to mind.
Art, too.
Maine is not hospitable landscape, nor is it especially majestic.
Yet the artists drawn to it are legion -- Winslow Homer, Marsden Hartley, Edward Hopper, John Marin, George Bellows are but a few of the names -- and their accomplishments have not discouraged later generations from trying their hands.


The Poet and the Ponderer
Four very famous pianists have died in the not too distant past.
For many in the United States, two of them -- Vladimir Horowitz, who passed away in 1989, and Rudolf Serkin, who died last year -- epitomized the two major keyboard types.
Horowitz was the high-strung Russian virtuoso whose extreme personality and legendary technique legitimated Romantic interpretive license.
Serkin was the ascetic and bespectacled Austrian whose literalism affirmed integrity and authenticity.
Claudio Arrau and Wilhelm Kempff, both of whom also died in 1991 -- and both of whose many remarkable recordings are currently being reissued on CD by Philips, EMI and Deutsche Grammophon -- never enjoyed phenomenal American reclame.
They, too, were pianistic antipodes -- albeit less obvious ones than Horowitz and Serkin.
For that matter, their very appeal was less obvious, at least on this side of the Atlantic.


Lauren E. Lee, Paul M. Stone
Lauren Elizabeth Lee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Lee Jr. of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Paul Martin Stone, a son of John T. Stone of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Judith Krumme performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
Ms.
Lee, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and is a Ph.D. candidate in medieval literature at Cornell University, where next month she will become an instructor in Italian literature and language.
Her father is the president of the Tosco Corporation, a petroleum refiner, in Stamford, Conn., where he is also the chairman of the Seminole Corporation, a fertilizer producer.
Her mother, Gayle K. Lee, is a registered nurse and a patient representative at Westchester Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y.


Introduction to Careers at a Fresh Air Camp
The journalism instructor stood before the group of Fresh Air Fund campers and asked: "When do newspapers use political cartoons?"
When they want to make a point with humor, came the answer.


There Will Be No Sequel to 'Swan Lake'
Every balletgoer loves the Royal Danish Ballet for its performances of masterpieces by the 19th-century choreographer August Bournonville.
The New York City Ballet is a treasure house of choreography by George Balanchine.
London's Royal Ballet has its own gems by Frederick Ashton.
The Kirov Ballet is renowned for its refined classicism.
Such achievements inspire admiration.
No wonder, then, that dancegoers of a purist bent have been known to declare, "The Danes should dance nothing but Bournonville." Some members of the City Ballet and Royal Ballet audiences look askance whenever those companies stray from Balanchine or Ashton.
Doubts have also been voiced about the wisdom of the Kirov staging Western ballets.
What is at the root of all this is the fear that by producing diverse works, a company may lose the qualities that have made it special.


Fresh Figs, From Starters to Finishers
LUSH, fresh figs add a new look and flavor to many dishes.
Once a delicacy rarely seen in produce markets, figs are now sold in late summer in stores carrying fine produce and even in some supermarkets.
Of the figs grown in California two kinds are generally available.
The black mission variety is small, the sharply pointed oval fruit with blackish to purple skin enclosing brick-color flesh studded with tiny seeds.
Calmyrna figs are larger and rounder, with a more flattened shape and bright green to chartreuse skin.
The flesh is brownish.


The Executive Life; In Dead of Summer, Dreams of Ski Heaven
It was the hottest week of the year -- over 90 degrees -- in Silicon Valley, but for the daredevil skiing executive, now is the time to make reservations for this winter's excursion.
Not for this group the crowded winter resorts of Lake Tahoe or Aspen.
Real skiing occurs in places that only helicopters can reach, where runs are measured in miles, avalanches lurk around every bend, and in a week of skiing one might not cross a single ski track.


A Lady Vanishes


Westminster Abbey, 7 Centuries New
WITH its great west front surrounded by a latticework of scaffolding for much of the past few years, like the nearby tower of the Palace of Westminster looming over the House of Lords, Westminster Abbey has long looked like a building that was still under construction, though it's seven centuries old.
But with a 20-year restoration of the external stone of the entire vast structure finally beginning to draw to a close, the scaffolding has come down, revealing an astonishing white facade whose every detail stands out brilliantly, after years of crumbling away under acid rain and black 19th-century soot.
Like Notre Dame in Paris, the abbey, though in the English capital, is one of the world's great French Gothic buildings.
Its patron, Henry III, and his master mason, Henry de Reyns, were clearly inspired by the buildings at Paris and Rheims when they designed the replacement of the existing Romanesque abbey in the mid-13th century.
The architects prized the soaring vaults and clean lines of the French models of the era, though the purity has been cluttered up inside by the many monuments to English history that tourists come to see today.


Networking; A New Hub Lets More LAN's Join the Conversation
Making a company's disparate computer networks work together is not easy.
In many large companies, there is a mainframe network surrounded by a proliferation of local area networks with a hodge-podge of operating systems and wiring schemes.
Providing simultaneous translation at the Tower of Babel was a minor matter compared with getting a network with S.N.A. (System Network Architecture -- I.B.M.'s mainframe wiring scheme) to talk to one with Ethernet wiring to talk to one with Token Ring or, Noah forbid, to an Appletalk network.
The job is made somewhat simpler through microprocessor technology known as an intelligent hub, which translates the signals from one kind of network into ones understandable by another.
Hubs connect LAN's so that users on a network with one wiring scheme can get data or use peripherals from one with another scheme.


American Electric Power: A Help . . .
To the Editor:
"A Coal-Burning Utility That's Trying to Paint Itself Green," (July 26) leaves the impression that the American Electric Power Corporation's donation of reclaimed land to the International Center for the Preservation of Wild Animals (now known as the Wilds) was a thinly disguised public relations exercise.
On the contrary.
The loss of jobs in southeastern Ohio resulting from coal-mining cutbacks is a major concern and A.E.P.'s gift ultimately will result in the creation of employment opportunities for the region.


'Thunder' Rumbles In Travers
Thunder Rumble, who delivered a rousing upset three weeks ago when he won the Jim Dandy Stakes at odds of 25-1, delivered just as rousing an encore today when he won the $1 million Travers Stakes by four and a half lengths and shot to the head of the class of 3-year-old colts.
He not only outran Devil His Due and Dance Floor, but all three of them outran the speed demons in the field of 10: Dixie Brass, who led into the homestretch but faded to finish fourth; Furiously, who won his first three races by 31 lengths but ran sixth in the big one, and Alydeed, the Canadian superstar and the favorite today, who stalked the leader for one mile but retreated in the stretch and finished eighth.


Mutual Funds; Glitter, but Little Gold, in Regionals
While most mutual fund managers scour the country, and often the world, for investment opportunities, a handful prefer stocks from their own backyard.
For the most part, their loyalty hasn't paid off.
With a few exceptions, the $820 million group of regional equity funds, which invest chiefly in stocks of companies based in one area, have mediocre performance records, reflecting at least in part the booms and busts of regional American economies.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about new medical technology and what insurers are willing to pay for it inaccurately described a billing practice at Tufts University.
While other hospitals have found ways to be partly reimbursed for cardiovascular ultrasound, the main teaching hospital at Tufts, New England Medical Center, says it gets no such reimbursement.


Outrun by Demons
THE MURDERER
By Roy Heath. 190 pp. New York: Persea Books. $19.95.


On the Beach


Small Farms Cultivate Way of Life, and Profit
The family farm, that white clapboard idyll where Mom cooks in a ruffled apron and Pop works in bib overalls, has for decades been lodged more firmly in the American heart than in the nation's countryside.
In the last 30 years the number of farms in the United States has dropped by half, to just over two million.
But as the number of traditional farms dwindles, a new type of farm -- and a new type of farmer -- is sprouting up across America: modest plots tended by savvy, part-time farmers who plow, weed and water as much to cultivate a way of living as to grow profitable crops.


Tender Trap
IN THE COLONNADE outside the Oval Office, Barbara Walters tests the white wrought-iron bench where she will sit to question the President of the United States.
The bench is not the most comfortable place to sit.
But the Rose Garden is bathed in sunshine this summer morning, and Dorrance Smith, the assistant to the President for media affairs, thinks the interview will look sensational against that backdrop.


150 Layoffs Averted in Nassau
The threatened layoff of 150 Nassau County road workers was avoided at the last minute late Friday when enough cash was found for another six work days.
But a bitter dispute between Democratic and Republican officials over short-term borrowing to meet the rest of the county's payroll in coming weeks remained unresolved.
County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta announced on Wednesday that the layoffs would begin on Friday unless the three Democrats on the six-member Board of Supervisors joined the three Republican members and agreed to borrow at least $17 million.
The cash is needed to meet the payroll until Nov. 1, when the county charter permits a transfer of any surplus funds from one department to another.


King Solomon's Nines
Sporting a ponytail, a protective face mask and a pocket whisk broom, David Leichman interrupted his umpiring duties to survey the baseball field of his dreams, a swatch of cool green in the sunbaked, furrowed soil surrounding this collective farming community.
"This is a legacy for our children," he said.


'Pearls' at a Price
Skirts that cling, coats that swing, jungle prints and drop-dead red.
Here's all of fall, accessible, adaptable, affordable


No Professionals Need Apply
To the Sports Editor:
Congratulations on "Mission Accomplished, for Better or Worse," (The Times, Aug. 9) about our extraterrestrial basketball Olympians.


King Protests Too Much
To the Sports Editor:
Stephen King's jeremiad about the Dream Team no doubt struck a sympathetic chord in many observers.
But in drawing a parallel with the American military operations in Kuwait, Grenada and Panama, and with the socioeconomic policies of the Reagan-Bush era, King seems to have become, as a famous British Prime Minister said of a parliamentary opponent, "inebriated with the exuberance of his verbosity."  RAY PERRY Warrington, Pa.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE CHANGING ATMOSPHERE: A Global Challenge, by John Firor. (Yale University, $8.) This book on the environment is strong medicine -- "about as agreeable as a dose of ipecac," our reviewer, Malcolm W. Browne, said in 1990.
The author points out that we must be ready either to change our habits or invent substitutes for all that is being destroyed.
"Mr. Firor's book is persuasive because it is based more on evenhanded analysis than on advocacy," Mr.
Browne noted.
THE ADAPTABLE MAN, by Janet Frame. (Braziller, $9.95.) In this novel, first published 27 years ago, the New Zealand author Janet Frame explores the ways human beings have tried to adapt to the 20th century.
One of her characters, Alwyn Maude, has committed an act that seems horrifyingly but quintessentially modern: a senseless murder.
In 1965 our reviewer, Wilfrid Sheed, called the book "an original novel, comic, intense, stylish, from one of the most interesting writers around." Braziller is also reissuing DAUGHTER BUFFALO ($8.95), the author's only novel set in New York City and one whose characters, not coincidentally, are all in love with death.
"She makes morbidity a spectacle, a brilliant, mutilating feast," Josephine Hendin said here in 1972.


AUGUST 16-22: Pressure on F.D.I.C.; A Regulator's Death Sidetracks Banking Reforms
The death last week of William Taylor, one of the country's top banking officials, left a large void in a regulatory plan already low on senior talent and facing a heavy schedule of rule making.
Mr.
Taylor, the widely respected chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, died on Thursday at age 53 from complications that arose after colon surgery a week earlier.


Reseeding Time
Reseed bare patches of the lawn or think about a complete renovation.
If opting for the latter, plant a low-maintenance grass that is drought-tolerant, disease-resistant and does not need a lot of fertilizer.
Your local cooperative extension agent should know which varieties are best for your area.
Better yet, abolish the lawn altogether.
Plant more ground covers, shrubs and berry bushes for the birds.
It is still not too late to plant fall greens and lettuce, especially if you have an old red wagon (as a letterto Fine Gardening magazine suggests).
Drill holes in the bottom, fill with a loamy soil and plant seeds in one corner.
Transplant in rows when seedlings are an inch high, and plant more seeds in another corner for a continuous supply.
When the weather gets cold, roll the wagon onto a sunny porch or to another protected area.


Lorraine A. Voles, Daniel E. Smith
Lorraine Ann Voles, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. Voles of Murrells Inlet, S.C., was married yesterday in Buffalo Center, Iowa, to Daniel Edward Smith, a son of Mary Ruth Smith of Buffalo Center and the late Raymond A. Smith.
The Rev.
Leo Riley officiated at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church.


China: At the Boundaries Of the Permissible
During the Maoist period, music in China was mostly limited to propaganda songs like "Socialism Is Good" and "Nightsoil Collectors Coming Down the Mountain." Popular music arrived in a big way in the 1980's, and the scene has been dominated by love songs, which are officially approved of, and rock and heavy-metal bands that operate at the boundaries of what is permissible.
Rap made its debut in 1985 when the British group Wham was allowed to give a concert in Beijing.
Wham performed one rap number in its concert and on a cassette that was widely copied in China at the time.
So far, rap has left so little impression that there isn't even a term for it in Chinese.
Music buffs use the English word, but no one agrees on which Chinese characters should be used to write it.


Raiders Juggling, Testing Passers
Until today, Los Angeles Raiders Coach Art Shell had been able to avoid the subject deftly.
But now, two weeks before the start of the regular season, he just might have a quarterback controversy on his hands.
Todd Marinovich, welcomed into the game by cheers after starter Jay Schroeder was booed during the first half, led the Raiders to two second-half touchdowns, but the Washington Redskins won the exhibition game, 27-23, at the Los Angeles Coliseum.


Law for Disabled
To the Editor:
Your "New Federal Law For the Disabled Slow to Take Hold" on July 12 does a lot to underscore the problem of accessibility for individuals with disabilities.
The accessibility standard referred to in the article is the Americans With Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG).
There are over 44 million Americans with disabilities covered by the act.


Miss Safenowitz, Jonathan Ambos
Sherry Alison Safenowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Aaron Safenowitz of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to Jonathan Josef Ambos, the son of Ronda Ambos of Great Neck and the late Leonard Ambos.
Rabbi Jerome K. Davidson officiated at Temple Beth-El in Great Neck.


House Revolutionary
A ROOM FULL OF THREE DOZEN CLEAN-CUT COLLEGE Juniors who are spending their summer as volunteers at the Republican National Committee might seem like an unlikely place to recruit revolutionaries.
Not to Newt Gingrich.
The House Republican whip rushed over to the Capitol Hill Club, a Republican watering hole, one afternoon last month between critical meetings on enterprise zone bills and speeches assailing Democrats.
In a 20-minute break from his war on Congress, he told them the welfare state was strangling their dreams.
"We will not make it through your lifetime without radical change," he said.
"You're either going to force the changes, or your generation is going to suffer a long, steady decline in the quality of life.


Act Soon for Peace, Israelis Tell Arabs
As they prepare for a new, and they hope invigorated, round of Middle East peace talks in Washington, Israeli leaders say they are serious about wanting to reach quick agreements, especially on a form of self-government for Palestinians in the occupied territories.
But the Israelis also say the Palestinians and the Arab countries must mean business, too, and they warn that the new Labor-led Government, which took office in mid-July, offers an opportunity for peace that will not last forever.


China Dissident Absent After Seeing the Police
The authorities appear to have detained a prominent Chinese dissident, Hou Xiaotian, who went to police headquarters this week to protest the treatment of her husband in prison.
Ms.
Hou, 29 years old, went to the headquarters on Thursday with her husband's younger brother for meetings with officials.
The meetings were conducted separately, and afterward the younger brother was allowed to go but Ms.
Hou did not re-emerge.


Washington Finds Place Among Traditional Powers
Tradition is where you find it.
But way up here?
Amid the lush trees and lakes and far, far away from bastions like South Bend, Ind., and State College, Pa.?
Perhaps.
Given its success last season -- and built on the seasons that preceded it -- it might be that the University of Washington has finally found a place among college football's traditional powers.


Yanks Send Hillegas And Leary Packing
The Yankees cleansed their pitching staff of two ineffective arms yesterday and made a pair of transactions that seemed long overdue when they sent Tim Leary and cash to the Seattle Mariners for a minor league outfielder and gave Shawn Hillegas his unconditional release.
It appeared inevitable that both pitchers would be packing their luggage soon because the Yankees have been trying to trade Leary since last summer and they contemplated releasing him throughout this season.
When the opportunity arose to trade Leary to the pitching-poor Mariners for a Class A outfielder named Sean Twitty, the Yankees leaped at the chance.


A Series' Longtime Patron
To the Editor:
A short article accompanying the interview with Jean Marsh and Eileen Atkins about their new television series "House of Eliott" referred to "Upstairs, Downstairs" and its success story  [ "165 Eaton Place, Now and Forever," July 12 ] .
Nowhere, however, was there mention of the fact that Mobil, sole underwriter of "Masterpiece Theater" since its inception more than 20 years ago, had to fight to put "Upstairs, Downstairs" on the air, because neither the commercial networks nor WGBH, the Boston public-TV station, wanted it.
FRANK GOODMAN New York The writer is the publicist for "Masterpiece Theater."


Business Diary/August 16-21
THE ECONOMY Let the People Pay the Debt


Madonna: Poor Comparison
To the Editor:
Francine Prose's article illustrates precisely why equating Madonna with Monroe is akin to likening articifically processed food to fresh produce: derivative, canned packaging is devoid of both the substance and flavor of the genuine article.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; CLINTON BORROWS TOUGH G.O.P. TACTIC
Striving to hold his ground in what polls show is a tightening race for President, Gov.
Bill Clinton is relying on a tactic that the Republicans used in their convention and in the campaign: blending attacks on the opponent with softer themes and images intended to make the candidate personally attractive.
For example, on Friday, Mr.
Clinton came close to calling President Bush a liar in the morning, then embarked on a telegenically warm and fuzzy bus tour with his running mate, Senator Al Gore, and their wives that afternoon.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush, in Georgia, Questions Clinton's Vision of the Family
In a small Southern town that looked like a set for Andy Griffith's Mayberry, President Bush raised doubts today about the Democrats' vision of family, and his surrogate cited Woody Allen as symbolizing the party's values.
As many as 20,000 exuberant supporters packed the center of town and remained buoyant through a driving rain as Mr.
Bush said he understood "the American way" and warned that Mr.
Clinton was in league with a "gridlocked Congress" that would neglect the crowd's interests.


The Executive Computer; Better Color Printers, Lower Prices, but Still a Niche Market
Desktop computers and graphics software make it easy to enliven reports and business presentations with color -- until it comes time to send the report to the printer.
On the computer screen, charts can be color-coded for easy analysis, colorful artwork can be scanned into a document for viewing, and the red ink on a budget report can be truly red.


Noelle F. Shepard, Curtin Winsor 3d
Noelle French Shepard, the daughter of Dr.
Alfred R. Shepard of Water Mill, L.I., and Mrs.
Leonard A. Schulman of Vero Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Curtin Winsor 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Winsor Jr. of Washington.
The Rev.
Peter Larsen performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Winsor graduated and received a master's degree in linguistics from Georgetown University, where she is a candidate for a Ph.D.
She is a saleswoman for Cathy Gill Real Estate in Washington.
Her father is a dentist in Water Mill.


The American Way of War
To the Editor:
What and who is Caleb Carr?
For certain he is an ideologue who has swallowed whole all the revisionist bilge of the past 20 years and is spewing it forth like so much vomit.
He arrogantly dismisses the reasoned works of award-winning Civil War historians by branding them as "addicts." He alone is competent to judge the merits of Sheridan and Forrest, who are considered by most competent scholars to have been accomplished cavalry leaders.
ERNEST G. THEROUX Brooklyn


Jets Draft Pick Takes Long Way to Camp
For the last 10 years, Suipeli Malamala has been on a wild adventure, an escape from what many would consider paradise but he remembers as primitive.
The trip has taken him halfway around the world: from his original home in Tonga, a tiny island nation in the southwest Pacific, to Hawaii, to Seattle and finally to Long Island.
Along the way, he has learned to speak English and discovered a sport that truly fits his expanding physique, which has now reached 6 feet 5 inches and 315 pounds.


Abigail A. Horan, John D. Moore
Abigail Atwater Horan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Horan of New York, was married yesterday in Washington, Conn., to John Donelson Moore, the son of Martha B. Moore of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Edward S. Moore 3d.
The Rev.
Timothy Cogan performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Moore, 28 years old, was until recently an admissions officer at the University of the Arts in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Fox &amp; Horan.
Her mother, Damaris S. Horan, is the executive director of the Royal Oak Foundation in New York, the American affiliate of the National Trust, the group that preserves stately homes and gardens in Britain.
Mr.
Moore, also 28, is a member of the United States Olympic rowing team.
Until recently, he taught Latin at Upland Country Day School in Kennett Square, Pa.
He graduated from Duke University.
His father was a lawyer at the New York law firm of Alexander &amp; Green.


Where to Tiptoe Through a Meadow
FLOWERS bloom, seeds ripen and scatter.
The wildflower invasion continues.
This quiet blitz is all too ephemeral.
The yellow lady-slippers that danced on the hillside in June at Halle Ravine in Pound Ridge are long gone.
The smell of trailing arbutus on Wildflower Island at the Teatown Lake Reservation in Ossining is a sweet memory.
Now clouds of Queen Anne's lace and legions of chicory are making their last stand along the roadways in Westchester and Putnam counties.
They will be soon be usurped by asters, goldenrod and blazing star.


Gorbachev Lost Nuclear Control, Russians Report
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev lost control of the "nuclear suitcase" containing the codes for the Soviet nuclear arsenal on the afternoon before the coup d'etat last August, at the moment when communications to his Crimean villa were cut, Russia's chief prosecutor says in a new book.
The next day, on Aug. 19, when the coup was in full swing, the suitcase and the team assigned to guard it were taken by plane from the Crimea back to Moscow, There, according to an earlier account by the former Chief of Staff, General Mikhail A. Moiseyev, the codes to the nuclear button were changed and stored in a "safe place."


Technology; A Way to Look Into the Heart and Detect the Killer Plaque
Physicians have long sought a window into the heart, some means to glimpse the progression of the fatty plaque in coronary arteries before it causes a heart attack.
Scientists at Imatron Inc., a small medical technology company here, say they have developed a scanning device that can do just that.
Heart specialists who have used the device say it provides a reliable early indicator of coronary artery disease, or atherosclerosis, and can eliminate for some people the need for more painful, time-consuming and far more expensive tests like the angiogram.
The need for such an indicator is compelling, they add, because for many of the 1.5 million people who have heart attacks in the United States annually, the first symptom is death.
The situation is all the more tragic because if caught early enough, coronary artery disease can be slowed or reversed with diet changes or drugs.


A Place That Makes Centuries Fade Away
It was with a lack of fuss bordering on reticence that the National Gallery of Art in Washington recently completed a two-year reinstallation and refurbishment of its West Building.
Yet this was something to boast about.
In all, 93 galleries had been rethought and rehung by a curators and designers' collective, egged on with characteristic brio by the director, J. Carter Brown.
Many rooms had been repainted, reshaped or relighted.
Paintings had been restored and reframed. (Above all, perhaps, the Leonardo "Ginevre de' Benci" has never looked so good, or been so aptly framed.)


Adjustable Rates, Steady Prices
Investors love adjustable-rate mortgage funds because they offer higher yields than money markets without too much share-price volatility.
Since its inception less than a year ago, the Benham U.S.
Adjustable-Rate Government fund -- which has ballooned to $1.2 billion -- has kept its promise.
Share prices have held between a high of $10.17 and a low of $9.98 -- roughly 30 percent as volatile as Benham's Ginnie Mae fund -- the yield, at about 6 percent.


Julie Caryn Weil, Clarke Brennan Futch
Julie Caryn Weil, a daughter of Fredrick S. Weil of New York and Nancy E. Weil of Philadelphia, was married last evening in Charlottesville, Va., to Clarke Brannen Futch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cecil B. Futch of Brentwood, Tenn.
The Rev.
Phillip A. Gates performed the Episcopal ceremony in the chapel at the University of Virginia, where Mrs.
Futch, 26 years old, is the reunion coordinator and Mr.
Futch, 25, is studying law.
She graduated from Middlebury College; he, magna cum laude, from Vanderbilt University.


NEW YORK: Red Alert
Fire--engine red rivals basic black as the color for the new evening fashions.


No Headline
I think people realize this may be it, the way the summer's been going. -- STEVEN GOLDSTEIN, who got up before 6:00 A.M. to head for the sun-blessed Hamptons.  [ 43:1. ]


Old Flame


Making a Difference; The Businessman at Ex-Im
Bringing private-sector standards to Federal Government contracting, a former corporate chairman who now heads a Federal agency canceled a $10 million contract last week with a private insurance company because of possible conflicts of interest.
The agency chief, John D. Macomber, is president of the Export-Import Bank of the United States.
The Federal agency, known as the Ex-Im Bank, provides loans, loan guarantees and insurance for exporters.
Mr.
Macomber was the chairman and chief executive of the Celanese Corporation until Hoechst A.G. bought it in 1987.


Butterflies In Germany
Just outside the town of Koblenz, Germany, is an indoor garden where hundreds of butterflies -- some with wingspans of nearly eight inches -- flutter amid orchids and other tropical plants.
Princess Gabriela zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Sayn opened the Garden of Living Butterflies five years ago in two glass conservatories on the castle grounds of her family's ancestral home in Bendorf-Sayn.
The butterflies, some bred on the grounds, most imported weekly from breeders in South America, the Philippines and other points around the globe, are an extraordinary collection of delicate creatures with life spans of only three days to a month at most.


Choruses Seeking Out New Voices
SEPTEMBER is the traditional startup month for the many fine avocational choirs in the county, a time when they spread their nets to entice new members.
The singers say few joys match the satisfaction of performing the choral masterworks, especially when all it takes is one evening rehearsal a week, so consider some of the possibilities:
The county's largest chorus, the Westchester Choral Society, has never been one to shirk a performing challenge, so the music director, Lyndon Woodside, has scheduled major scores like Handel's "Messiah," Mendelssohn's "Lobegesang" and Bloch's "Sacred Service."


American Electric Power: A Help . . . Or a Hindrance?
To the Editor:
American Electric Power paint itself green?
The problem is identified in the article's subhead: "But a wildlife preserve and new light bulb may not be enough." It's not.


Woman Gets Tryout
The expansion Tampa Bay Lightning next month plan to give a tryout to goalie MANON RHEAUME, who will become the first woman to compete for a job with an National Hockey League team.
Rheaume, 20, made international headlines last season when she became the first woman to play in a major junior hockey game as she appeared in a game for Trois-Rivieres of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League on Nov. 26, 1991. (AP)


Beware the Haunted Raspberry
FANTASTIC TALES
By I. U. Tarchetti.
Edited and translated by Lawrence Venuti.
Illustrated by Jim Pearson. 191 pp.
San Francisco: Mercury House. $25.


Real Horror A World Away
To the Sports Editor:
The true horror that I read about for the two weeks during the Olympics was not taking place in Barcelona at all, but rather in Sarajevo.
The United States should not be ashamed by the way its basketball team routed the Croatians in Spain, but perhaps the world should be ashamed of the way it has done little to help the people of what used to be Yugoslavia.
PETE CALLAHAN Newark, Del.


Hemline Angst
The date doesn't matter: Any switch in skirt lengths, from over-the-knee to short and back again, is first greeted with a less-than-positive response.
The attitude is "Don't mess with my hemline." Here, a decade by decade survey of the pitfalls and catcalls triggered by changing skirt styles.


The Croquet Boom: A New Passion for a Game of Strategies
ON the manicured greensward, four players in dress-code white were making their way around one of the three courts at the Green Gables Croquet Club, the nation's oldest, in Spring Lake.
Suddenly one of the players called for a referee, and Margaret Mihlon, the president of the New Jersey section of the United States Croquet Association, presented herself.
The tension mounted as Mrs.
Mihlon went down on her hands and knees to study the situation.
A player had hit her ball through a wicket from the wrong side, hoping on her next turn to have an easy shot going through the wicket from the right side.


Anti-Gang TV Spot Draws Racism Charges in Chicago Suburb
When Lieut.
Michael Gresham first saw the city's new public announcement comparing black street gangs to neo-Nazis and hooded Ku Klux Klansmen, he "endorsed it 100 percent."
The comparison, the Evanston police officer said, was painful but appropriate.
"I know some critics say you can't compare gangs to hate groups," said Lieut.
Gresham, who heads the Police Department's gang unit.
"But I don't know what you call murder; it's not love."


Corrections
A picture caption on page 23 of The Times Magazine today with an article about Barbara Walters misidentifies the location in which she is shown watching a television monitor.
It was a set used for the "Nightline" program.


Mr. Tough Guy in Telecommunications
It was a routine lunchtime workout in the company gym, but William T. Esrey, the 52-year-old chairman and chief executive of Sprint, attacked it with seasoned intensity.
Warming up on the rowing machine with unhurried but powerful strokes, he strove to shave a few seconds off his best time for rowing the equivalent of 2,500 meters.
Next he lifted an assortment of weights, working the thighs, calves and shoulders.
Finally, sweat pouring, he moved briskly through a dozen chin-ups, 50 push-ups and 180 abdominal crunches.
"It's what I do every time," he said, grabbing a towel on the way to the shower.


A Quilter's Hand With Dazzling Images
THOUGH a new dealer in Kent, Hugh A. Hill is no stranger to the art business.
Indeed, before migrating to Connecticut he spent 10 years in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, N.Y., living in the Northside Bank Building and operating a gallery on its ground floor.
Michael A. Cummings, Mr.
Hill's current artist, is not exactly run-of-the-mill either, his medium being the quilt.
Male quilters, while not unheard of, are rare in Western society, but as explained in the news release, the production of fabrics is still men's work in certain Asian cultures and, in West Africa, women are weavers by avocation while men are the professionals.


Illusions of Safety
To the Editor:
Re the Aug. 5 letter of Representative Thomas J. Bliley Jr. on your July 21 editorial endorsing statehood for the District of Columbia:


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Bus Tour; CLINTON DISMISSES HIS DROP IN POLLS
His once-formidable lead in the polls much diminished, Gov.
Bill Clinton campaigned relentlessly today in the nation's economically troubled industrial Midwest in search of new campaign momentum.
He dismissed the new voter surveys showing that the Republican National Convention had given President Bush a significant lift.
"I didn't trust the polls when I had a big lead and I don't trust them now," he said.
"But I don't think the people are going to lose their trust in me on the basis of some Republican attacks in Houston."


AUGUST 16-22: Aw Shucks; A Bad Back Ends the Career Of French Lick's Larry Bird
He was just a small-town boy from Indiana -- "a hick from French Lick" as he put it -- who, aw shucks, just happened to play basketball better than almost anybody else.
So well, anyway, that when Larry Joe Bird retired from the Boston Celtics last week at the age of 35, an era ended.
Earlier this season, the other player most like him in skill, teamwork and fan appeal, Magic Johnson -- who learned he was HIV positive -- also bowed out.


IRAQ AIRCRAFT BAN AROUSES ARAB IRE
Eighteen months after they helped the multi-national coalition chase Saddam Hussein from Kuwait, Egypt and Syria are keeping a distance from their former Western partners, who are bracing for another military showdown with Iraq.
In Damascus, Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa said on Friday that his Government rejected outright plans by the United States, Britain and France to bar Iraqi combat planes and helicopters from flying over southern Iraq, where they have been attacking Shiite Muslim dissidents.


On the Road, Four Spots for Breakfast
FOR various reasons many Connecticut residents eat breakfast away from home, as commuters, just for the fun of it or to meet a friend when schedules make other get-together times impossible.
Most towns have at least one place, humble though it may be, where breakfast is served.
The following foursome, in the Norwalk-New Canaan-Stamford-Old Greenwich axis, reflect the variety of places where breakfast is available.
WINFIELD'S, in the atrium of the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Old Greenwich, might well be the most beautiful place in the area to have breakfast.
Winter or summer the 56-foot atrium is light, airy and cheerful.
Guests sit amid plants and full-fledged ficus trees, with the sound and sight of a small waterfall on the other side of the walkway leading to the open restaurant.


It's a Miserable Life
SHE'S COME UNDONE
By Wally Lamb. 405 pp. New York: Pocket Books. $21.


Resolving Property 'Takings'
TWO HUNDRED AND ONE years have passed since the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution guaranteed that private property would not be "taken for public use, without just compensation." Judges, landlords and government officials are still trying to figure out exactly what that means.
Several critical cases -- involving a historic Art Deco movie theater in Philadelphia's Center City, oceanfront lots on the Isle of Palms in South Carolina and wetland acreage on Long Beach Island in Ocean County, N.J. -- suggest to some that the ill-defined line between a constitutional land-use regulation and an unconstitutional "taking" may be shifting in owners' favor.


The First Steps in Preventing Pests
HOUSEHOLD insect and animal pests pose obvious health and building hazards.
Getting rid of established pests is usually a job for professional exterminators, but homeowners can take the first step in any pest-control strategy by keeping pests from entering a house.
The key to combating pests is to make the house and yard unattractive by eliminating moisture, food and easy access or habitation.


Ms. Hopewell, Benjamin Greene
BlakeLee Hopewell, a daughter of Henry C. Hopewell Jr. of Damariscotta Mills, Me., and Pamela S. Hopewell of Rockport, Me., was married yesterday to Benjamin Taylor Greene, a son of Ben W. Greene of Portsmouth, N.H., and Louise LaMontagne of Branford, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert Genevicz, an American Baptist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Union Church in Vinalhaven, Me.


Being Whatever It Takes to Win Election
IT'S going to be a crowded autumn.
There are, as far as can be seen through the fog, four serious candidates for the Presidency.
On the Democratic side, there is Bill Clinton, the big-government, tax-crazy, special-interests-loving, old-fashioned liberal; and Bill Clinton, the covenant-building, moderate-minded, stand-up-to-the-interest-groups New Democrat.
The Republicans have put forward George Bush, the vacillating, pawn-of-the-rich, inside Washington, country-clubbing middle-of-the-roader who wants everything to stay just the way it is; and George Bush, the arch-conservative, deeply religious, tax-cutting, Washington-bashing architect of bold new change.


Deborah Schrag, Yochai Benkler
Dr.
Deborah Schrag, the daughter of Minna Schrag and Dr.
Peter E. Schrag, both of New York, was married last evening to Yochai Benkler, a son of Dina Benkler of Tel Aviv and the late Shmuel Benkler.
Rabbi Isaac Levi, the bride's uncle, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother in Pawling, N.Y.
Dr.
Schrag, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, is a medical resident at Brigham &amp; Women's Hospital in Brookline, Mass.
She graduated from Harvard University and received her M.D. from Columbia University.
Her father is an associate medical director at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in New York.
Her mother is a partner in the New York law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn.
The bride is a granddaughter of Karl Schrag, a painter in New York.


Bias Beating And a Death Shock a City
Last weekend in this small Southeast Florida city, a 19-year-old pre-medical student who came to this country as a child with his parents from Vietnam, was fatally beaten by a group of young white men after he objected to a racial slur one of them used.
The student, Luyen Phan Nguyen, of Coral Springs, died Monday.
The Broward County Medical Examiner said the fatal blow was a kick behind an ear that fractured a neck bone and severed arteries.


Liz Tilberis's Kind of September
YOU are riding in a town car down Seventh Avenue.
Beside you, staring into the mirror of a Chanel compact, painting on a sweet pink smile, is Elizabeth Tilberis, the new editor in chief of Harper's Bazaar.
Beside her, staring out the window, is Paul Cavaco, one of the magazine's fashion directors.
And -- here's the beauty part -- you are clutching an advance copy of September.
September, as they call it, is Ms.
Tilberis's debut, a redesigned Bazaar with a team of star photographers and editors.
Her mandate from Hearst Magazines, which lured her away from the top job at British Vogue, is to make Bazaar great again.
Or, as the legendary art director Alexey Brodovitch told photographers in the 1940's, when Bazaar was great: "Amaze me."


AUGUST 16-22: Soldier of Fortune; Magazine Liable for Death Arranged Through an Ad
The U.S.
Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit in Atlanta last week upheld a $4.3 million damage payment to the survivors of a murdered businessman whose associates hired a contract killer through a classified advertisement in a magazine.
The ruling in a case involving Soldier of Fortune magazine found that the ad, headed "Gun for Hire" and saying "All jobs considered," suggested on its face a substantial danger of harm to the public, according to the 2-1 decision by a three-judge panel.


Streetscapes: The Riverside Buildings; A Model Tenement In Dickensian Style
"PHILANTHROPY, plus 5 percent" was Alfred T. White's motto in 1890 when he built the limited-profit model tenements called the Riverside Buildings.
The complex, at the southwest corner of Joralemon Street and Columbia Place, where Brooklyn Heights meets the waterfront, is now at the end of a long renovation interrupted by foreclosure proceedings.
The craggy, six-story brick facades have been cleaned, and the central courtyard has been spruced up.


Suit Opposes New Name For College
A group of disgruntled alumni of Glassboro State College has asked the New Jersey Superior Court to overturn a July decision that renamed the school after Henry M. Rowan, an industrialist who is giving it $100 million.
A lawsuit filed on Friday in Woodbury contended that Glassboro's trustees violated New Jersey's Open Meetings Act when they voted on July 8 to change the college's name to Rowan College of New Jersey.
The group's lawyer, Clifford Van Syoc of Cherry Hill, said yesterday that the meeting was illegal because the trustees failed to mention the proposed name change in their public notice 48 hours in advance of the meeting.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PLAYING DIRTY
It's dirty and exhausting, but everybody has a good time at the Mud Volleyball Tournament held annually for the last five years to benefit the Epilepsy Foundation of Connecticut in Rocky Hill.
This year's event will take place Saturday from 9 A.M. to 4 P.M. at the Zoars Pond Recreation Area in Middletown, on Randolph Road off Exit 11 of Route 9.


Somewhat Suited
The vest, usually the hidden element of a three-piece suit, requiring less than a yard of cloth, has emerged this summer as fashion's main event for both men and women.
The vest has lost its gender identity and become a fashion trend with both men and women, coming into its own as a major ingredient in the creation of a new language of casual dress.
On hot muggy days, it is being worn as a top of its own by some.
More often, it is being worn over shirts, from a simple T-shirt to more elaborate styles.
Some of the wearers are recycling vests from men's old business suits.
One woman chose a white pique vest, the sort usually worn with men's white evening tails.
Other vests are printed in leopard spots or vivid abstract motifs.
A few have imaginative new designs, like the Romeo Gigli at the far upper right.


Newark Police Fatally Shoot 2 Teen-Agers
Two Newark teen-agers who had been riding in a stolen car were shot and killed shortly before dawn today, after one of them pointed a gun at an off-duty officer and his partner at a red light at a downtown intersection, the authorities said.
One of the youths, identified as Barry Shelton, 18 years old, was shot at close range and killed as he stood outside the car pointing a stolen handgun toward the officers, the police said.
The other youth, Michael Chapman, 16, was fatally shot as the two officers fired their service weapons as the car in which the two teen-agers and two other youths had been riding left the scene, according to a statement released this evening by Newark's police director, William R. Celester, and the acting Essex County Prosecutor, James F. Mulvihill.


The American Way of War
To the Editor:
Caleb Carr's review of "Sheridan: The Life and Wars of General Phil Sheridan," by Roy Morris Jr., and "A Battle From the Start: The Life of Nathan Bedford Forrest," by Brian Steel Wills (July 5), is an egregious example of politically correct claptrap.


SUSAN SONTAG FINDS ROMANCE
Just to straighten the record: In discussing Susan Sontag's writing for Partisan Review, Leslie Garis might have mentioned that I was the one who arranged for Sontag's first reviews in the magazine and negotiated the publication of her piece on camp.
At a party given by Farrar Straus &amp; Giroux, Sontag asked me how one gets to write reviews for Partisan Review.
I said, "You ask." She said, "I'm asking." Sontag also called me one day to say that she wanted to do an essay on camp.
I discussed the piece with her and made suggestions about the several versions of it.
Incidentally, I had to ignore the opposition to the piece by Philip Rahv, who was then an editor of the magazine.
WILLIAM PHILLIPS Editor, Partisan Review
Boston
ILS&gt;Photo: Susan Sontag (Photograph by Gregory Heisler)


LEARNING TO TALK OF RACE
Enough already.
It's time to stop pointing fingers and to assume individual responsibility.
Parents must be responsible for children.
This includes the decision to have them.
Violence must never be dismissed as a "sign" of anything; it is an act and must be paid for.
There is no such thing as mass awareness or mass reforms or mass ills; there are only people doing things to other people.
SUE KLEIN
Freeport, L.I.


Divided Government: Messy, but Not Fatal
IN accepting renomination last week, President Bush sounded one of the fundamental themes of his re-election campaign.
He assailed Congress for its failure to approve many of his proposals on education, health care, crime and taxes.
Mr.
Bush is sure to hammer that theme again and again in the next 10 weeks, in the hope that voters will blame Congress rather than him for the stagnation of the economy and other domestic problems.
Mr.
Bush's indictment of Congress reflects the conventional wisdom in Washington, which holds that Government is inevitably paralyzed when one party controls the White House and the other controls Congress.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  BEIJING AND SEOUL PLAN TIES


Kathleen Frankovic and Hal Glatzer
Kathleen Ann Frankovic, the director of surveys at CBS News in New York, and Hal Glatzer, a freelance writer, were married yesterday in New York.
Justice Martin Evans of State Supreme Court officiated at La Belle Epoque, a reception hall.
Ms.
Frankovic, 45 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the president of the American Association for Public Opinion Research.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a Ph.D. degree in political science from Rutgers University.
She is the daughter of Olga Frankovic of Garfield, N.J., who retired as the secretary to the Superintendent of the Passaic, N.J., school district, and the late Frank J. Frankovic.


Rounding Up What Was Once the West
WHEN an Americana collector, Michael Friedman, was a little boy, he would not go to sleep without his gun and his boots on.
"No self-respecting cowboy would," the 49-year-old father of two says today.
Little did the young suburban buckaroo realize that he would someday assemble a vast collection of authentic and Hollywood cowboy items, and write a 300-page book on the subject to boot.
"Cowboy Culture," recently published by Schiffer Publishing Ltd., sold half its first printing in the space of two weeks, at $79.95 a copy.


Lori Sue Unker, Scott D. Bohrer
Lori Sue Unker, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard S. Unker of North Caldwell, N.J., was married last evening to Scott David Bohrer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas C. Bohrer of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
Rabbi Norman R. Patz officiated at the Hilton hotel in Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Bohrer, 25 years old, is a senior computer-systems analyst in New York for Systematics Inc., a data-processing company.
She and her husband graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Her father is the executive vice president of the Carlisle Collection, a women's sportswear manufacturer in New York.


The Top 20: The Tide Is High and at Home in S.E.C.
The 1992 New York Times Top 20 was prepared by Malcolm Moran, a reporter who admits to being as confused about potential bowl-coalition scenarios as anyone else (including the coalition members
). He requests that all indignant letters be addressed to The Times's computer.


Sanders Levels Criticism at Falcons
Atlanta Braves outfielder DEION SANDERS says Atlanta Falcons management has a plantation mentality, an accusation that his agent said just means the two-sport star is frustrated.
"I don't think Deion is trying to put pressure on them," EUGENE PARKER said yesterday.
"He is just speaking his mind."
Sanders said Friday that his relationship with Falcons management has been strained for some time.
"This goes way back, and it's way beyond money," Sanders said.
"It's way back to meetings and discussions where they talk this plantation type" of mentality, he said.


India: Vanilla Ice In Hindi
The staccato beat is familiar, but the Hindi hip-hop chant, "Thanda Thanda Pani, Thanda Thanda Pani" ("Cold Cold Water, Cold Cold Water"), pumps along oddly, a South Asian edge to an urban American rhythm.
The voice is Baba Sehgal's, a singer who has banged around the club scene in Bombay, issued a couple of albums of saccharine pop songs and is now offering himself up as India's first, and so far lone, rapper.
Unlike most of the world, India has remained immune to the lure of Western popular music.
Over the last four decades, the country has made a conscious effort to seal itself off, economically and culturally, leaving hundreds of millions of Indians with no idea who the Red Hot Chili Peppers, Hammer or Phil Collins are.


Jennifer Starr Gaylord And Peter Allen Donat
Jennifer Starr Gaylord, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeremy P. Gaylord of Pound Ridge, N.Y., was married yesterday to Peter Allen Donat, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Donat of Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Donald Boyer performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
James Church in Woodstock, Vt.


At Work; Paranoia in the Ranks? No, Realism.
Middle- and less-than-middle managers may be forgiven if the current terms of art in human resources -- including downsizing and streamlining -- seem more like euphemisms for bloodletting.
According to Workplace Trends, a newsletter that keeps track of corporate staff cuts at all levels nationwide, 550,000 lost their jobs last year, up from 110,000 in 1989, when Workplace began collecting the data.
Because much of the current cutting is coming from their ranks, middle managers may also be forgiven for feeling that they have been forced into a nasty game of duck-and-cover by senior executives hunkered down and pushing buttons far from any set of coordinates that might put
them
at risk.


IN SHORT: FICTION
RICOCHET RIVER  By Robin Cody. Knopf, $20.


Alta Moda Milan
Explosions of color lit up the runways: brilliantly hued coats from Versace, sleek red leather from Ferre, Ozbek's velvet jackets in rich tones.
Military might mixed with feminine frivolity.
Cat prints made thier mark.
And, as always, there was the ritzy classy sportwear.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday comparing a world stock index with one for Japan was mislabeled.
The top, broken line represented the world index, the solid line below was the index for Japan.


Ms. MacCallum, Daniel J. Gregory
Martha Bowes MacCallum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas C. MacCallum Jr. of Wyckoff, N.J., was married there yesterday to Daniel John Gregory, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward R. Gregory of Upper Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph Fitzpatrick performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Elizabeth's Church.
Ms.
MacCallum-Gregory, 28 years old, is an associate in corporate relations at Dow Jones &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and studied at the Circle in the Square Theater School in New York.
She is a founding member of the Miranda Theater Company in New York.


Where Rock Happened
SMALL groups of the faithful still gather at the leafy intersection near the center of St.
John's Wood, a neighborhood of stately homes and apartment terraces just beyond Regent's Park.
Seekers on a rock-and-roll pilgrimage, they have come to pay homage to the black and white striped pedestrian crossing where, at 10 A.M. on Friday, Aug. 8, 1969, John, Paul, George and Ringo strode stiff-legged and single file across Abbey Road, a moment frozen famously for all time on the cover of the Beatles' "Abbey Road" album.
There is hardly a taxi driver in London who has not had to wait while fans posed, Beatle-like, in the middle of Abbey Road for a souvenir photograph, or swarmed along the curb for a better view of the converted mansion that still belongs to E.M.I., the music company where the Beatles recorded most of their hits.
Like the crosswalk, the E.M.I. studios look much as they did three decades ago, except that the long low whitewashed wall in front of the building is now covered with a constantly changing spiderwork of graffiti, notes of love and loss from a thousand fans, scrawled in more than a half-dozen languages.


Bruce Dern's Career of Con Men and Killers
He gets out of one of those tiny black Mercedes and shuffles into the swank hotel, past silk flowers in marble vases that stand taller than he does.
By now it is clear his shuffle is not an affectation of cool; he's limping.
Maybe because he's wearing no socks with his Reeboks, maybe because he -- the inveterate runner -- has twisted his ankle?
No, Bruce Dern says, that's just the way he walks.
"I hate to walk. I never walk anywhere. I never stand unless I absolutely have to. When I can lie down and take a nap, I do. If I can get into repose, I'm in repose because I know eventually I'm going to have to get up and move very quickly."
Mr.
Dern's roles often demand that he move swiftly.
The 56-year-old actor has shot John Wayne on screen in "The Cowboys," threatened to blow up the entire Super Bowl crowd in "Black Sunday," chewed the furniture in dozens of movies as a psychopath, and won an Academy Award nomination for his portrayal of a traumatized Vietnam veteran in "Coming Home." He is now appearing in "Diggstown," the tale of a sting operation directed by Michael Ritchie that recently opened to favorable reviews.
Vincent Canby, in The Times, called it "a funny and vulgar fable about con artists." In this movie, Mr.
Dern plays yet another scoundrel, working opposite Louis Gossett Jr. and a fellow no-goodster, James Woods.


SURFACING
PSYCHOTHERAPY --
Working vacations:
More shrinks are staying in touch with their patients by phone during August.
NIGHTLIFE --
Lingerie parties:
at some Los Angeles clubs, the 90's version of the pajama party. CYCLING --
Dual-suspension mountain bikes:
Front and rear shock absorbers designed for rural terrain make taking potholes easier, too.
CHILDREN --
Muppet fashions:
Coming to 300 Wal-Mart stores, Classic Muppets and Muppet Babies clothing lines for infants and toddlers.


Recent Sales
Centre Island 999,000
122 Centre Island Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old farm ranch; dining room, den, 2 fireplaces, 3 waterfront acres; taxes $8,800.
Jericho 463,000
267 Vista Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old condominium town house; dining room, den, 2-car garage, pool, tennis; taxes $10,000, common charges, $433 monthly.
Lattingtown 630,000
2 Mindy Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 10-year-old colonial; library, family room, fireplace, beach rights; taxes $9,800.
Old Brookville 525,000
26 Hill House Lane  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 13-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, 2 acres; taxes $7,300.
Ronkonkoma 119,000
740 Johnson Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; finished basement, 0.50-acre; taxes $2,900.
Syosset 250,000
85 Melanie Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, family room, pool; taxes $7,800.
OTHER AREAS Chappaqua, N.Y. 382,000
46 Hardscrabble Hill  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old raised ranch; family room, fireplace, terrace, utility room, deck; taxes $7,564.
Westbrook, Conn. 137,500
1037 Old Clinton Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old raised ranch; oversized closets, pool, walk to town, 0.75 acre; taxes $1,437.
Ridgewood 240,000
301 Kensington Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old colonial; finished basement, game room, enclosed porch, fireplace; taxes $5,316.


Lee Hennessee, Charles Gradante
Mary Frances Dillon and William E. Hennessee, both of Raleigh, N.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Lee Hennessee, to Charles Joseph Gradante, a son of Sebastian Gradante of Boca Raton, Fla., and Mildred Gradante of Lindenhurst, L.I.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Hennessee, who is known as Lee, is a senior money management consultant and a vice president at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Randolph-Macon Woman's College.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of advertising and tobacco specialty sales at the Dillon Supply Company, a distributor of industrial and farming machinery in Raleigh.


Elizabeth Wilson, C. R. Dutton
Elizabeth Monk Wilson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Wilson of Concord, N.H., was married there yesterday to Christopher Robert Dutton, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Dutton of Winsted, Conn.
The Rev.
Gregory Turner performed the Congregational ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Wilson, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, is a second-grade teacher at the Springside School, a private school for girls in Philadelphia.
She and her husband graduated from Middlebury College.
She is a master's degree candidate in science and education at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is president of Newspapers of New England Inc. in Concord.


O'Rourke Wins Medical Center Dispute
COUNTY EXECUTIVE Andrew P. O'Rourke emerged victorious last week after a three-month struggle with the Board of Legislators over control of the appointment and duties of the medical director, who heads the staff of doctors at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla.
At issue was an attempt to prevent any future conflicts of interest after the recent resignation of the last medical director, who simultaneously had served as an administrator at the private, church-affiliated New York Medical College in Valhalla, as well as being involved in a private business that provides billing services to doctors.


From the Sea, A Lighthouse For Your Home
Talk about distressed wood.
The raw material for this lamp-table combo was battered by waves for years before it became a glorious sculpture.
Driftwood's dramatic, water-worn shapes are icons of the 50's.
This six-foot specimen is artfully constructed of several pieces nailed together, painted with plaster, then sprayed gold, white and black.
Its enormous oval shade, of clear fiberglass spun with gold and lashed with black lanyard, is topped by a jaunty finial. $650 at Atomic Passion.


The Wye Valley
To the Editor: I was delighted to see the Wye Valley of Wales highlighted ("The Quiet Joys of the Wye Valley," June 28).
This area has become my second home, as the peace and tranquillity, the charms and traditions of the market town of Monmouth have captured my heart.
My wife, who was raised in Monmouth, and I return here once or twice a year.
Robin Hardy's article will encourage others to visit this wonderful bit of old Britain, as yet unspoiled by the growth of Cardiff, Gloucester or Bristol.


Accessories; It's What You Add That Counts
Accessories are the finishing touches that complete the new silhouette.
Head to toe, the styles are big and bold.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a front-page article last week about late-night television talk-show hosts misidentified the channel that will carry "The Whoopi Goldberg Show" in the New York area.
It is Channel 9.


Toys Transformed by Wit and Whimsy
Compared to the mechanical and live birds in "Batman Returns," the toy ducks, penguins and cats that Charles Bell uses as models for his paintings are Lilliputian.
But the fantasy images he creates, using wind-up toys to depict circuses, Greek myths and takeoffs on other artists' works that he photographs and then paints, are frequently as eerie or witty as those in the film.
Typical of Mr.
Bell's Photorealist paintings is one that portrays clowns with hands shaped like ducks' feet and legs locked together like a tail; they are doing handstands while a seal balances a ball on its snout and a ballerina twirls eternally.
The artist's modern-dress "Judgment of Paris" uses dolls: Barbie beauty queens and G. I. Joes.
And his takeoff on a primeval landscape by Henri Rousseau depicts dinosaurs in a fantastic jungle.


Condolences


Carey Gerwig, Thomas Jones
Ellen Carey Gerwig, the daughter of Robert and Elizabeth Gerwig of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Lieut.
Thomas Edwin Jones, the son of Thomas and Stephanie Jones of Plano, Tex.
The Rev.
James Gay performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Michael the Archangel Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Jones, 27 years old, is known as Carey.
She is a graphic designer for Laura Coe Design Associates in San Diego.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of the chemical division of Conoco in Stamford, Conn.


The Accent Gap
For months, tabloid scribes and authors of gossipy best sellers have offered millions of readers lurid, even shocking stories of the rift between the Prince and Princess of Wales.
Now a British linguist, John Honey, provides an unusual spin on that familiar subject.
Differences in age, interests and tastes are one thing, but the real schism, Honey suggests, may be in how the two speak the English language.
"There is a huge accent gap between Charles and Diana," says Honey, the author of the 1989 book "Does Accent Matter? The Pygmalion Factor."
The accent factor cannot be easily dismissed, given the British obsession with speech accents, so definitively spoofed in George Bernard Shaw's 1912 play "Pygmalion." In his preface to the play, Shaw declared, "It is impossible for an Englishman to open his mouth without making another Englishman hate or despise him."


World Markets; It's Dim Days on the Bourse
Battered by high German interest rates, uncertainty over European monetary union and malaise stemming from the war in what was once Yugoslavia, the French stock exchange is in the doldrums.
And few analysts expect any significant upswing before the end of the year.
After climbing steadily from the start of the year until May 11, when the 40-stock blue-chip CAC index stood at 2,077, or 17.6 percent above its Jan.1 level, the Bourse has slumped.
It closed on Friday at 1,724.18, down 2.3 percent from Jan. 1.


Kathy E. Pryce Andrew Witherell
Kathy Ellen Pryce, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Pryce of McLean, Va., was married yesterday to Andrew John Witherell, the son of Col. and Mrs.
John R. Witherell of Springfield, Va.
The Rev.
Robert Friend performed the ceremony at St.
Francis Episcopal Church in Great Falls, Va.
Ms.
Pryce, who is 33 years old and is keeping her name, is a sportswear buyer in Arlington, Va., for the Hechts department store chain, where her husband was until recently a financial manager.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.


All About/Currency Printers; The Companies That Make Money From Making Money
Brand-new American products are scarce in the former Soviet Union, but by next month almost every Lithuanian will be using some.
The litas, Lithuania's new currency, is made in the U.S.A.
Like the paper currencies of Malaysia, Haiti, Venezuela and a score of other nations, the litas is a product of the United States Banknote Corporation.
Its main office is in Manhattan and it prints in plants in Philadelphia, Chicago and Los Angeles (where the 100-litu note, featuring a handsome scene of a peaceful Lithuanian town, was printed).


Computer Foursomes: Chaos, but No Yelling
IMAGINE a game of bridge in which a dozen or so players, cutting in and out randomly, are scattered about a continent.
Not only can they not see each other, but there are no playing cards.
If players fall asleep, there is no way to awaken them.
This might sound like a vision of hell to the average player, but it may offer a clue to the future of the game.
It is OKbridge, in which 250 students and professors with access to an academic electronic network use their computers to play bridge with one another.
After each deal, a post-mortem conversation takes place.


For Armenia, Rainbows And Eagles in Flight
AFTER several false starts, Armenia has issued its first stamps since becoming an independent republic last year.
The first set has four stamps.
Three of them, denominated at 0.20, 2 and 5 drams, appear on the same sheet.
The fourth, a 7-dram stamp, appears alone in a 3 1/8-inch-square souvenir sheet.


Philip Hulitar, Fashion Designer And Preservationist, Dies at 87
Philip Hulitar, a noted women's fashion designer in the 1950's, a buildings preservationist and a patron of the arts, died yesterday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 87 years old.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


In Connecticut, Other Issues Help Foes of Gun Control
As in New Jersey, the National Rifle Association maintains a political presence in the state capitals of New York and Connecticut.
In New York, through its legislative fund, the N.R.A.
Political Victory Fund, the association contributed more than $100,000 to legislators and party campaign committees between Jan. 12, 1989 and Nov. 28, 1991, according to State Board of Elections records.
From 1986 to 1991, more than 120 members of the State Legislature received N.R.A. contributions.


'No Cause For Celebration'
To the Editor:
I do not understand why this country cannot let Marilyn Monroe just die and be dead once and for all.
Our embarrassing obsession with trying to demythologize a celebrity who was invented for the sole purpose of cultural mythologizing has reached a point of ridiculousness.


Darth Vader of the Lobbyists
THE POWER HOUSE
Robert Keith Gray and the Selling of Access and Influence in Washington.
By Susan B. Trento.
Illustrated. 430 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $24.95.


CAPE TOWN ARENA AVOIDS RACE INSULT
If black and white leaders resume their talks on South Africa's political future any time soon, it may be in some part because a restive crowd of 44,000 rugby fans managed to keep almost quiet for 17 seconds this afternoon.
One week after white rugby enthusiasts in Johannesburg interrupted a silent tribute to victims of violence by bursting lustily into the national anthem of the apartheid era, spectators here held their tongues, more or less, averting a poisonous new round of racial recriminations just as political leaders were trying to find their way back to the bargaining table.


May I Have Some Less?
To the Editor:
Bryan Miller's article  [ "The Fifth Deadly Sin" ]  in the Styles section of Sunday, July 12, confirms my suspicion that restaurants' motivation in overfeeding diners is for financial gain.
It is time to let the patron have a choice.
First, most food taken home in a doggy bag never tastes as good the next day and often is forgotten and thrown out a day or so later.
Second, when people don't take home their uneaten food, the only place it can be donated is to the garbage can, not a soup kitchen.


AUGUST 16-22: A Haiti Connection; Smuggling Chinese, Trawler Tries the East Coast
When 151 Chinese citizens were dropped in Jacmel on the southwest coast of Haiti last week by a Taiwanese trawler, the residents may have been surprised, but the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service was not.
The worst fears of officials who are trying to crack the smuggling rings slipping hundreds of Chinese into the American West Coast were realized: The human trade now had a new East Coast dimension.
Haiti, approached diplomatically by the United States to take a stand against the smugglers, who may have been testing a new route to the American mainland, acted swiftly to confine the Chinese to a schoolyard, arrest five members of the trawler's crew and seize the vessel, the Chin Wing No. 18.
The Haitian authorities also took into custody two American citizens and two resident foreigners from New York who officials of the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service believe are members of the gang that masterminded the marathon voyage of the Chin Wing No. 18 and possibly countless other vessels.


Muted Hostility and Seeds of Hope
A year after violence between blacks and Jews ripped through Crown Heights, "there is turmoil," said Mildred Scott, a retired school administrator who is active in many community groups, referring to residents' anxieties about police protection, equality in city services and the future of the neighborhood.
"But," said Mrs.
Scott, who is black, "there is also a new awakening. People believe they can make a change."


Amanda Weaver, Jeffrey Meiler
Amanda Katharine Weaver, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul E. Weaver of Dallas, was married yesterday to George Jeffrey Meiler, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Mark Meiler of Oneonta, N.Y.
The Rev.
Jack S. Hoffman performed the ceremony at Trinity Lutheran Church in Lancaster, Pa.
Mrs.
Meiler, 24 years old, graduated from Elizabethtown College.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in journalism at the University of South Carolina, where her husband received an M.B.A. degree in May.
Her father is the managing partner in Dallas for Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm.


Special Today: Fashions of The Times Magazine Pt. 2/Travel Section 5
Contrasting London landmarks, from the newly restored Westminster Abbey to the historic sites of rock and a cluster of old Thameside pubs.


A la Carte; Where Some Good Cheesecake Comes From
THE cheesecake served at the Radisson Hotel in Melville, the Crest Hollow Country Club in Woodbury, the Marriott in Uniondale, the LaGrange Restaurant in Islip, the Riverview in Oakdale and 150 other Long Island restaurants all comes from one place.
It is the same cheesecake that won the Best of Show award at the Taste of Long Island event this year.
Seven hundred diners consumed almost 1,000 slices and voted it the outstanding single dish.
Many luxury restaurants think so highly of the cake that they claim it as their own.


Kimerer LaMothe, Geoffrey Gee
Kimerer Lewis LaMothe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. LaMothe Jr. of Concord, Mass., was married there yesterday to Geoffrey Kenneth Gee, a son of Suzanne Evanson and Peter Gee, both of Worthington, Ohio.
The Rev.
Barbara W. Miner performed the ceremony at the Trinitarian Congregational Church.
Ms.
LaMothe, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Williams College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. in religion at Harvard University and a dancer with the Rae Dance Company, a modern-dance repertory company in Boston.
Her father is the director of investment industry marketing for the Digital Equipment Corporation in Marlboro, Mass.
Her mother is the chairwoman of the mathematics department at the Winsor School in Boston.


Big East: There's Miami and Syracuse And . . .
The Big East, in only its second football season and without a round-robin schedule until next year, is comfortable for now with Miami as its standard bearer.
The Hurricanes continue to give the new league stature and instant identity.
Eventually, the seven other schools must become competitive with the 'Canes, or else the Big East will be a big bust.
It will not happen this year.


Town Rebuffs Big Company, Worrying L.I.
The scene could have come straight from a New York neighborhood fighting to block a drug-treatment program or a shelter for the homeless: outraged neighbors complaining that an intruder would change the character of the streets, set a damaging precedent and lower property values.
The outsider, however, was Canon U.S.A.
Inc., precisely the kind of company most communities dream of having in their tax base: a $4 billion nonpolluting giant that wanted to expand its headquarters on Long Island while other companies were shutting down and moving far from New York.


HAVING IT ALL
It was a joy to be reminded by Francine Prose of Margaret Sanger's courageous struggle in the early 20th century to insure safe and reliable contraception for women (Hers: "Having It All," July 26).
If I were able to send a message to Sanger, I'd tell her that there are many who continue to fight alongside the poor and uneducated.
They learned from her example that lives can change with sexual and reproductive self-determination.
I'd tell her that there are still people with her spirit who exercise their "freedoms and . . . range of possibilities" and insist on the same rights for others.
I'd simply tell her she's in good company.
HERNAN SANHUEZA, M.D.
Regional Director, International Planned Parenthood Federation
New York, N.Y.


THE DYING CITY OF SARAJEVO
The great sadness is not just the slow death of Sarajevo, but the slow moral death of those nations that stand by and watch it happen ("The Dying City of Sarajevo," photo essay by Jon Jones, text by John F. Burns, July 26).
Now is the time to remember and act upon the words of John Donne: "Any man's death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind." HARVEY BRODSKY
Brooklyn


THE AIDS DOCKET: A special report.; Tide of Lawsuits Portrays Society Ravaged by AIDS
A Philadelphia woman sues a funeral home for refusing to embalm the body of her son, who died of AIDS.
The nation's largest law firm is ordered to pay $1 million to the estate of a gay lawyer who had filed charges of discrimination.
A Wisconsin woman sues after being artificially inseminated with H.I.V.-contaminated semen.
A Texas man with AIDS sues his insurer for cutting off his coverage.
A California man with AIDS sues a pedicurist for refusing to cut his toenails.


Luncheon Clubs And Newark's History
The article "Luncheon Clubs: A Tradition Fades" (Aug. 2) was a welcome contribution to the appreciation of Newark's rich history.


Catherine L. Stifel, Burnett Hansen
Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Stifel of Irvington, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Catherine Louise Stifel to Burnett McAnney Hansen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald C. Hansen of Portland, Me.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Stifel, 28 years old, graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
She is the production manager in the publications department of the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
Her father, now retired, was the president of the American Kennel Club in New York.
Her mother, Carolyn G. Stifel, also retired, was the executive director of the New York Genealogical and Biographical Society in New York.


Seven Thousand Pictures Are Better Than One
Photography, which came along soon after the great age of the encyclopedia, was instantly seized on as a new means to collect data.
The visible forms of flora, fauna and far-off lands, monuments, engineering feats and criminals' faces could all be catalogued, and were.
Photography eventually turned almost everyone into a collector: cameras inevitably made their owners into accumulators, piling up endless evidence of friends, family and vacations.
Amassing data was so natural with this instrument that a new era of hunting and gathering might be said to have come along in the history of evolution.
No one thought any of the common variety of photographic accumulation, whether in slide libraries or news-photo files or family albums, had any claim to being art.
But in the 1960's, the very activity of collecting data was turned into an art enterprise, as if the catalogue, the survey and the census were artistic models.
Groups and sequences of related photographs that did not necessarily tell a story and were not often of much individual power were now presented as art objects.


Socks Clinton Will Campaign If He Must, An Aide Says
Millie, at right, Barbara Bush's springer spaniel who is credited with writing a best-selling children's book, is such an asset to the President's re-election campaign that George Bush even mentioned "Millie's Book" in his acceptance speech Thursday night.
Bill Clinton and his family own a black-and-white cat named Socks, who is usually left out of Clinton family portraits.
"Bill and Hillary are both allergic to cats," said Betsey Wright, an official of the Clinton campaign.
She said their daughter, Chelsea, "wanted a cat real bad; they used to have a dog named Zeke, but he's dead."


Elizabeth Finkle and D. T. Cummins
Elizabeth Hamilton Finkle, the daughter of Mrs.
Richard B. Smith of New York and S. Marcus Finkle of Aspen, Colo., was married yesterday in Sherman, Conn., to Douglas Tait Cummins, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Philip D. Cummins of Iowa City.
The Rev.
Lloyd R. Thompson performed the ceremony at the Sherman Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Cummins, 28 years old, was until recently an account executive at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company in Stamford, Conn.
She attended Pine Manor College and the Columbia University School of General Studies and is to resume undergraduate studies in September at the Waterbury branch of the University of Connecticut.


A New Era In Basketball
To the Sports Editor:
After reading the many and varied opinions expressed about the Dream Team at the Barcelona Olympics, I had to offer another point of view.
Basketball just recently celebrated its first 100 years.


Flyers Sign Nattress
The Philadelphia Flyers signed defenseman RIC NATTRESS on Friday, one day after he won his unconditional release from the Toronto Maple Leafs. (AP)


UP AND COMING: Nick Gomez; Ex-'Knucklehead' Makes Good
With his sharply trimmed beard and fast-talking self-assurance, Nick Gomez could easily pass for a character in "Laws of Gravity," his first feature film, which opens on Wednesday.
Mr.
Gomez both wrote and directed the story of Jimmy (Peter Greene) and Jon (Adam Trese), two small-time criminals in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, whose lives veer out of control when a friend arrives in town with a load of illegal handguns.
The resemblance between creator and characters is not coincidental.
"I was a knucklehead who did a lot of stupid stuff as a kid," Mr.
Gomez said one recent afternoon in an office at the Shooting Gallery, the downtown production facility where "Laws of Gravity" was edited.
Now 29, Mr.
Gomez grew up in an Irish-Italian neighborhood on the fringes of Cambridge, Mass.
Though his father is Chilean, he considers himself to have been "basically just an Anglo-Saxon Boston kid."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ZELDA, SCOTT, ET AL
A new play based on the lives of Zelda and F. Scott Fitzgerald will be given a staged reading by the Phoenix Theater Company at the State University of New York at Purchase.
"Appassionata" by Vinton McCabe may be seen free on Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M. in Theater B of the Performing Arts Center.
It is directed by the company's artistic director, Bram Lewis.


Karen L. Keshner, Andrew E. Chapro
Karen Lisa Keshner, the daughter of Judith Sue Keshner and Stanley Keshner, both of Lynbrook, L.I., was married last evening to Andrew Edward Chapro, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander E. Chapro of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Harold Saperstein performed the ceremony at Congregation Rodeph Sholom in New York.
Mrs.
Chapro, 30 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brandeis University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father owns Karen Richard Ltd., a women's accessory store in Holbrook, L.I.
Her mother is a kindergarten teacher at the R. W. Carbonaro School in Valley Stream, L.I.


Widow's Slaying Is Latest Proof of a Housing Project's Decline
Lerona Manning's neighbors said yesterday that when she moved into the Woodson Houses in Brooklyn about 17 years ago, it was a beautiful place: There were handrails on the walls to help the elderly walk; a 24-hour security guard was posted at the entrance, and rarely was anyone under 50 years old allowed to live there.
On Friday evening, Mrs.
Manning, a 78-year-old widow who stood only about five feet tall, was found dead in her neat one-bedroom apartment.
She had been beaten and stabbed numerous times, the police said.


Perfect for the Monster Part
It's the People vs.
Fielding Mellish all over again.
At least it should be.
In "Bananas" the plucky Fielding ("from the Latin meaning 'strong or with strength' ") offers a persuasive analysis of the legal-social net in which he is caught: "This trial is a travesty; it's a travesty of a mockery of a sham of a mockery of a travesty of two mockeries of a sham. I move for a mistrial."
But now the script is in other hands, and the people are not likely to be moved by Mellish's eloquence, even if he is telling the truth.
We the people have needs other than truth at stake here, and we will be searching Woody Allen's films for lines more in keeping with our desires: "Still, the age difference! I shouldn't have seduced you!" ("Another Woman"), or "I'm legal, but I'm still a kid" ("Manhattan") or "I'm doing a sociological study of perversion. I'm up to advanced child-molesting" ("Bananas").


U.S. Food Flights Stick Red Cross With Distribution
A United States airlift to famine- and war-ravaged Somalia, announced by the White House, ran into logistical difficulties last week when it became evident that little thought had been given to how the food would actually reach the starving people once it got there.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Religious Right; Bush Gets Full Support At Religious Gathering
Fresh from a Republican National Convention that they celebrated as a triumph for their cause, the preachers and ideological spokesmen of the religious right gathered here this weekend to anoint President Bush as their champion in a battle between good and evil.
At a two-day meeting, the Rev.
Jerry Falwell, Phyllis Schlafly, Oliver L. North, Patrick J. Buchanan and others replayed many themes heard at the Houston convention, but in harsher terms.


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*Residential in millions of dollars)
June 92
June 91
Change
New York
391.2
370.7
+ 6%
New Jersey
177.1
177.3
+ 1%
Connecticut
94.9
86.0
+10%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.15
8.22
9.36
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.45
5.47
7.16
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.04
8.09
9.25
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.25
5.27
7.06
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.05
8.12
9.30
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.19
5.30
6.97
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.19
8.33
9.50
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.13
6.09
7.62
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.43
3.54
5.72
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.04
8.04
9.12
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


The Benefit of the Doubt
HIGHLY CONFIDENT
The Crime and Punishment of Michael Milken.
By Jesse Kornbluth.
Illustrated. 384 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.


Who Says It's a Sacrifice?
To the Editor:
Why juxtapose negative phrases like "sacrifice" and "give up" with some of Tipper Gore's life decisions like moving to Washington, raising four children and focusing her energy on causes for which she receives intrinsic, if not monetary, reward  [ "The Prime of Tipper Gore," July 19 ] ?


100-Year-Old Black Paper Is Struggling
In a shadowy, ink-stained workroom here, hundreds of bound volumes fill tables, carts and shelves, their covers shielding yellowed newspapers and a part of America that for decades found expression only in the now-fragile pages of the black-owned press.
The bound sheaves of The Afro-American, the nation's oldest family-owned black newspaper, span 100 years this month.
But if they chronicle the fundamental change in black American life between the turn of the century and the 1970's, they also indirectly cover the paper's own decline as black America found a voice in mainstream newspapers.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about WNEW-AM in New York rendered the name of the station's first disk jockey incorrectly.
He was Martin Block.


RECORD BRIEFS
'The Psalms of David'  Esther Lamandier, soprano and harpist. Alienor AL 1041; CD.


Paris Potpourri
Fashion Blazed with red.
Shapes long and lean were stealing the scene.
Hemlines fell.
Shoes towered.
Jungle print prowled.
Military influences went on the march.
Gypsy looks wandered through.
Handbags were big.
Belts were bold.
Coats billowed.
Leather enlivened everything.
Sporty meant chic.
Paris was a carnival of style.


Seeking to End Sexual Harassment
WESTCHESTER has begun teaching all its employees about sexual harassment in the workplace, becoming the first county in the state to do so.
"We are very serious about this," said Andrew P. O'Rourke, the County Executive.
"We don't want people coming to work for the county to be bothered, interfered with or harassed on the job. We are going to make a point of getting the word out through all of our departments that we will not stand for this type of behavior."


If Attack Falls Short, Beware Counterattack
THAT old chestnut, "The bigger they come, the harder they fall," is well supported by chess.
The more aggressive the thrust against the enemy, the more vulnerable another sector of one's own formation becomes.
It's all well and good if the opponent is quickly subdued, but if he is still on his feet after the first wave, look out.
A good illustration is the game between the international master Timothy Taylor and Walter Browne, a six-time United States champion, from the Los Angeles Open Tournament on July 26.
Browne's counterattack came so swiftly that Taylor scarcely knew what hit him.
Browne's victory was an important step toward his victory in the tournament, in which his 4 1/2- 1/2 score won him the $2,500 first prize.


New York Plans Attack On Pay-Phone Abuses
In the eight years since the deregulation of the telephone industry, thousands of privately owned pay phones have sprouted along the streets of New York City, providing, as intended, a vital service to neighborhoods that lacked it, but also, as never intended, duping and sometimes gouging unwitting users.
Now, the city, frustrated by a lack of enforcement despite years of consumer complaints, is moving ahead with a plan that would in effect regulate many of the companies that operate the pay phones, the worst of which violate Federal, state and city laws.


Walter Jacobs, 88; Ex-Dentist Perfected Boxing Mouthpieces
Dr.
Walter H. Jacobs, a retired dentist who developed individually molded rubber mouth guards for boxers, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of unspecified natural causes, his family said.


Suzette Blum, John Devine
Suzette Florence Blum, a daughter of John R. Blum of Lakeville, Conn., and the late Susanne D. Blum, was married on Friday to John Duddy Devine, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Bernard M. Devine of Falmouth, Me.
The Rev.
Edmund M. O'Brien performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Lakeville.
Mrs.
Devine, 25 years old, is a watercolorist in Lakeville.
She and her husband graduated from Bowdoin College, she magna cum laude and he cum laude.
Her father, a lawyer, is the Connecticut's Agriculture Commissioner.
He and the bride's stepmother, Jeanne C. Blum, raise cattle in Lakeville.


Pursuit


Married With Children: The Waning Icon
Dan Quayle sounded the clarion call and the Republican convetion took up arms - 'family values' became a weapon against Democrats.
In their speeches to the convention, both Marilyn Quayle and Barbara Bush emphasized the traditional unit - Mom, Dad and the children - as the family whose values they affirmed.
But these families are a shrinking part of the electoral battleground.
According to the Census Bureau, half of all marriages end in divorce.
Births to single mothers now make up one-quarter of total births.
One in four Americans over age 18 have never married.
These factors have whittled away at the number of households that fit the Republican ideal.


Questions Facing the Front-Runner
For many years, Geraldine A. Ferraro has been dogged by questions and accusations about her financial records and business dealings.
Now her opponents have raised a mix of old questions and new ones growing out of those questions.
Here is a summary of several of them.
A Fund-Raiser Convicted of Stealing
A fund-raiser for Ms.
Ferraro in her days in Congress was Nicholas M. Sands, a former carpenters' union official who was convicted of stealing union funds in 1975 and who has been listed by some law enforcement authorities as an associate of organized-crime families.
He was shot and wounded outside his home in 1980.


Hawaii Hiking
To the Editor: After I read an article in your paper several months ago about hiking in Hawaii mentioning a trip the writer had taken with Pacific Quest ("On Foot on Four Islands, Jan. 26), I took Pacific Quest's hiking trip to Kauai and Maui on July 5.
I was greatly disappointed.
I believe their brochure misleads participants about the quality of the accommodations and food.
In fact, our group of seven cut short its stay by a day and a half because we were so appalled at what was to be the last two nights' accommodations on Maui.


Brewers' Run at Pennant Is Still in Deciding Stage
The Milwaukee Brewers remind Phil Garner, their rookie manager, of a movie.
No, not "The Bad News Bears." The movie Garner has in mind as he watches his scrappy team play is "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid."
"We're like the guys in the long coats," Garner said, "the guys who kept following them. They kept asking, 'Who are those guys?' They couldn't shake them. At some point, teams ahead of us are going to say: 'Who are those guys? They keep tracking us and we can't shake them."'


Peace in Our Time, Bosnia-Style?
Talks on Bosnia open Wednesday in London, but already the siren song is sounding: Bosnia is dead; the only thing left for negotiators is to bury it.
Serbia has already gobbled up the lion's share of Bosnian territory, the defeatists say; it's too late to reverse its brutal aggression.
Besides, armed intervention is too complicated and risky.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
JAPAN-THINK, AMERI-THINK An Irreverent Guide to Understanding the Cultural Differences Between Us.
By Robert J. Collins.
Penguin, paper, $10.


Talking: Tenancies; High Tech Used for Evictions
WHEN the market for New York City apartments was at a boiling point in the 80's, landlords would do almost anything to pry a tenant loose from a rent-regulated unit.
One of the most effective weapons was proof that the tenant was not using the apartment as a primary residence.
Since 1971, state law has restricted rent-regulation protection -- both the below-market rent and the right to remain indefinitely -- solely to tenants who use their apartments as a primary residence.


Tech Notes; At Last, a Television Ghost Buster
There may finally be a weapon to stop television ghosts, the annoying phenomenon of receiving every image on the screen in duplicate or triplicate.
After three years of testing, a technical advisory group representing broadcasters and television manufacturers, the Advanced Television Steering Committee, agreed this month to embrace a new ghost-canceling circuit that can be built into new sets.


Virginia Rowthorn And Michael Apel
Virginia Mary Rowthorn, the daughter of Suffragan Bishop Jeffery W. Rowthorn and Dr.
Anne Rowthorn of Salem, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Charles Apel, a son of Roy and Paula Apel of Morro Bay, Calif.
The bride's father performed the ceremony at St.
Ann's Episcopal Church in Old Lyme, Conn.
Mrs.
Rowthorn-Apel, 27 years old, is a legislative aide in Washington to Senator Alan Cranston, Democrat of California.
She graduated from Carleton College, as did her husband.
Her father is the Suffragan Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Connecticut.
Her mother writes books about religious and environmental issues.


Parma's Peerless Ham and Cheese
SEVEN centuries ago, when Dante Alighieri was in Florence creating his masterpiece, dairy farmers in the Emilian countryside began working on theirs.
What the Divine Comedy became in Italian culture, Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese became to Italian food.
And the culinary equivalent of, say, Boccaccio's Decameron has to be prosciutto di Parma.
Few things in Italy are capable of producing a consensus, but these two foodstuffs, consumed and revered from the Alps to Etna, are pillars of Italian gastronomy and national pride.
Not even pasta and olive oil can make that claim.


Corrections
The Your Own Account column on Aug. 2, about the sale of mutual fund shares to two investors at the Society for Savings in Connecticut, misidentified the broker-dealer employing Michael Garofalo, the salesman, at the time of the 1990 transaction.
Mr.
Garofalo, formerly with the Invest Financial Corporation of Tampa, Fla., had moved to Financial Services Marketing of Winter Park, Fla.


Traffic Alert
Madison Avenue between 23d and 45th streets will close from noon to 2 P.M. today for the Pakistan Day parade; Madison Avenue between 23d and 26th streets will be closed from 8 A.M.- 8 P.M. for a fair.


POSTINGS: Private Sewage Customers; City Ends Overbilling
The vast majority of residences throughout the New York City are hooked up to the municipal sewer system, which treats and disposes of waste.
To pay for the service, the city adds a sewer charge to all water bills.
But some property owners servic by private waste-water treatment plants, which are hooked to city disposal lines, were charged full sewer fees, meaning they paid for sewage treatment twice.


Christina M. Sassi, David J. Lehner
Christina Maria Sassi, a daughter of Michael F. and Christina M. Sassi of New York, was married yesterday in Granite Springs, N.Y., to David Jay Lehner, a son of Harold L. and Charlotte W. Lehner of Howey-in-the-Hills, Fla.
Rabbi Burt Siegal performed the interdenominational ceremony at Maxime's restaurant, with the Rev.
Giles Spoonhour, a Roman Catholic priest, attending.
Mrs.
Lehner, 25 years old, graduated from Bryn Mawr College.
She is a doctoral candidate in English literature at the City University of New York Graduate Center, as is her husband.
Her father is a portfolio manager with Lynch &amp; Mayer Inc., a money-managing firm in New York.


Poor Australia Economy Imperils Prime Minister
Eight months after he staged a political coup in his Labor Party to become Prime Minister of Australia, Paul Keating is struggling to keep the party in power, amid growing signs that his term may be ended by a persistent economic recession and a resurgence of the nation's conservative opposition.
Political analysts and members of Mr.
Keating's own party say that his problems are strikingly similar to President Bush's.
Despite the Government's repeated predictions of an economic upturn, none has materialized.
Unemployment is about 11 percent and Mr.
Keating is receiving much of the blame.
During most of the 1980's, he served as Prime Minister Bob Hawke's deputy and the chief architect of Australia's economic strategy.


Sports of The Times; Vincent Prepares For Battle
IT will probably never be clear which side fired the first shot in what is now clearly the Baseball War of 1992.
But guaranteed, that first shot was a mini-ball compared with the howitzer shots being lobbed back and forth between some major league owners and Commissioner Fay Vincent.
That there has been an escalation became very clear yesterday, when a report on WFAN radio disclosed that Vincent was more than secluded at his vacation retreat on Cape Cod last week.
The commissioner was crafting an offense, it turns out, one he considered necessary to let anyone who needed reminding know that he will, indeed, fight to keep his job.


AUGUST 16-22: Panic Control; Japan Gives Banks a Break To Save the Market As a Recession Threatens
Japan's Minister of Finance put his finger in the dike last week, announcing measures to discourage banks from dumping shares into the cratering stock market.
The move was cheered as a step away from financial panic.
But far more is needed to contain the flood.
Like their American counterparts, Japanese banks are sitting on humongous losses in commercial real estate.
And to raise money for dividends, they have been tempted to sell securities bought for a song before the market peaked in 1989.


Making a Difference; When a No. 1 Customer Goes Broke
Robert L. King, president and chief executive of the FoxMeyer Corporation, was worn out from long days of attending the Olympics in Barcelona.
But when a telephone call woke him from a nap on Aug. 4, Mr.
King found himself tossed into an unscheduled wrestling match: dealing with scandal and bankruptcy at his biggest customer, the Phar-Mor Corporation.
FoxMeyer, the nation's third-largest distributor of pharmaceuticals, is owed $74 million by Phar-Mor, the deep-discount retailer that sought court protection from creditors last Monday.
Donald T. Spindel, an analyst at A. G. Edwards Inc., in St.
Louis, estimates that Mr.
King ultimately may have to write off about $20 million, and that Phar-Mor's troubles could drag down FoxMeyer's sales growth below 15 percent a year, from its usual 20 percent or more.
The name comes from two distribution companies that merged in the mid-80's.


The Unsolved Case Of the Missing Birds
EVERYONE has a theory but no one knows for sure.
Did the ducks and geese desert Library Pond here because they didn't like the new aerator bubbling up in the middle of it?
Were their nesting habits disturbed by the landscape work done last spring around the pond?
Perhaps, some nature lovers suggest, the birds miss the algae that provided plant food before the pond was dredged in a cleanup effort last fall.
Or, maybe its banks, with their deposits of dredged material, are now too high to allow waterfowl to waddle into the pond.


The Wye Valley
To the Editor: Your articles about Wales left out mention of an outstanding choir -- Cor Meibion Dyffryn Tywi.
One of the members is Viv Fischer, who is life president of the Welsh Choir Association of Male Choirs.
Their membership represents a wide variance of vocations: farmer, professor, business manager, milkman, miner, etc.
It was in an all-Welsh ceremony that I received my Ph.D. degree at St.
David's University College in Lampeter.
At the close everyone sang dutifully "God Save the Queen" but I saw no one on the stage singing.
Then came the Welsh anthem: "Mae Hen Wlad" and the rafters rang.
Even English-speaking students like me learned it in Welsh.
In that area, including Merlin's town of Camarthen and Dylan Thomas's town of Laugharne, one hears mostly Welsh on the streets.
But the bank teller or shop clerk moves quickly to English if that is what you speak.


Susan Udry, Kevin Martin
Susan Marie Udry, a political organizer for the Coalition for New Priorities, a community-action group in Chicago, was married yesterday to Kevin Michael Martin, the executive director of the Illinois Sane/Freeze Campaign for Global Security, a disarmament group.
The Rev.
T.
Carlton Lee performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Ms.
Udry, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Hamilton College and received a master's degree in Russian literature from the State University of New York at Albany.
She is the daughter of William and Dorothy Udry of Laurel Hollow, L.I.
Her father is the vice president and treasurer of the New York Institute of Technology in Greenvale, L.I.
Her mother is a real-estate agent in East Norwich, L.I., for the Daniel Gale Agency.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Chappaqua, N.Y. 382,000
46 Hardscrabble Hill  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old raised ranch; family room, fireplace, terrace, utility room, deck; taxes $7,564.
Millwood, N.Y. 394,000
19 Overbrook Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; front porch, cathedral ceiling, family room, fireplace, deck; taxes $8,500.
South Salem, N.Y. 455,000
Church Tavern Lane
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; library, 2 fireplaces, deck, screened porch, Jacuzzi, 6 acres; taxes not yet assessed.
Brookfield, Conn. 229,000
17 Hunting Ridge  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 32-year-old ranch; h/w floors, extra kitchen, fruit trees, 1.2 acres; taxes $2,290.
Essex, Conn. 349,000
Oxbow Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old contemporary; stone fireplace and cathedral ceiling in living room, deck, 3 acres; taxes $3,967.
Westbrook, Conn. 137,500
1037 Old Clinton Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old raised ranch; oversized closets, pool, walk to town, 0.75 acre; taxes $1,437.
OTHER AREAS Ronkonkoma, L.I. 119,000
740 Johnson Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, 0.50-acre; taxes $2,900.
Syosset, L.I. 250,000
85 Melanie Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, family room, pool; taxes $7,800.
Edison, N.J. 330,000
4012 Park Avenue  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 19-year-old colonial; skylights, wood trim and doors; taxes $5,983.


Ellen Harrington, Jeffrey Campbell
Ellen Crocker Harrington, an English teacher at Wayland (Mass.) Middle School, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Scott Campbell, a product manager in the personal computer division of Digital Equipment Corporation in Marlboro, Mass.
The Rev.
Terry O. Martinson performed the Congregational ceremony at the First and Second Church in Boston.
Mrs.
Campbell, 36 years old, graduated from Princeton University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George S. Harrington of Centreville, Del.
Her father is a retired chemical engineer for E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company in Wilmington, Del.


The Big Bolo At Fisher Hall
The New York Philharmonic is capitalizing on its music director's penchant for bolo ties.
Last season the Philharmonic's gift shop began selling them.
Now it's adding a line with clasps shaped like instruments to commemorate the orchestra's 150th anniversary.


An Unusual Hurdle
KEVIN YOUNG, Olympic champion and world record-holder in the 400-meter hurdles, knew where the hurdle was supposed to be but learned the organizers of a track and field meet in Berlin did not.
"I was next to the track and I saw Kevin Young make a gesture with his hand when he arrived at the spot where the second hurdle was supposed to go," RUDI THIEL, the meet director, said.
"This is very serious. What would have happened if we had a world record?"


3 Find Reality Is Part of the Game
They did not plan to be spectators on Saturday afternoons.
After all the letters and phone calls from college football coaches, the visits and decisions, this much seemed clear: Michael Miller, Bryan Fortay and Robert Smith each possessed the gifts to make a difference in a sport that turns nearly all the others into witnesses.
As the structure of college football continues to evolve, with a coalition of bowl games attempting to reshape the sport's decisive moments and with severe economic and pressures threatening further change, there is one factor that has remained constant since the days of the flying wedge.
At the highest level, on the most memorable Saturdays, the history of the game is often determined by the remarkable accomplishments of great players.


Kelley J. Simon, Glenn D. Hoskins
Kelley Jean Simon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Simon of Rivervale, N.J., was married yesterday in Park Ridge, N.J., to Glenn David Hoskins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Hoskins of Park Ridge.
The Rev.
Charles P. Granstrand performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Mercy Church.
Mrs.
Hoskins, 21 years old, is the receptionist at the Pitman Company, a graphic arts supplier in Totowa, N.J., where her father is the branch manager.
Her mother, Jean B. Simon, is the director of sales for Omnitech Corporate Solutions, a computer supply company in Teaneck, N.J.


LEARNING TO TALK OF RACE
Yes, yes, yes!
Finally, an accurate reaction to the events in Los Angeles last April.
Cornel West's methodical and full-bodied analysis, "Learning to Talk of Race" (Aug. 2), left nothing unmentioned or understated.
Especially revealing was his explanation of the cause of the riots: not "us" or "them," but all of American society.
The riots were not caused simply by the failure of one court's sense of justice, but by the injustices and lies of centuries.
KURT J. AKERSTEN JR.
Bay Head, N.J.


New Deal for Coach
SUE GUNTER, the third-winningest active coach in the nation, received a three-year contract with an annual salary of $55,000 to continue as Louisiana State women's basketball coach.


W. Lincoln Hawkins, 81, a Chemist and Inventor
W.
Lincoln Hawkins, a noted chemist, inventor and leader in efforts to foster scientific careers for other blacks, died on Thursday at his home in San Marcos, Calif., near San Diego.
He was 81 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Ofelia Acosta And Todd Silva
Ofelia Acosta Marchetti, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Manuel Acosta Bonilla of Tegucigalpa, Honduras, was married there Friday to Gil Todd Silva, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gil V. Silva of White Plains.
Archbishop Hector Enrique Santos performed the ceremony at Santuario de la Juventud Don Bosco.
Mrs.
Silva, 26 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Texas A &amp; M University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father, a lawyer in Tegucigalpa and a deputy to the Central American Parliament, is a former Minister of the Treasury and Minister of Economics of the Honduran government.
Her mother, Anna Lucia Marchetti de Acosta, is the chairwoman of Hiasa, an equipment importing company in Tegucigalpa.


RECORD BRIEFS
Smetana: 'Ma Vlast' Czech Philharmonic conducted by Karel Ancerl.
Supraphon 11 0669-2; CD.
Milwaukee Symphony conducted by Zdenek Macal.
Telarc CD-80265; CD.


NEW YORK: Play Ball!
Here's the pitch: This FALL, designers HAVE found inspiration IN THE world of sports -- WITH SMASHING success.


Once and Future Audubon
The critic Reyner Banham once wrote that "architecture is that which changes land use," and in built-up cities like New York such changes can be traumatic.
Taj Mahal, anyone?
Not in my backyard.
Even when a good building replaces an eyesore, the disruption can be painful, for it robs us of memories and violates our sense of control.
For cities to work as social organisms, people need to feel a proprietary interest in their surroundings.
Yet almost every ground-breaking shatters that benign illusion of ownership.
This fall, the jackhammers will start pounding on a piece of property in upper Manhattan that has aroused more than the usual amount of emotional upheaval.
The Audubon Research Building, whose design has just been completed, has been a focus of controversy for a decade.
The issues it has raised range from the civil rights of minorities to the possible hazards of conducting biological research in populous urban settings.
These issues largely lie beyond the scope of architecture.
They would remain unresolved no matter how well or badly the Audubon were designed, or even if nothing were built here.
But this project is one in which architectural and social values are not easily separated.
Indeed, the strength of the building's design, by Davis, Brody &amp; Associates, is in the sensitivity with which it brings these values into coherent relationship.


Miss Tolmach, Jeffrey Harper
Mr. and Mrs.
Ned S. Tolmach of Great Falls, Va., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Elisabeth Joy Tolmach and Jeffrey Rhodes Harper, a son of the Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
John C. Harper of Washington.
Miss Tolmach, 31 years old, is an associate at the Washington law firm of Shaw, Pittman, Potts &amp; Trowbridge.
She graduated magna cum laude from Duke University and received her law degree from the University of Virginia.
Her father, a retired advertising executive, and her mother, Norma A. Tolmach, are antiques dealers based in Leesburg, Va.
Miss Tolmach's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Fresh Figs, From Starters to Finishers
LUSH, fresh figs add a new look and flavor to many dishes.
Once a delicacy rarely seen in produce markets, figs are now sold in late summer in stores carrying fine produce and even in some supermarkets.
Of the figs grown in California two kinds are generally available.
The black mission variety is small, the sharply pointed oval fruit with blackish to purple skin enclosing brick-color flesh studded with tiny seeds.
Calmyrna figs are larger and rounder, with a more flattened shape and bright green to chartreuse skin.
The flesh is brownish.


King's Apartments Open
The King's Apartments at Hampton Court Palace west of London reopened last month after a $25 million, six-year restoration following severe fire damage in 1986.
The restoration project, which has involved not only returning the apartments to their original state but also refurbishing the interiors to as they were in 1700, is, according to Dr.
Simon Thurley, curator for the Historic Royal Palaces, "one of the largest and most complex undertaken in Europe since the Second World War."
The restorers were helped by the fact that most of the apartments' contents were saved and thousands of historical fragments salvaged; also, the apartment wing had not been altered architecturally since it was built for William and Mary by Sir Christopher Wren in the 1690's.
The original furnishing bills survive virtually intact, providing precise information about such details as the color, width and length of cord needed to pull the rich white silk damask curtains.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Gov.
Bill Clinton
MONDAY: 7 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America," interview.  (Channel 7 in New York.)


Making a Difference; The Lonely Free Trader
Last year, when United States makers of flat-panel video display screens for computers banded together to seek higher tariffs on Japanese displays, Steven R. Hix, chairman of In Focus Systems Inc., was a lone dissenting voice.
He said he'd rather battle the Japanese with technology than with legal briefs.
Last week, Mr.
Hix got a vote of confidence from Motorola Inc., which paid $22 million to acquire 20 percent of In Focus and entered a joint venture to make flat panel displays using the small company's technology.
The display screens will be made in a new plant, to be built near In Focus's headquarters in Tualatin, Ore., near Portland.
Most flat panel displays are made in Asian countries.


Putting the Power in the Car And the Powder in the Chili
They're having their annual vintage race-car festival over Labor Day weekend, the folks at Lime Rock Park called to say, and how about talking to Carroll Shelby, the Texas chili master and car builder who will be at the Connecticut track along with the Shelby American car club?
So the phone rings, and the first words from the other end of the line, in a somewhat befuddled growl, are: "Do you have any idea what we're supposed to be talking about?"
With the life lived by Carroll Shelby, he comes to no conversation unprepared.
Not after driving against the world's best in the 1950's, then retiring to build the Shelby Cobra and other racing sports cars that conquered Ferrari in the 1960's.
Burning Up Less Money
The Shelby Can Am car, his latest project, is his effort to give aspiring racers a chance to find out how good they are without spending a lot of money.
"I sell it for $35,000," he said, "and I wish I had known how much money I was going to lose on it.


Stasia Ward, Kevin J. Kehoe Jr.
Stasia Ward, a daughter of Michael and Janet Ward of Contoocook, N.H., was married yesterday to Kevin James Kehoe Jr., a son of Kevin and Ellen Kehoe of White Plains.
The Rev.
Richard J. Kehoe, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Our Lady of Fatima in New London, N.H.
Mrs.
Kehoe, 24 years old, graduated from Georgetown University and is a master's degree candidate in performance studies at New York University.
Her father is the president of Liscord, Ward &amp; Roy, an actuarial-consulting concern in Concord, N.H.
Her mother is the coordinator of the Scientist as Humanist Project, a teacher-training program at St.
Paul's School in Concord.


Quayle Emphasizes Simplicity on Tour of Past
While President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton fought over the future, Vice President Dan Quayle spent today trying to rewrite the past in a hometown visit intended to strip away his image as a child of privilege.
Mr.
Quayle showed reporters the simple house where he once lived and then led them on the milelong walk he took each morning to Central Elementary School.
He stopped in at Nick's Kitchen, where he used to enjoy the "world famous breaded tenderloin." Like many locations in town, the restaurant is now decorated with a plaque erected by the Dan Quayle Commemorative Foundation.


Auto-Mated


It's Your Choice
Hemlines slide low on the leg, or end at the knee.
Shorts replace minis.
Pants are as slim as leggins.
Long molded jackets shape the body.
Red is right at night.
Animal prints, tweed, leather, knits define day silhouettes.
Shoes have substance.
Belts cinch.
Bags are big.
So much is new this season, all you have to do is choose what works for you.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Amateur Garlickers
SUNSET watching from the Antignanos' back porch will have to wait.
The view becomes a bit obscured this time of year, what with the 2,000 pounds of hanging garlic.


3 Hurricanes With Speed and a Purpose
Several years ago, not long after they had been brought together in the place where the sun shines and the quarterbacks glitter with equal intensity, Micheal Barrow, Darrin Smith and Jesse Armstead defined their futures.
They were watching former University of Miami teammates prepare for the next level, working out for National Football League scouts, when the thought came to them.
"All three of us can go first round," Barrow remembered.
"We can work out better. We can run faster. We can do what it takes."


A Careful Approach to Controlling Pests
THE bugs are here.
The inclination is to get rid of them the quickest way possible.
But increased environmental awareness, a good thing, is making most gardeners think twice about the use of any chemical on their grounds.
More practical now appears to be a system called integrated pest management, which includes targeting particular nuisance insects.
When insect pests are getting the upper hand, and something has to be done, it must be done wisely.
One of the first rules is to identify correctly the insect to be controlled.
Then the method for its control can be selected.
Blanket spraying should be a thing of the past.


Will Courts Doff Wigs? The Jury's Out in Britain
Still befrocked and bewigged after all these centuries, judges and lawyers in British courtrooms were asked this week to consider the unthinkable: Is it time to lose their wigs and thick robes and begin to dispense justice with the bare heads and sober clothing of ordinary citizens?
In a gesture that has dismayed traditionalists and cheered reformers, Britain's two top legal officials have set out to learn whether court officers, jurors, even members of the general public believe that wigs and ceremonial robes add to or detract from the cause of equal justice.


Russia: Of Dog Cosmonauts And Leather Jackets
Rap has come to Russia, but as with most Western trends, with considerable delay and inevitable modifications.
"After all," says Aleksei Soloviev, a member of the rap group Raketa, or Rocket, "Russia lacks a black underclass."
That's why, he says, he has adapted American rap rhythms "to make it more techno-beat, more house music, a bit more European, because, after all, I'm white." Even the Russian language, he says, so verbally rich, doesn't fit the sharp, rhyming patterns of American rap very well.


Fresh Figs, From Starters to Finishers
LUSH, fresh figs add a new look and flavor to many dishes.
Once a delicacy rarely seen in produce markets, figs are now sold in late summer in stores carrying fine produce and even in some supermarkets.
Of the figs grown in California two kinds are generally available.
The black mission variety is small, the sharply pointed oval fruit with blackish to purple skin enclosing brick-color flesh studded with tiny seeds.
Calmyrna figs are larger and rounder, with a more flattened shape and bright green to chartreuse skin.
The flesh is brownish.


1 Marshal Dead, Others Confront Fugitive in Idaho
A fugitive remained holed up in a remote mountaintop cabin today as the Federal authorities sent in more than 100 agents and helicopters and small armored vehicles hours after the fatal shooting of a Federal marshal.
It was not clear what the Federal agents planned to do next.
A negotiation team was called, but the authorities were not able to contact the fugitive because he has no telephone.
A telephone company truck and an armed personnel carrier were taken behind three roadblocks to the scene.


3 Homers Send Pirates Past Giants
Pirates 9, Giants 2
Barry Bonds, Jay Bell and Mike LaValliere each hit two-run homers to back Doug Drabek's strong pitching as the Pittsburgh Pirates beat the San Francisco Giants, 9-2, today.


'No Cause For Celebration'
To the Editor:
I do not understand why this country cannot let Marilyn Monroe just die and be dead once and for all.
Our embarrassing obsession with trying to demythologize a celebrity who was invented for the sole purpose of cultural mythologizing has reached a point of ridiculousness.


Disabled Taking to the Road in Adapted Rental Vans
IN 1987, when Wheelers' Accessible Van Rentals began renting wheelchair-adapted minivans in Glendale, Ariz., "we were lucky to rent one van a month," Tammy Smith, the president, said.
And then when the Americans With Disabilities Act was signed in July 1990, she said, "We did not pay muh attention because we thought it was about architecture." But, she discovered, "It's not about architecture, it's about access. And it's having a major impact on the number of wheelchair users who want to go places."
Now, she said, her rental company, with 30 locations, mostly in the warm-weather states, sometimes turns away as much business as it accommodates.
It has 60 vans, mostly Chevrolets, and they are 80 percent booked all year, she said.
This represents a lot of pent-up demand from wheelchair users, who can now get into attractions and parks and visit scenic places that would have been out of reach 10 years ago.


Laura Cabot, C. J. Carrigan
Laura Cabot, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas D. Cabot Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher John Carrigan, a son of Sarah M. Carrigan of Concord, Mass., and the late Dr.
Walter E. Carrigan.
The Rev.
Christian Roy performed the Roman Catholic service at St.
Francis of Assisi Church in Belfast, Me.
Ms.
Cabot Carrigan, 26 years old, was until recently an assistant to the director of disaster response at Catholic Charities U.S.A. in Alexandria, Va.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and will begin studies for a master's degree in public policy at Columbia University this month.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president and a physicist at the Cabot Corporation, a Boston petrochemicals company.
The bride's grandfather Thomas D. Cabot of Weston, Mass., is the company's honorary chairman; his father, the late Godfrey Lowell Cabot, founded the company.


Intermarriage And the Temple
In response to the recent interview with Rabbi Gerald Zelizer (New Jersey Q &amp; A, "The Struggle to Prevent Intermarriage"):


CRIME
Robert Barnard could teach spiders a trick or two about spinning webs.
In A FATAL ATTACHMENT (Scribners, $20), the British author of more than two dozen novels of mystery and suspense fashions a silken plot tight enough to ensnare a formidable villain, a designing woman who alienates teen-age boys from their parents and fills their heads with romantic swill about their heroic destiny.
We are not talking about a benignly bossy Auntie Mame here, but "that thing that devours her males" -- in this case, by destroying their egos.
Although Mr.
Barnard is a bit glib about the origins of Lydia Perceval's pathology, he draws a meticulous portrait of her dominating personality and the lethal psychological damage she inflicts.
An aloof but admired celebrity in her Yorkshire village, Lydia indulges her fantasies by writing popular biographies of historical swashbucklers like Lord Byron and T. E. Lawrence, and by mooning over a dashing explorer she almost married.
But when she begins to instill her reckless notions in two impressionable brothers from the village, someone among Lydia's many past conquests gets a mind to strangle her.


SUSAN SONTAG FINDS ROMANCE
As a women's-health activist, I was a little confused by Francine Prose's lament for the shortage of modern-day Margaret Sangers.
Prose writes that "Mathilde Krim isn't going to jail for free needle exchange and condom distribution," but many women and men from Act Up have, and have succeeded in changing laws in New York City and elsewhere.
Abortion rights activists
have
included civil disobedience in their tactics and are prepared to do whatever is necessary to insure that women will have the right to safe abortions.


Laura Palmer Land


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; One Economy, 2 Visions
Their gimmicks and vague promises aside, President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton present contrasting pictures of the state of the American economy and starkly different views about what needs to be done in the next four years.
Mr.
Bush maintains that the American economy is inherently healthy and that the Government should take a hands-off approach and leave the free market alone.


'Dollar Apartheid' Makes a Few Russians Rich but Resented
IN the enormous shadow economy that was the Soviet Union, a foreigner, immediately recognizable by hair, shoes, clothes and who knew what else, could hardly walk the street outside his wretched Intourist hotel without a young man sidling up to whisper: "Change money? Sell dzhinsi?"
Today in St.
Petersburg, always closer to the West in geography and spirit, the dual economy is out in the open, with real Levi's 501's on sale in the airport for $54 and every taxi driver a mobile bureau de change.
Charging $6 for a taxi ride across town (expensive here, but not when you're very late), the driver happily took a $10 bill and returned $2 and 320 rubles, an accurate rate of exchange.
Asked, he spun off similarly decent rates for German marks and French francs.


Art and Commerce: a College's Turbulent Tale
Even before the pipe bomb explosion that led to the cancellation of graduation exercises, before the $12 million lawsuit by disgruntled students and the purge of skeptical faculty members and trustees, a lot of people here had begun to wonder just what was going on at the Savannah College of Art and Design.
Depending on who's talking, the college is either a model of entrepreneurial education -- an institution that in 14 years has gone from a mere idea to one of the largest of its kind in the nation -- or a place that deserves the contempt of protesting students who call it SCAM instead of SCAD.
But at a time when the standard answer to everything from education to the Presidency is that it needs to be run like a business, there's an intriguing tale (call it "The Art College That Ate Savannah") in the combination of art, academics and commerce that surrounds the college.


Air Pollution
To the Editor: After a 10-day trip to northern Italy -- Milan, the lakes and Venice -- I would like to make a suggestion to all travel writers of books and articles.
The recent environmental conference in Rio de Janeiro highlighted ecological issues.
But pollution is now a real factor in deciding where to travel.
Many choose on the basis of idealized pictures or descriptions that ignore environmental conditions entirely.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison 330,000
4012 Park Avenue  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 19-year-old colonial; skylights, wood trim and doors; taxes $5,983.
Fair Haven 340,000
1 Woodland Road  6-bedroom, 2-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod, stained-glass windows, pool, poolhouse; taxes $7,400.
Glen Ridge 200,000
6 Clinton Road  5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 92-year-old colonial; parquet floors, patio, stained-glass windows; taxes $5,110.
Montclair 305,000
111 Christopher Street  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 64-year-old Tudor; new kitchen, secluded back yard, full basement; taxes $7,363.
Ridgewood 240,000
301 Kensington Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old colonial; finished basement, game room, enclosed porch, fireplace; taxes $5,316.
Toms River 174,900
8 Clearwater Way  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 15-year-old ranch; great room w/dual marble fireplace, family room; taxes $3,070.
OTHER AREAS Chappaqua, N.Y. 382,000
46 Hardscrabble Hill  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old raised ranch; family room, fireplace, terrace, utility room, deck; taxes $7,564.
Westbrook, Conn. 137,500
1037 Old Clinton Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old raised ranch; oversized closets, pool, walk to town, 0.75 acre; taxes $1,437.
Old Brookville, L.I. 525,000
26 Hill House Lane  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 13-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, 2 acres; taxes $7,300.


New Year's Revolution: Bowls Try Banding Together
Not so long ago, when all those representatives of bowl games set out each autumn in their brightly colored blazers to seek teams, they were united only in a distrust of their competitors, a willingness to be entertained and a desperate need to find a respectable clothier.
But now the Orange, Cotton, Sugar and Fiesta Bowls have banded together with six conferences and Notre Dame in an effort to introduce the concepts of dignity and organization to the college football season.
The merger of all those loud jackets into a Rainbow Coalition could eventually mark 1992 as the year in which chaos began to give way to order on New Year's day and night.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; NOMINEES CRITICIZE EACH OTHER'S PLAN TO REVIVE ECONOMY
The race for the Presidency began in earnest this weekend, as President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton engaged in a furious exchange over each other's economic proposals and, by extension, their political character.
The opening debate set the tone and the subject matter for what strategists in both campaigns predict will be a harsh and brutally competitive 10-week struggle that could ultimately come down to a handful of states in the industrial Midwest.


100-Year-Old Black Paper Is Struggling
In a shadowy, ink-stained workroom here, hundreds of bound volumes fill tables, carts and shelves, their covers shielding yellowed newspapers and a part of America that for decades found expression only in the now-fragile pages of the black-owned press.
The bound sheaves of The Afro-American, the nation's oldest family-owned black newspaper, span 100 years this month.
But if they chronicle the fundamental change in black American life between the turn of the century and the 1970's, they also indirectly cover the paper's own decline as black America found a voice in mainstream newspapers.


SUSAN SONTAG FINDS ROMANCE
I would like to be reincarnated as one of Susan Sontag's books ("Susan Sontag Finds Romance," by Leslie Garis, Aug. 2).
Preferably one with lots of white strips of paper sticking up from my pages.
THOMAS J. MONSELL
Flemington, N.J.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
July existing-home sales, millions
3.36
3.50
Aug. consumer confidence, percent
61.0
59.5
Late August auto sales, millions
5.7
6.5
Wednesday
July durable goods orders, percent change
2.7
4.0
Thursday
July gross domestic product, percent
1.4
1.8
July price deflator, percent
2.4
2.4
Mid-August jobless claims, thousands
474
400
Friday
July personal income, percent change
0.0
0.2
July spending, percent change
0.5
0.4
Wednesday: Chancellor Kohl of Germany and President Mitterrand of France meet  Thursday: July import and export prices released


Entertaining A la Betsy
The lady knows how to lunch, but can she cook?
Betsy Bloomingdale, the widow of Alfred Bloomingdale, who developed the Diners' Club credit-card business, is writing a book on entertaining.


When Wintergreen Ran, Family Values Were Fun
Even if politicians were fit for nothing else, throwing
all
the bums out would dry up the raw material for one of America's great durable-goods industries -- the making of books, plays, films and wisecracks about politicians and politics.
Before there was a Willie Stark in Robert Penn Warren's "All the King's Men," there had to be a Huey Long.


Wall Street; Funds That Lock Investors In
Investors in baseball cards, shopping centers and antique cars cheerfully accept that their investments might prove tough to sell quickly.
But a lack of liquidity in mutual funds?
The recent initial public offering of the Japan Equity Fund shows that at least some investors simply aren't ready to be barred from getting out of a fund whenever they feel like it.
Even if the restriction is fully disclosed to them ahead of time, and even if the illiquidity lasts only for a short time.
Like it or not, however, investors will encounter a growing number of such funds.


Brainstorming
THEORIES OF THE MIND
By Stephen Priest. 233 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. Paper, $9.95.


Saints Sign Safeties
The New Orleans Saints signed free safety GENE ATKINS and strong safety BRETT MAXIE ended their 32-day contract disputes and signed two-year deals.
Wide receiver ERIC MARTIN and cornerback TOI COOK, who refused to report to training camp because of unhappiness with their negotiations, remained unsigned. (AP)


In Health Care, Technology Is Not the Villain
To the Editor:
Professors at medical schools are paid more than other faculty.
Physicians make staggering incomes.
Hospital rooms cost more than the fanciest hotel rooms.
And yet in "The Hard Choices in Health Care" (Forum, July 19), William B. Schwartz tells us that rising health costs are caused by "the rapid introduction of valuable and extremely expensive new technology."


If You're Thinking of Living in: Carnegie Hill
WALKING among small children on quiet, tree-lined streets, past well-tended brownstones to an avenue of friendly shops serving a clientele on a first-name basis, a visitor to Carnegie Hill finds what seems to be more a village than a Manhattan neighborhood.
With its devotion to family, privacy and, well, good manners it is distincly distanced from the angry, churning metropolis beyond its borders.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley, of the Church of the Heavenly Rest on Fifth Avenue and 90th Street, grew up in a village in England.
In Carnegie Hill, too, he finds "a very real quality of country living."


The Club
WHAT: A bright red antitheft device for automobiles that was invented five years ago by the Winner International Corporation in Sharon, Pa., and is now sold in department and auto-parts stores worldwide.
Two million Clubs were sold last year.
Winner hopes to sell four million to six million this year.
Law-enforcement officials often tout the almost uncuttable, case-hardened steel bar as the best possible protection against car theft.
Cost: $59.95.
The Econo Club costs $39.95 and the Super Club, $99.
The Designer Club, which costs $61.99, comes in four neon colors.
One size fits all steering wheels.
The models vary in the degree of difficulty in opening the locks.
WHY: In 1990, the last year for which data exists, there were 1.6 million car thefts in the United States.


Boston Staging Holiday Festival
Massachusetts starts a new event this Labor Day weekend called Taste of Massachusetts, a five-day festival of food and entertainment to be held in Boston.
The festival, beginning Sept. 3, will feature regional specialties from 25 Boston area restaurants, music, children's activities and an artisans' marketplace.
Visitors can sample clam chowder and lobster rolls from Jimmy's Harborside, duck sausage and Caesar salad from the Back Bay Bistro and enchiladas from Rebecca's Cafe, and chefs will give cooking presentations throughout the festival.
Stage acts include Blood, Sweat and Tears; Three Dog Night; Sha Na Na; Manly Moondog, and the Three Kool Kats.
A Best of Massachusetts stage will showcase local and regional bands, while a Heritage Stage will offer ethnic and folk music.
Children's entertainment will include puppet shows, clowns, magicians, face-painting, storytelling, arts and crafts and a play area.


Clock Is Running Out On 3 Giants Holdouts
After tonight's preseason game against the Jets, the Giants had one week before their final preseason game, two weeks before the season opener and three 1991 starters still unsigned and absent.
Of the three, nose tackle Erik Howard seems most likely to sign this week.
Outside linebacker Carl Banks seems next in line.
Offensive guard Eric Moore remains a mystery.


NEW YORK: Chic Sports
What a way to go jogging! Some of THE most sybaritic styles derive from exercise gear.


Diane Huebner, Peter Dillon
Diane Marie Huebner, a daughter of Dr.
Charles A. Huebner of Budapest and the late Suzan Huebner, was married yesterday in Westport, Conn., to Peter William Dillon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian Dillon of New York.
Msgr.
Thomas Driscoll performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Luke's Church.
Ms.
Huebner-Dillon, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Hamilton College and is a master's degree candidate in education at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
Her father is the director of the Hungarian-American Enterprise Fund, an economic development group in Budapest.


Cathedral Resists Nursing Home's Shadow
It is a dispute that pits the dappling play of celestial light through the rose window of a great Gothic cathedral against the earthly urgency for more beds to comfort the aged and infirm.
Amsterdam House, a 303-bed nursing home on West 112th Street in Manhattan, hopes to build a 13-story addition that would stand across from -- opponents say, "tower over" -- the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.


The Awful Crime of I. U. Tarchetti: Plagiarism as Propaganda
DO you ever wonder what might be concealed by a translator's invisibility?
Have you ever read a translation suspecting that the translator has left an indelible mark on the foreign text, but you can't detect it?
I myself have grown more obsessed recently, after translating a book of Italian fiction.
I discovered, quite by accident, that the author had committed a crime, but invisibly, with none of his readers ever knowing.
The author is I. U. Tarchetti (1839-69), a short-lived but prolific Italian writer whose work had never been translated into English.
I was especially attracted by his fantastic tales, and among them was one entitled "The Elixir of Immortality." It is treated by Italian scholars as the first Gothic tale written in Italian, and I too was under this impression.
But then I unexpectedly came across a brief summary of it in a book by an English critic.
The critic gave a different title to the tale, "The Mortal Immortal" (1833), and attributed it to Mary Shelley.
What Italian readers thought was written by Tarchetti turns out to be his Italian translation of her English text, published as his own tale.


Suzanne Welsh, Brendan Mulshine
Suzanne Mary Welsh, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Welsh Jr. of Valparaiso, Ind., was married yesterday to Brendan Martin Mulshine, a son of Robert Mulshine of New York and Kathleen Mulshine of Hartsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Charles Faso performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Peter's Church in Chicago.
Mrs.
Mulshine, 28 years old, was until recently a lawyer for the Phillips Petroleum Company in Bartlesville, Okla.
She graduated from St.
Mary's College in Notre Dame, Ind., and received a J.D. degree from the University of Notre Dame.
Her father is the president of the Welsh Oil Company in Merrillville, Ind.


Six Years Later, Green Is a Backer, Not a Runner
Mark Green, a Democrat who won the right to take on United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato in 1986 but roundly lost the general election, sat out the primary race this time around.
But Mr.
Green, now New York City's Consumer Affairs Commissioner and a man who once said that one of his "missions in life" was to see Mr.
D'Amato unseated, is lining up behind State Attorney General Robert Abrams, who is running against three other candidates for the Democratic nomination.
The Green endorsement comes as the race for the Sept. 15 primary is entering a hostile -- and critical -- phase.


A Careful Approach to Controlling Pests
THE bugs are here.
The inclination is to get rid of them the quickest way possible.
But increased environmental awareness, a good thing, is making most gardeners think twice about the use of any chemical on their grounds.
More practical now appears to be a system called integrated pest management, which includes targeting particular nuisance insects.
When insect pests are getting the upper hand, and something has to be done, it must be done wisely.
One of the first rules is to identify correctly the insect to be controlled.
Then the method for its control can be selected.
Blanket spraying should be a thing of the past.


Houston's Two Conventions
There were actually two Republican conventions in Houston, not one.
The first, aimed at softening up the Democrats while firming up Mr.
Bush's right wing, consisted of numbingly repetitive attacks on Congress and coarse slurs about the Clintons.
It seemed to go on forever.
The second convention lasted almost an hour: Mr.
Bush's acceptance speech.
Here, at last, real issues like foreign affairs and the recession were engaged.
Mr.
Bush mentioned "family values" only once and left Bill and Hillary Clinton's personal life alone.
He wasn't mean.
Hard-edged, but not mean.


Pro-Choice Means Women Can Make Decisions; Abstinence Is Sexist
To the Editor:
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo writes that we must teach abstinence to teen-agers as an ideal, then realistically recognizes that we must deal with lack of abstinence as a fact (Op-Ed, Aug. 5).
This is better than teaching only abstinence and refusing to deal with anything else, but it raises a question that no one seems prepared to ask or answer: Is there anything wrong with abstinence as an ideal?


Laws Mandate Posted Charges
The state Public Service Commission requires that all pay phones clearly post information about the identity of the companies that own them.
Those operated by New York Telephone are clearly marked by distinctive blue and white logos.
The commission also requires that phones post:


Auto Insurance: Another View
In his letter to the New Jersey editor on July 19, responding to the article "No-Frills Insurance Proposed for Cars," attorney Paul Hofmann criticized the recent proposals to reduce the minimum liability requirements for New Jersey drivers, contending that innocent victims could suffer "severe financial hardships."


Irresponsible or Just Playful?
NAME: Gregg Araki
IDENTITY: Director of "The Living End," a road movie about two H.I.V.-positive men, which has been criticized for its portrayals of violence, unsafe sex and killer lesbians.


Perspectives: Wall Street Leasing; Cooling a Securities Firm's Wanderlust
"IF the economics are comparable, then we get to the convenience issue," said William J. Ahearn, first vice president of Prudential Securities.
The economics were made comparable, in the end, with those in Jersey City by tax relief granted by New York City, so downtown Manhattan was free to prove itself on the convenience issue.
No trouble there.
Mr.
Ahearn was elaborating on the decision-making process that led the nation's third largest securities firm to make a major commitment to the Wall Street area, announced by Mayor David N. Dinkins on Aug. 5.
The company is taking a million square feet of space in Chase Manhattan Bank's 2.1-million-square-foot tower at One Water Street, known as One New York Plaza, at the Battery.
And it is renewing its lease on 500,000 square feet in Jack Resnick &amp; Sons' One Seaport Plaza, or 199 Water Street, near South Street Seaport.


Fresh Figs, From Starters to Finishers
LUSH, fresh figs add a new look and flavor to many dishes.
Once a delicacy rarely seen in produce markets, figs are now sold in late summer in stores carrying fine produce and even in some supermarkets.
Of the figs grown in California two kinds are generally available.
The black mission variety is small, the sharply pointed oval fruit with blackish to purple skin enclosing brick-color flesh studded with tiny seeds.
Calmyrna figs are larger and rounder, with a more flattened shape and bright green to chartreuse skin.
The flesh is brownish.


Clinton Video Now an Infomercial
"A Man from Hope," the video campaign biography of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas produced for the Democratic National Convention, has begun running as a television infomercial, a program-length commercial with program-style content.
The video runs twice during a 30-minute segment and is accompanied by a telephone number viewers can call to obtain a copy of Gov.
Clinton's economic plan.


Team Owners Take A 3d Strike at Vincent
It may not have seemed possible, but baseball might have struck the trifecta.
In the course of one season, major league owners have come to challenge three common precepts long held inviolate not only by previous lords of baseball but also by the Federal court system.


Fugitive Holds Off Officers in Idaho After Death of U.S. Marshal


Meeting On Vincent Could Be Ordered
Commissioner Fay Vincent will conduct a telephone meeting of major league club owners today, but it won't be the session sought by the owners who want to dismiss him.
Today's meeting will deal with the sale of the Detroit Tigers.
It is a formality because owners in both leagues already have unanimously approved the transaction in unofficial league votes.
The type of meeting the anti-Vincent faction of owners wants, in which they would ask Vincent to resign or be fired, would not be a formality.
It could, on the other hand, turn out to be unofficial, and its results unenforceable.


Orgosolo Journal; Where Kings of the Mountains Are Kidnappers
His hair had been cropped, he had acquired a fear of rats and part of his left ear had been sliced away.
But when 8-year-old Farouk Kassam was freed by kidnappers last month after 177 days of captivity, not only his family rejoiced.
For once, in a land where organized crime increasingly seems to know no restraint, the Italian police said they had demonstrated the power of the state over lawlessness.
And for once the people in villages like this on a barren Sardinian hillside said they had mustered the courage with protests and demonstrations to resist the bandits, as the Sicilians have started to do with the Mafia on another Mediterranean island farther south.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Gov.
Bill Clinton  TODAY: 7 A.M., ABC, "Good Morning America," interview. (Channel 7 in New York.)


Argentina's Stock Regulator Faces Daunting Task
When Martin Redrado was named chairman of Argentina's National Securities Commission a year ago, he was just 29 years old, fresh from jobs in the United States with Salomon Brothers and the Security Pacific Bank, and the outlook for the Argentine stock markets he was to regulate seemed bright.
The economy was stable and growing at almost 5 percent a year, inflation was running below 20 percent, and the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange was booming, having just been discovered by a cadre of emerging-market investors from the United States and Europe.


W. Lincoln Hawkins, 81, Chemist And Mentor for Black Scientists
W.
Lincoln Hawkins, a noted chemist, inventor and leader in efforts to foster scientific careers for other blacks, died on Thursday at his home in San Marcos, Calif., near San Diego.
He was 81 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Even Falling Prices Can Be Painful
It's not just the $5 New York-Washington bus fare, the Gap stores' 26 percent cut in jeans prices and the aggressive air fare discounts, which could push some airlines into oblivion.
The prices of many items -- from gold and other commodities to television sets and new-model Chevrolets -- are falling.
They are not just going up more slowly or going down only after allowing for inflation, but are actually falling, period.


Olympics' Value Drops As Vehicle for Networks
NBC executives describe the results of the network's more than $600 million investment in the 1992 Summer Olympics as a "tolerable loss," which they hope will be mitigated by gains the network may make in other programs that it promoted extensively during the heavily watched Games.
"In light of the things we hope will see some benefit because of how well the Games did, we're saying we had a tolerable loss," said Robert C. Wright, president of NBC.


Home Depot Joins Olympics
The Home Depot Inc., the Atlanta-based home improvement chain, has become the third corporate sponsor of the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta.
The two other companies that have already pledged sponsorship are Nationsbank and the Sara Lee Corporation.
The companies are paying nearly $40 million each to join the small club of 12 corporate sponsors.


Bank Law Gives Equal Credit Where It Is Due
To the Editor:
The real Catch-22 involving the Community Reinvestment Act is the conflicting interpretations of what this 1977 law is about.
The interpretation by bankers and their lawyers, such as Jay G. Baris ("Inner-City Banking's Catch-22," Op-Ed, Aug. 1), is that the Community Reinvestment Act means credit allocation and requires banks to make "risky loans" to "inner-city residents and other economically disadvantaged entrepreneurs." Community group leaders, on the other hand, view the law as a long-overdue Government effort to prevent redlining and other illegal discrimination.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Second Straight for Fittipaldi  Emerson Fittipaldi won an eight-lap sprint to the finish following a late-race caution period and won the Texaco-Havoline 200 in Elkhart Lake, Wis., yesterday for his second straight Indy-car victory.
Fittipaldi, who led most of the race, held off Al Unser Jr. on the final laps for his 16th career Indy-car victory, including three at Elkhart Lake's Road America.
Bobby Rahal, slowed by a near pit collision with Michael Andretti, took third and Andretti was fourth.
Scott Goodyear went off the track in the 35th lap, forcing the next seven laps to be run under the yellow flag and creating a tight dash to the finish.
Fittipaldi wouldn't budge from the lead -- fighting off two pass attempts from Unser on the first lap after the restart -- and finished the race with an average speed of 110.656 miles an hour on the four-mile road course.
Fittipaldi also won at Road America in 1986 and 1988.
Unser finished .775 seconds back and Rahal was 1.078 seconds behind. (AP) Nemechek Outduels Earnhardt: Joe Nemechek held off a charging Dale Earnhardt by half a car-length to capture the Busch Grand National New England Chevy Dealers 250 at New Hampshire International Speedway in Loudon.
Nemechek, the Grand National points leader, overcame a sparkplug problem during the pace laps and a hard bump by Earnhardt on lap 247 to win the second race of his career. (AP) GOLF  Faxon Triumphs in Colorado  Brad Faxon was the first on the course and the first to realize how difficult it would be waiting out his cliff-hanging victory in the International at Castle Rock, Colo.
"Boy, that's the worst part of going off first, having to sit there and watch it," Faxon said yesterday after watching several challengers miss chances to catch up over the closing holes.
Faxon gave them that opportunity after missing a three-putt par on the par-5 17th hole that would have given him some breathing room.
As it turned out, however, the breathing room wasn't needed and Faxon scored a two-point triumph in the tournament, in which medal scores do not count.
Faxon acquired 14 points under the modified Stableford scoring system that awards points for a player's score on each hole: 5 for eagle, 2 for birdie, 0 for par, minus 1 for bogey and minus 3 for double bogey or higher.
Faxon, 31 years old, collected $216,000 for his second victory of the year and fourth of his career.
Lee Janzen, a winner in Tucson this year, was second with 12 points.
D.
A.
Weibring and Steve Elkington of Australia were next at 10.  (AP) Joyce Rallies to Win: Mike Joyce shot a 64 in the final round of the GTE Northwest Classic at Kenmore, Wash., coming from five strokes back for his first victory on the Senior PGA Tour.
Joyce, a club pro from Long Island, sizzled on the 6,455-yard Inglewood Country Club course for a bogey-free round and ended at 204.
Mike Hill, the defending champion, who held a one-stroke lead through 36 holes, finished second after a 71 and 206. (AP) Tschetter Finally Wins: Kris Tschetter's eagle on the 12th hole lifted her dwindling lead at the L.P.G.A.
Northgate Classic in Brooklyn Park, Minn., yesterday and sent her to her first victory in five seasons on tour.
Tschetter, 27, had a one-over 73 at the Edinburgh USA course for a 54-hole total of 211, three shots ahead of Deb Richard.
Betsy King and Judy Dickinson tied for third at 216. (AP)
SAILING  Match-Race Title to Coutts  Russell Coutts of New Zealand displaced his compatriot, Chris Dickson, as yachting's match-racing world champion when he defeated Kevin Mahaney of the United States in the final off Long Beach, Calif.
The 13th-ranked Mahaney had scored a stunning upset by taking out the top-ranked Dickson in their semifinal. (Reuters)


Bridge
Play began here this morning in the ninth World Team Olympiad, under the auspices of the World Bridge Federation.
A record number of teams is taking part: 59 in the open series and 35 in the women's series.
The United States open team began well, winning matches against Turkey and Estonia 16 to 14 and 25 to 0.
This put them in fourth place in the B group, 5 victory points behind Sweden, the leaders with 46.
Poland led the A group with 48 out of a possible 50.


Yugoslav-American in Belgrade Leads Serbs Who Won't Follow
Since Milan Panic, a California millionaire, returned to his native Yugoslavia to assume the job of Prime Minister, he has vowed to end support for Serbs fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to allow observers to move freely through Yugoslav territory and to halt "ethnic cleansing," which he described in his inaugural address as "the disgrace of our nation."
But although Mr.
Panic's words have been welcomed, he has been unable to keep his promises.
Several programs have been blocked by Slobodan Milosevic, the President of Serbia, the larger of the two republics that make up the truncated Yugoslav federation.
Others have been sidetracked by members of Mr.
Panic's Cabinet, some of whose members were imposed on him by Mr.
Milosevic and the Yugoslav President, Dobrica Cosic.
Not Welcome at Peace Talks
Despite Mr.
Panic's efforts, the war in Bosnia is still raging, and foreign governments are tightening their sanctions against Yugoslavia.


Essay; Grading Bush's Speech
All eyes have been fixed on the effect of the Bush acceptance speech: conventioneers bought while investors sold and pollsters bounced.
But what of the speech itself?
Did it measure up to the standard set in Mr.
Bush's first acceptance speech four years ago -- and did it live up to the advance word that it would not only "redefine" his image but would tell the American people where he hoped to lead them in a second term?


'Outsert' Planned For Details
The "polybagged outsert" -- a lavish advertising supplement to a magazine that comes wrapped in a plastic bag -- will make another appearance when Request Jeans distributes a 48-page supplement with 200,000 copies of the October issue of Details magazine.
An earlier supplement for Calvin Klein jeans, featuring provocative photographs by Bruce Weber, became notorious after it was distributed with Vanity Fair magazine last October.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about putting the homeless in housing projects mislocated the Stanley M. Isaacs project.
It is in Yorkville at 403 East 93d Street.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Voters; Some Ohioans Finding No Easy Political Home
Spirits were high at the Great Tomato Weigh-In and Festival here the other day.
With the sun shining, the soda cold and a gentle breeze off Lake Erie rustling the trees, it was just about a perfect day, said Priscilla Davis.
Then the subject of the Presidential campaign came up.
"They both stink," the 36-year-old part-time bank teller said of President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
"There's too much dirt being dug up on each candidate that has nothing to do with the election or the lives of real people. They don't care about us, and they don't know anything about family values. What does politics have to do with it?"


World Economies


Frances M. Rosenblatt And Edward S. Plotkin
Frances Maxine Rosenblatt and Edward S. Plotkin were married yesterday in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Rabbi Barry Kenter performed the ceremony at the Greenburgh Hebrew Center.
Mrs.
Plotkin, 57 years old, is a financial administrator at Beth El Synagogue in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mr.
Plotkin, 59, is Westchester County's Commissioner of Public Works.
Both the bride and the bridegroom were widowed.


In Change to I.R.A.'s, Few Gain, Many Pay
To the Editor:
The Senate tax bill's provision to remove income limits for full deduction of investments in individual retirement accounts by workers covered by pension plans is ill advised.
That such liberalization would provide an incentive for increasing family savings is very questionable; moreover, the revenue loss to the Treasury would result in a net loss in national savings.
Among other things, the I.R.A. measure would restore full deductibility -- up to $2,000 -- on higher incomes that was eliminated in the Tax Reform Act of 1986.


Elizabeth Ginsberg, Lawrence Sodano
Elizabeth Zahava Ginsberg, a daughter of Robert and Ilene Ginsberg of Norwalk, Conn., was married yesterday to Lawrence Steven Sodano, a son of Roy and Mary Sodano of Concord, Mass.
The bride's mother, a Norwalk justice of the peace, officiated at the Inn at Longshore in Westport, Conn.
Ms.
Ginsberg, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a program director at Brakeley, John Price Jones Inc., a fund-raising consultant in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Carol Wright Sales, a housewares catalogue company in Stamford.
Her mother is an administrative assistant at the Westport chapter of Save the Children, the charitable group.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


A MILLION ARE TOLD TO FLEE HURRICANE IN SOUTH FLORIDA
A ferocious hurricane slammed into the Bahamas Sunday afternoon and swept toward the densely populated coast of southern Florida, prompting the authorities here to order a million people to leave their homes.
Early today Hurricane Andrew was on a course that would take it to the Florida coast at dawn with winds that meteorologists expected to be as high as 140 miles an hour.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Applied Materials Inc., 3.5 million common shares, 2.8 million in the United States.
Lehman Brothers.
Consolidated Natural Gas Co., 4 million common shares, 3.6 million in the United States.
First Boston Corp.


Tracy Bernstein, Eric A. Beldoch
Tracy Gina Bernstein, a senior editor at Warner Books in New York, was married yesterday to Eric Adam Beldoch, a computer systems manager at the Simmons Market Research Bureau in New York.
Rabbi Charles Lippman officiated at the Parker Meridien Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Beldoch, 30 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Robert and Vicki Bernstein of New York.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of March Five Inc., a New York public-relations concern.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Baker Returns, Bringing Tried-and-True Tactics
With but 10 weeks to election day, James A. Baker 3d took over as White House chief of staff this evening amid expectations that he planned to reorder the top of the Republican re-election apparatus.
Mr.
Baker replaced Samuel K. Skinner as President Bush's top aide at 6:30 this evening, minutes after the President returned from a post-convention speaking trip to a carefully orchestrated welcome by a thousand cheering Federal employees and their families at the White House.


Debra Bradley, Eric Ruder
Debra Ann Bradley, the daughter of Dr.
Trudy Festinger of New York and the late Dan F. Bradley, was married yesterday to Eric Ruder, a son of William Ruder of New York and the late Helen F. Ruder.
Rabbi William Hamilton officiated at the Paine House in Waltham, Mass.
Mrs.
Ruder, 33 years old, is a reporter for The Harvard University Gazette in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father was a professor of physical chemistry at the Polytechnic Institute of New York.
Her mother is a professor of social work at New York University.
The bride is a stepdaughter of the late Dr.
Leon Festinger, a professor of social psychology at the New School for Social Research in New York, and of Raya Bradley of Ramat ha Sharon, Israel.


Grace Shemin and Louis Goldstein
Grace Anne Shemin, an account manager at Queens Group Design, a marketing and design company, and Louis Philip Goldstein, a vice president and securities analyst at Oppenheimer Capital, both in Manhattan, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Hillel Silverman officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Goldstein graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Emanuel and Rhoda Shemin of Greenwich, Conn.
Her father, who is retired, founded and headed Shemin Nurseries, a wholesaler in Greenwich.
Her mother is an owner of Alconox Inc., a distributor of industrial detergents in New York.
Mr.
Goldstein graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, from which he also received an M.B.A.
He is a son of Irving and Ida Goldstein of Ridge, L.I.
His father, who is retired, was a photoengraver for the Quality Engraving Company in Long Island City, Queens.


Changes at Harvard Business Review
The Harvard Business School is expected to name a new publisher of the Harvard Business Review soon, and it appears close to filling another important vacancy at the 70-year-old management journal.
Effective Sept. 1, Laurance Allen, who was with The Financial Times for 21 years, will assume the publisher's post, which was recently vacated by James McGowan, according to a Aug. 13 memo that was circulated last week among the publishing unit's employees.


What If They Built a Ferry to the Hamptons and People Came?
WHEN Jennifer Quinn plans her weekends, she takes any ferryboat she can find.
"I've been to Nantucket, Martha's Vineyard and Block Island this summer, and if I could take a ferry directly to the Hamptons, that would be fantastic," she said Friday, standing at the Orient Point ferry terminal at the eastern tip of Long Island's North Fork.
"Where do I sign?"


INSIDE
U.S. Carrier Poised Near Iraq
An American carrier ended shore leave and set sail in the Persian Gulf, its planes ready to protect Shiites by enforcing a ban on flights over southern Iraq by Iraqi warplanes.
Page A3.
Optimism for Mideast Talks
There is a feeling that local politics -- U.S., Israeli and Arab -- could produce real progress in the Middle East negotiations for the first time since they began in October.
Page A3.
Currency Pressures
The United States appears willing to let the dollar fall further against the German mark.
But Britain is expected to try to support the pound to avoid having to lift interest rates.
Page D1.
Newark Shooting Aftermath
Two Newark officers who shot and killed two youths in a stolen car had been at a party, but were not drunk, the police director said.
Page B1.
Running Against Themselves
In a year when incumbents are especially vulnerable, dozens of candidates from both parties are supporting term limits.
Page A12.


Sports of The Times; The Night Browning Nagle Met the Monsters at the Meadowlands
Over all, it was a grand night for Browning Nagle, but it did have its down sides.
Young Nagle, a second-year Jets player who is seeking to become the team's first-string quarterback, spun out of the pocket on one play in the first quarter Saturday against the Giants and ran smack into a mountain.
The name of the mountain was Leonard Marshall.
There were those moments, too, in Nagle's two and a half quarters of play during the Jets' 20-14 exhibition victory when he glanced up while calling signals from behind the center and saw an alarming sight: "Number 56," as he recalled it, at the end of the defensive line.


CREDIT MARKETS: Rising Mark Reverberates in Britain and U.S.; Sacrificing The Dollar to Spur Exports
President Bush did something unexpected in Houston last week.
In the midst of all the speeches about pride in America, he appeared to have written off the dollar for now.
If it falls, even from the all-time low it reached on Friday against the German mark, so be it, as long as the swoon is slow and orderly.
The decision is not necessarily bad -- or even avoidable.
And it does not mean that the Administration would tolerate a sudden, steep plunge in the dollar.
But it carries risks that could unnerve both the bond and the stock markets unless the dollar stabilizes more or less on its own.
If the dollar plunges, investor confidence could erode further, pushing down stock and bond prices, and undermining the economy and Mr.
Bush's campaign.


No Headline
"If you don't go, you're risking suicide." -- KATE HALE, director of the emergency management agency for Miami.  [ A1:6. ]


QUESTION BOX
Shutouts, Shutouts
Q.
There appear to be an awful lot of shutouts in the major leagues this year.
What are the season shutout records for a team, against a team and for each league?
A.The 1907 and 1909 Chicago Cubs, playing in an era when the ball was often dead and the bats were often dead weight, held opponents scoreless 32 times in a 154-game season, and that is a major league mark, as well as the National League one.
The American League mark belongs to the Cubs' crosstown rivals, the White Sox, whose 1906 team, the so-called "Hitless Wonders," held opponents runless in 32 games, winning 30 of them and tying the other two.
Not surprisingly, the 1906 White Sox and the 1907 Cubs went on to win the World Series; the 1909 Cubs finished second to Pittsburgh.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
President Bush appears to have written off the dollar for now.
If it falls, even from the all-time low it reached on Friday against the German mark, so be it, as long as the swoon is slow and orderly.
The decision does not mean that the Administration would tolerate a sudden, steep plunge.
And it carries risks that could unnerve both the bond and stock markets.  [ Page D1. ]
The mark's strength is forcing Britain to confront its most painful lesson yet about the costs of economic integration with the Continent.
And with the pound, like the dollar, plunging in value, London stands at the brink of being forced to prop up its currency.
Any further drop could, in fact, force Prime Minister Major to raise interest rates at a time of recession.  [ D1. ] The Economy
Among many economists who shape the strategies of banks and investment houses, patience with the President ended with his speech last week.
The very highlight of his plan -- offsetting cuts in taxes and spending -- was widely denounced in interviews as poison for an economy in a joyless, jobless recovery.  [ D1. ]


Corrections
An article on Friday about the election in the Bahamas described the islands incorrectly.
They are in the Atlantic Ocean, not the Carib- bean.


Wendy Lebowitz, Brett Prager
Wendy Lynn Lebowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvyn J. Lebowitz of Manalapan, N.J., was married yesterday to Brett L. Prager, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Prager of Allentown, Pa.
Rabbi Carol Balen officiated at the Stronghold mansion on the campus of the Gill St.
Bernard's School in Bernardsville, N.J.
Mrs.
Prager graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her husband, and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She expects to become an associate at the New York law firm of Seward &amp; Kissel next month.
Her father is a guidance counselor at Port Richmond (S.I.) High School.
Her mother, Lorraine Lebowitz, is a reading teacher at Pine Brook Junior High School in Manalapan.


A Halfhearted Homeless Policy
The Dinkins administration forged a stopgap solution to a sharp dispute over jumping homeless families to the head of the line for public housing.
Fewer apartments will go to the homeless each year, the new tenants will get some needed counseling, and the New York City Housing Authority will screen the applicants to weed out disruptive tenants.
That could help preserve the stability of public housing projects in the short run, while providing better support to the homeless lucky enough to qualify.
But the settlement that Deputy Mayor Cesar Perales worked out last week is destined to fail in the long run until Mayor David Dinkins and his advisers stop ducking the need to overhaul the city's homeless policies.


A Greek Publisher Says It Controls Pravda
A small Greek publishing concern whose owner has ties to the Greek Communist Party has announced that it has obtained majority control of the Russian daily newspaper Pravda, formerly the official paper of the Soviet Communist Party.
The Greek company, Akadymos, is run by Yannis Yannikos, 69 years old, and his 30-year-old son, Christos, both of whom are in Moscow working on the paper, a spokesman for their office in Athens said last week.


The Jets' Lunch-Bucket Defense Is Sharpening Its Utensils
The Jets-Giants preseason game was the perfect opportunity to see two defenses heading in different directions.
The Giants' defense, once fierce, feared and punishing, is still good, but age is beginning to take some of the edge off.
The Jets' defense is young, aggressive and active, and would like to be what the Giants once were.


Abroad at Home; The Price Of Lies
If you wonder why Americans have become so cynical about politics, take a close look at George Bush's acceptance speech at the Houston convention.
It was a classic of the misrepresentations, the hollow promises, the brazen falsehoods that have made people turn off.
The big news in the speech was the promise of an across-the-board tax cut.
Everyone likes the idea of paying less in taxes.
But the Bush plan was so hollow that it collapsed at once when analyzed -- not only by the Democrats but by conservative economists.


Review/Music; Hearing the Last of All of Mozart
Well, that's the last of them.
The early operas held out longest, but over at Lincoln Center the Mozart Bicentennial people have been flushing diehard repertory out of hiding.
One is reminded of the marines on Guadalcanal 50 years ago, mopping up with their flame throwers.
"Ascanio in Alba" came out with its hands up on Saturday night.
With it, the roundup of Mozart's music -- a year and a half in the doing -- is presumably complete.
At Alice Tully Hall, "Ascanio," a mild-mannered teen-age exercise in classical myth and romance, seemed a pale warrior next to the mighty lineup of masterpieces at Mostly Mozart's concert the night before.
At Avery Fisher Hall, the Clarinet Concerto, the Requiem, the Overture to "The Magic Flute" and the "Ave verum corpus" held up Mozart's magnificent last few years for all to hear.


Suburban Weeklies Hit By Rivals and Recession
The decline and possible demise of Pulitzer Publishing Company's chain of community weeklies in Chicago's northern suburbs could be a harbinger of the 90's for similar small newspaper groups that sprang up in the 80's around many cities.
For months, Pulitzer has been trying to sell the 15 papers after watching advertising decline 40 percent over three years and profits disappear entirely.
Should no buyer emerge by Oct. 13, the company has said it will cease publishing the papers, ending 150 jobs.


Arrest in Death of Infant Found in Bushes
A newborn was found abandoned in a clump of bushes in Far Rockaway, Queens, Saturday night and pronounced dead on arrival at the hospital, the police said yesterday.
The police later arrested the child's mother, identified as Deborah McGuiness, 27 years old, of 890 East Beech Street in Long Beach, L.I., and were awaiting the report of the New York City medical examiner to determine whether the child's death was a homicide.


Compromise On Garbage Faces a Test
A week after the Dinkins administration and City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone struck a breakthrough deal on trash disposal, the plan gets its first public airing today when it goes before the full Council.
Two days of hearings have been scheduled for the plan, which calls for the construction of a $550 million incineration plant at the Brooklyn Navy Yard and increasing New York City's recycling efforts.
At stake is whether the city, which generates more waste than any other in the country, has found a politically acceptable way to get rid of its garbage.


Luke Dommer, 62, Founder of a Group Opposed to Hunting
Luke A. Dommer Sr., who founded and led a national organization opposed to the hunting of animals for sport, died on Tuesday at the Veterans Administration Hospital in West Haven, Conn.
He was 62 years old and lived in New Fairfield.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Dommer, who for years befriended stray and wild animals, started the Committee to Abolish Sport Hunting in 1975 with $12 worth of pamphlets.


Rep. Flake Is Fighting Hard Race in Queens
To Floyd H. Flake, the minister-Congressman from Queens, the Democratic party machine is fighting his renomination because he has led a grass-roots movement that threatens local party stalwarts.
To Simeon Golar, a former New York City official whom the party organization is backing, Mr.
Flake, the Democratic incumbent, has been a "part-time Congressman" who has worked to forge a "church-based" political fief that "evokes scary reminders of Jonestown," where hundreds of members of a cult committed mass suicide in 1978.


Newalta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Television; David Mamet's Fable of the Inventor and the Ogre
"The Water Engine" produces more smoke than energy.
David Mamet's fable about a luckless inventor in Depression-era Chicago has plenty of period flavor, with tunes of the time crooned from a radio, a glimpse inside a dime-a-dance joint and snatches of soapbox speechifying, but most of these 90 minutes are devoted to comic-book characters acting out a tale whose essential simple-mindedness is visible even through the allegorical fog.
William H. Macy plays Charles Lang, a factory worker who has the bad luck to invent an engine that runs on water.
That brings him to the attention of Lawrence Oberman, a mysterious and powerful figure played by Joe Mantegna, who is bent on getting control of it by fair means and, preferably, foul, especially if he has to kidnap Charles's blind sister (Patti LuPone).


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Criticizes President's Remarks on Religion
Gov.
Bill Clinton accused President Bush today of promoting religious and political intolerance in the United States for political gain.
In one of the sharpest counterattacks yet in the Presidential campaign, Mr.
Clinton said that Mr.
Bush had abandoned the American principle that individuals should be free to disagree on personal issues, especially religious and family values.


Meridian Point Realty Trust VII reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


News Involving 2 Accounts Puts Some Pep Into August
DOG days on Madison Avenue?
Hardly.
A burst of activity last week involving two accounts totaling about $45 million in billings belied the notion that nothing happens in advertising in August.
Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. said Friday that it had parted ways with Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc. in New York, 20 months after Shearson, a division of the American Express Company, moved its estimated $20 million account there from Ally &amp; Gargano.


A's Put McGwire on D.L.
Mark McGwire, whose 38 homers lead the majors, on Sunday became the latest member of the Oakland Athletics to be placed on the disabled list.
McGwire was put on the 15-day d.l., retroactive to Saturday, with a strained right rib cage.
The A's first baseman suffered the injury Friday night diving for a first-inning grounder in a game against the Baltimore Orioles.
He stayed in the game until the fourth inning, then left after taking one swing at the plate.


Cades Cove Journal; No Final Tears Shed for Paradise Lost
The distance seems to be measured in centuries, not miles, from this breathtaking American Eden, population 2, to the menagerie of Elvis museums, water slides and bumper car emporiums just over the mountains in Pigeon Forge.
But, then again, who knows?


T.W.A. Plan Under Study
Negotiations to reorganize Trans World Airlines continued yesterday, as the airline's pilots studied a response from T.W.A.'s creditors to a proposal submitted by their union on Saturday.
A spokesman for the T.W.A. branch of the Air Line Pilots Association said that the union had agreed to wage concessions of 15 percent, but that no agreement had been reached yesterday on the issues of chief concern to the pilots: job and pension security.
The counterproposal "integrates both parties' goals," said Bill Compton, chairman of the union's executive council.
Other details of the plan were not available yesterday.


Notch Babies Won't Cost the Taxpayer Forever
To the Editor:
"Notch Babies Threaten Real Babies" (editorial, Aug. 4) reads like a George Bush campaign news release -- dyspeptic and grossly wrong on the facts.
Notch babies haven't, as you claim, turned "viciously on real babies in an unconscionable attempt to get what's unrightfully theirs."
In the first place, we were wronged by Congressional arithmetic in 1977, dropping us far below the compensation for others under Social Security.
Second, your argument that the proposed correction would cost "an astonishing $300 billion over 30 years" is wildly specious.


The Two Faces Of Goran
Goran Ivanisevic, Vesuvian to his molten core, tried and failed to explain why, after successfully taming his temperament in 1992, he hasn't yet achieved full cooperation from his prodigious tennis talents.
"You never know what I'm going to do," he said. "I never know what I'm going to do."


At Least 4 Killed in Sinking of Cruise Ship
A cruise ship with more than 500 people aboard sank today off the west coast of Malaysia after it was struck hours before dawn by a Taiwanese trawler.
At least four passengers were killed, with scores of others injured.
Malaysian rescue workers said two other passengers from the 405-foot Royal Pacific were missing, although it was not clear how they reached that conclusion because of conflicting reports about the number of passengers and crew aboard the Greek-managed ship.


Sheffield Triples His Fun With a Batting Explosion
The physical apparatus is ideal, from the power legs to the incendiary wrists, to the eyes lit with a mix of personal peace and ambition.
The swing, from the firing of the hands at the top to the subtle yet violent turn of the hips, is explosive and exact.


For Misplaced Students, Special Education Can Disable, Too
MARGARITA OTERO PARKER has seen both her sons labeled handicapped by New York City's school bureaucracy, and she cannot understand why.
These young men, who live on the Lower East Side, are not blind, retarded or crippled, yet because of sporadic misbehavior, both were classified as emotionally disturbed.
That is a catch-all that sweeps in everyone from psychotics to class clowns who irritate their teachers once too often.


Computer Pioneer's Moment of Truth
As Japan's most famous personal computer entrepreneur, Kazuhiko Nishi, nicknamed Kay, has often seemed out of place in this land of conservative, conformist businessmen.
He is a college dropout, he started his own company rather than work for a large one and he has flaunted his wealth with a flamboyant style that has included dashing from meeting to meeting by helicopter.


Aimee Weiss, Brian Goldstein
Aimee Hope Weiss, the daughter of Diana and Martin Weiss of Roslyn, L.I., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Brian Seth Goldstein, a son of Gloria and David Goldstein of Bellmore, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph P. Sternstein officiated at Temple Beth Sholom.
Mrs.
Goldstein, 26 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges.
She graduated summa cum laude from Emory University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is the senior vice president of Bestform Foundations, a lingerie maker in New York.


Ms. Weinstein, Scott Amaral
Andrea Ivy Weinstein, the daughter of Lois Weinstein of Monsey, N.Y., and Victor Weinstein of Tarrytown, N.Y., was married yesterday to Scott Michael Amaral, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Earle Amaral of De Kalb Junction, N.Y.
Cantor Raymond Smolover performed the ceremony at Singers in Spring Valley, N.Y.
Ms.
Weinstein, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the general counsel to LBS Associates in Monsey, a distributor of health and beauty products.
She graduated summa cum laude from the State University of New York at Albany, where her husband graduated cum laude.
She received a law degree from Columbia University.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7  A LONG WAY FROM CALIFORNIA
Since Milan Panic left California and returned to his native Yugoslavia to assume the job of Prime Minister, he has vowed to take steps to end violence in the former republics.
But several programs have been blocked by the President of Serbia and others have been sidetracked by members of Mr.
Panic's Cabinet.
A1  THE PLIGHT OF LATIN INDIANS
From Mexico to Argentina, many of Latin America's 30 million indigenous people are living as permanent refugees.
The Indians contend with not only deprivation but also with constant pressure on their cultures, religions and languages.
A1


Rachel Turk and Benjamin Tolub
Rachel Dena Turk, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roland Turk of Melrose Park, Pa., was married there yesterday to Benjamin Stuart Tolub, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Walter B. Tolub of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Arthur Ruberg performed the ceremony at the Turk home.
Mrs.
Tolub, 24 years old, is studying for a master's degree in occupational therapy at New York University.
She graduated from Barnard College and the Jewish Theological Seminary.
Her father is a consultant to the State Office of Mental Health in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Helen Turk, is a director of the Paley Day Care Center in Philadelphia.


Rachel Linhardt, Thomas Kelly
Rachel F. Linhardt, the assistant director of education at the Margaret Chapman School in Hawthorne, N.Y., was married yesterday to Thomas More Kelly, the school's director of education.
Msgr.
Edward Conners performed the ceremony at the Scarsdale Golf Club in Hartsdale, N.Y., with Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman participating.
Mrs.
Kelly, 24 years old, and her husband, 27, are Ph.D. candidates in behavior analysis and disorders at Columbia University.
She graduated magna cum laude from the State University of New York at Binghamton; he graduated cum laude from Fairfield University.


Jackson Urges Extension of Voter Sign-Up
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson plans to ask the New York City Board of Elections today to extend the time in which people can register to vote in the Sept. 15 primary.
If the board rejects his request, he said, he would file a lawsuit.
At a voter-registration rally at a Brooklyn church yesterday, Mr.
Jackson said the registration deadline for the primary, which passed on Friday, was too early.
He recruited people who are not registered to vote to accompany him to the board's Manhattan headquarter's today "to demand the right to vote Sept. 15."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues: Women and Families; Legal Scholars See Distortion In Attacks on Hillary Clinton
Hillary Clinton, whose aggressive campaign style and dedication to children's causes seemed a political asset for Democrats at the beginning of the campaign season, now finds herself under full-scale attack as the Republicans try to turn her into a symbol of anti-family values.
The overall strategy appears to be to paint Mrs.
Clinton as a radical feminist, in contrast with her Republican counterparts: Barbara Bush, the quintessential grandmother, and Marilyn Quayle, who, like Mrs.
Clinton, is a lawyer but has put aside her own career to support her husband's.
And the focus of the attack is on two passages from Mrs.
Clinton's legal writings, in law-review articles from the 1970's.


Nancy Fefferman, Edward S. Katz
Dr.
Nancy Rochelle Fefferman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald B. Fefferman of Morris Plains, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Edward Steven Katz, the son of Sidney E. Katz of New York and the late Lee L. Katz.
Rabbi Daniel Franzel performed the ceremony at the Chanticler restaurant in Short Hills, N.J.
Dr.
Fefferman-Katz, 27 years old, is a resident in radiology at the New York University Medical Center.
She graduated from Brandeis University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she and her husband received M.D. degrees from N.Y.U.
Her father is a chemical engineer at Bell Labs in Whippany, N.J.
Her mother, Sylvia Fefferman, is an elementary-school teacher in Parsippany, N.J.


Bank Law Gives Equal Credit Where It Is Due; Profit in Inner City
To the Editor:
Contrary to "Inner-City Banking's Catch-22" (Op-Ed, Aug. 1) by Jay G. Baris, the Community Reinvestment Act encourages banks to find the good credit risks in their area.
Mr.
Baris asserts that although "risky loans" are irrational financially, they are good social policy.
If a risky loan is unlikely to be repaid, no one benefits -- not the borrower and not the bank.


Chinese and South Koreans Formally Establish Relations
China and South Korea formally established diplomatic relations this morning, and Beijing announced that the South Korean President, Roh Tae Woo, would make an official visit "in the near future."
A joint statement, signed at a ceremony here and broadcast live on Chinese television, ended four decades of official hostility based on ideological rivalry and bitter memories of the Korean War of 1950-53.
China took hundreds of thousands of casualties in joining North Korean troops in that war against American-led United Nations forces.
The Chinese have remained one of North Korea's closest allies.


Quick Mischief's Upset Adds to Wacky Weekend
Racing people were still trying to figure out how Thunder Rumble had shot to the head of the class of 3-year-old colts by winning two major races in three weeks at the Saratoga Race Course.
And while they were doing it, the fillies and mares took the stage today and supplied an upset of their own: Quick Mischief outran the highly favored Versailles Treaty by nearly seven lengths in the $200,000 John A. Morris Handicap.
Versailles Treaty, a daughter of Danzig owned by Cynthia Phipps and trained by Shug McGaughey, doesn't get outrun very often and not by very much.
In 16 races before today, she won eight times and ran in the money all 16 times.
She ran in the money this time, too, but still was a soundly beaten 3-5 favorite in a Grade I stakes for fillies and mares on a race track renowned for beaten favorites.
Surrounded by Questions
Meanwhile, the colts were still surrounded by questions about their own recent upsets.
Ten of them ran a ringing Travers Stakes on Saturday, with $1 million on the line and 46,372 persons watching and betting $6.5 million, the most money ever wagered in one day at Saratoga in the 125-year history of the track.


U.S. WILL TIGHTEN HEALTH-LAB GOALS
The Bush Administration has drafted a broad strategic plan that sets new priorities for the Government's vast biomedical research efforts, which until now have proceeded along largely disparate paths chosen by individual scientists and research institutions.
The Government plan is intended to channel $9 billion in Federal money to areas Washington deems critical to the nation's health, while for the first time also trying to insure that American medical researchers proceed along lines that keep the United States economically competitive.


Russians Say 'Da' To An Old Friend
When the Brooklyn Racquet Club decided to put on one of those free clinics and exhibitions, it was understandable why COLIN DIBLEY would be a big-name attraction for the event, which will be held Sunday starting at 1 P.M.
Dibley, after all, the former Australian Davis Cup player known for "the world's fastest serve" (145 miles an hour), has been teaching tennis in the New York area for years.


Parade Essentials


This Runner Has Missionary Zeal
It was inevitable that some eyebrows would be raised when word got around that a 45-year-old New Mexico school adminstrator had won a free trip to participate in next Sunday's City of San Francisco Marathon and a $1,000 prize as a result of a letter of nomination that happened to be submitted by two fifth-graders under his supervision.
Even so, it is understandable why Mastercard, the marathon sponsor that conducted the contest to reward a socially conscious marathoner, chose to overlook -- or more likely, to embrace -- the obvious connection between the nominators and the nominee.


U.S. CARRIER SAILS INTO PERSIAN GULF
The American aircraft carrier Independence ended a shore leave and went to sea in the Persian Gulf today, its warplanes prepared to enforce an allied ban on Iraqi flights over southern Iraq this week.
The White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said the prohibition would take effect only after President Bush personally explained the mission to the American public.
Mr.
Bush may make an announcement as early as Tuesday, Mr.
Fitzwater said.


Where Office Buildings Were Planted, Doubts Now Grow
For 30 years this mid-Westchester city has been rebuilding itself into what some said was a prototype of the modern suburban center.
But now, in a city where heavy traffic roars past towering office buildings and a jumbo mall but where there is no longer a single movie theater, some here are saying they are not sure they like what they have created.


Lori Weiner, Eric Leskin
Lori Blake Weiner, a daughter of Jerome Weiner of Margate, Fla., and Susan Weiner of Torrance, Calif., was married yesterday in Brooklyn to Eric Mitchell Leskin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Leskin of Morganville, N.J.
Rabbi Alan Lavin officiated at Temple Sholom of Flatbush.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this
week:


Risa Agin, Daniel Levin
Risa Beth Agin, the daughter of Tobysue and Michael Agin of Richboro, Pa., was married yesterday to Daniel Zev Levin, a son of Dr.
Judith Levin and Dr.
Jonathan Levin of Bethesda, Md.
Rabbi Noam Zohar performed the ceremony at the Wyndham Franklin Plaza Hotel in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Agin Levin, 23 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in social work from Yeshiva University in July.
Her father is a certified public accountant in Horsham, Pa.
Her mother is a staff analyst for the Navy's International Logistics Control Office in Philadelphia.


New Yorkers Can Thank the Dead for Cherished Public Parks
To the Editor:
News articles about the African-American cemetery in Lower Manhattan, such as one July 31, recall the extensive connection between our public parks and burial grounds.
Many of our cherished open spaces might not exist had they not originally been set aside as graveyards.
Examples include a Roman Catholic cemetery owned by Trinity Parish, relocated to make way for St.
John's Park, today J. J. Walker Park; a Jewish congregational burial ground, until the mid-19th century at the site of Central Park's Conservatory Gardens, and a Quaker cemetery in Prospect Park, reduced in size and now surrounded by the public landscape.
Washington and Madison Squares were once potter's fields, and so were several smaller parks.


Review/Rock; Masses Converge Across Generations On Two Pop Icons
During a handful of breaks between songs at Shea Stadium on Friday night, the singer Elton John picked up his handy can of Diet Coke and quaffed a few chugs, slowly and with evident pleasure.
Shea Stadium, not particularly known for its sightlines, had been fitted with monster television screens, and there it was, a 20-foot can of Diet Coke.
That, under normal circumstances, might indicate that Mr.
John was thirsty; Diet Coke, however, was underwriting the show.
It was enough to make rock purists' heads spin around, Linda Blair style.
If they'd bothered to come at all.
Both Mr.
John and Eric Clapton, who headlined the show, the first of two sold-out concerts -- 66,000 seats, $60 a ticket -- are on tour playing huge venues for hours, but without the social significance or the specifically college-age audience of this summer's Lollapalooza tour.
It is pop music for the masses, and clearly what the two are selling has its advocates, because rarely has a show been so cross-generational and without class bias.
Parents sat with their 15-year-olds; 50-year-olds quietly puffed at cigarette substitutes, remembering past enthusiasms, enjoying the fall-like weather.


New Yorkers Can Thank the Dead for Cherished Public Parks; Slaves and Liberators
To the Editor:
I was heartened to read your July 31 news article reporting that the General Services Administration has agreed to halt excavation for an office tower on the site of the old Negros Burial Ground (a new one was established at Chrystie Street when the old one closed in 1795).
I hope the Federal Government and Mayor David N. Dinkins are aware of the full significance of the site, where a museum or memorial is to be erected.
During the Revolutionary War, New York City was the headquarters of the British Army in North America, and hundreds of American prisoners of war were incarcerated in the city's jail, near present-day City Hall Park.
Those who perished in captivity were interred in the Negros Burial Ground, situated only a short distance from the jail (I. N. P. Stokes, "Iconography of Manhattan Island," Volume 3, page 927; 4, 394; 5, 1040).


Kajal Rejaie, Stephen Vicinelli
Kajal Rejaie, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Iraj Rejaie of Houston, was married yesterday at her parents' home to Stephen Gaetano Vicinelli, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gaetano Vicinelli of Summit, N.J.
Dr.
Mehdi Abedi, a professor of cultural anthropology at Rice University, performed the Islamic ceremony.
Mrs.
Vicinelli, 26 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and received a law degree in May from the University of Texas at Austin.
Her father is a plastic surgeon in Houston, where her mother, Shahla Rejaie, is a real-estate broker.


Vouching for Capitalism in Moscow
President Boris Yeltsin plans to make every Russian a capitalist.
Come Oct. 1, 150 million Russian citizens will be given vouchers to buy shares in state-owned enterprises.
The goal is to privatize most enterprises within three years.
That's lightening-fast.
Speed is key.
After last summer's coup, Communist controls were dismantled.
But market controls have yet to take their place.
That's left managers in charge of factories, but answerable to no owner -- an invitation to mismanagement and theft.


Private Lives, Public Battleground
Mia Farrow -- at least as Woody Allen tells it -- believes that the two are now partners in a "grotesque publicity circus."
Implicit in that line is the fact that has kept the story in the headlines: This is no ordinary custody fight.
Whatever the private facts behind the very public breakup of these once very private people, they have tried to get their stories across with the help of public-relations armies set up for the usually bloodless battles of movie promotion.


People
*
Karen Zahorsky, executive vice president and general manager of RCM &amp; Partners, Boston, said last week that she and Dom Cimei, senior vice president and creative director, would resign following the merger of RCM and Cabot Direct to form RCM Cabot.
Robin Riggs, senior vice president and general manager at Cabot Direct, was named to head RCM Cabot, as managing and creative director.


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes This Week
Treasury financings this week include the regular auction of new three- and six-month bills today, followed by auctions of a new two-year note tomorrow and a new five-year note on Wednesday.
By late on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.06 percent and the rate on the six-month bill was 3.16 percent.
Traders said that in when-issued trading the two-year note was being offered at a price to yield 4.12 percent and the five-year was at 5.53 percent.


Searching for Thrills, 2 Find Death Instead
In a video arcade across from the Hayes Homes housing project, a steady stream of teen-agers and children dropped money into a jar today in memory of Michael Chapman, who was killed early Saturday when two off-duty police officers fired on a stolen car in which he was riding.
Friends and relatives of Mr.
Chapman, 16 years old, said he was a well-liked teen-ager whose days and nights were framed by typical pursuits: dancing at clubs, hanging out with his buddies, amassing a small collection of Nike sneakers.


Baseball Secures Some Seed Money
For a sport that derives revenue from beer advertising and cigarette billboards, it should come as no surprise that major league baseball has sold out to yet another social menace: sunflower seeds.
A brand supplied by a company known as David &amp; Sons has been designated "the official sunflower seed" of major league baseball.


New Campaigns
*
Rax Restaurants, Dublin, Ohio, and its new agency, Deutsch Inc., New York, are introducing a humorous campaign meant to establish Rax as fast food for adults.
Television commercials are produced in a consciously cheesy style; in one, a Chevrolet Corvair visits a Rax drive-through window.
The spots feature an animated character called Mr.
Delicious, who appears in black and white wearing an outdated plaid suit and bow tie.


Esquire Is Struggling Against GQ in Britain
In 1988, when Conde Nast started a British edition of GQ, the conventional wisdom was that British men didn't read general-interest magazines, did not care a whit about fashion, and did not want to be seen with some marketing man's idea of a male Cosmopolitan.
But GQ defied the odds and now leads a British market for men's general-interest magazines that it was instrumental in creating.
Esquire, which started its British edition in February 1991, is seeking to challenge that market, but so far success has remained elusive.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Summer Series Get Respect And Places in Fall Lineup
Until recently, prime-time television in the summer was the equivalent of the defect rack at the department store: flawed and largely unwanted by anybody.
But this year summer TV on the networks has the look of a busy outlet shop: people seem to like the merchandise, and they're buying.
At least four series introduced as summer entries and perhaps more have scored well enough to receive orders for new episodes, guaranteeing that this will be the first successful crop of shows ever introduced in the summer months.
Two years ago, when the experiment was first tried, only one show was picked up in the fall; last year none made the transit.
"Summer is absolutely becoming a viable time to launch new shows," said Leslie Moonves, president of Lorimar Television, which produces one of the shows that has broken through this summer, a CBS police drama called "Bodies of Evidence."


Tough Task Ahead in Beating Trial
The Federal Government plans to bring four Los Angeles police officers to trial next month for their roles in the beating of Rodney G. King, hoping to succeed where the State of California failed four months ago.
But legal experts say the Federal prosecutors may have even more trouble winning convictions than the state did.
The Federal charges, which were brought this month, accuse the officers of depriving Mr.
King of his civil rights when they beat and kicked him for 81 seconds on the night of March 3, 1991.
The episode was captured on an amateur's videotape and provoked the nation's deadliest riot in this century after the officers were acquitted last April.
The Federal trial is tentatively set for Sept. 29.


LSI Logic Expects $100 Million Loss
Hurt in part by ferocious competition in the personal computer market, LSI Logic Inc., a leading maker of custom semiconductor chips, says it will take a restructuring charge of up to $110 million and lay off about 450 employees.
The layoffs will include 175 nonproduction workers in the United States and 275 production employees at a German plant that will be phased out of operation during the next six months.


Rising Mark Reverberates in Britain and U.S.; Weak Pound May Require Hard Choice
The recent strengthening of the German mark is forcing Britain to confront its most painful lesson yet about the costs of economic integration with the Continent.
Although deeply ambivalent about unification with Europe, Britain agreed two years ago to link its currency to the value of other European currencies, promising to keep the pound within an agreed-upon range relative to the mark.


Handley on Hostetler: O.K. for Opener
When Jeff Hostetler arrived at Giants Stadium today, he was still in considerable pain in the pelvic area and suffering frequent spasms in his lower back.
But Giants Coach Ray Handley said he expected Hostetler, his starting quarterback, to be ready for the team's season opener, Sept. 6 against the San Francisco 49ers, and possibly for its final preseason game, Saturday night against the Steelers in Pittsburgh.
Hostetler was injured in the second quarter of Saturday night's 20-14 exhibition loss to the Jets at Giants Stadium.
He finished the half, but he spent the second half in the trainer's room.
The Giants were scoreless until Phil Simms, now a 36-year-old backup quarterback, led them to two fourth-quarter touchdowns.


Home Runs in 4 Straight Games Ring Hollow for Bonilla and Mets
The home runs sound the same -- loud, authoritative.
The home runs look the same -- lengthy, majestic.
Bobby Bonilla has hit four of them in the last four games for the Mets, and for all the noise and grandeur, the hollowness of it all has been inescapable.
The season is done, and so it is hard to care how many baseballs are gone on any given day or week of what's left of 1992.
The home runs will enhance Bonilla's statistics and doubtlessly bolster his sense of self.
But they haven't and won't do much for the Mets.
Today, for instance, Bonilla's ninth-inning homer cut into a 4-2 score that still became a 4-3 defeat.
And the Mets are 1-3 in the games in which he has homered.


Heavy Fighting Continues in Sarajevo


Books of The Times; The 'American Century': Beneficence or Illusion?
Grand Illusion  Critics and Champions of the American Century  By John B. Judis  344 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.
Is this departing century the American Century or is that idea only a "Grand Illusion," as John B. Judis calls it in the title of his thought-provoking book?
In a Presidential election year, is the American Century just an old-fashioned jingoistic slogan, backed up by military threats and force, or do the words have some kinder, gentler meaning that takes into account the rest of the civilized world?


Lebanese Vote but Christian Boycott Cuts Turnout
Voters in a country recovering from 15 years of civil war went to the polls today for the first time in two decades to elect a new Parliament, but the balloting was marred by a boycott by Christians who object to the presence of Syrian troops.
Stringent security measures were in force for the first round of voting, which was limited to northern and eastern Lebanon.
The turnout in Muslim districts was high, ranging from 55 to 95 percent, while in some predominantly Christian areas it was as low as 2 percent, according to official statistics and witnesses.


Mark E. Andrews, Oil Executive And Ex-Navy Official, Dies at 88
Mark Edwin Andrews, an oil executive and former Navy official, died on Saturday at his home in Houston.
He was 88 years old and also had homes on Fishers Island, N.Y., and in Ireland.
He died after a recent stroke, his family said.


Marianne Novak, Noam Stadlan
Marianne Novak, the daughter of Rabbi Dr. and Mrs.
David Novak of Richmond, was married yesterday to Dr.
Noam Yigal Stadlan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Emanuel Stadlan of Chevy Chase, Md.
The bride's father performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth El in Bethesda, Md.
Ms.
Novak, 24 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a law degree in May from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Her father is a professor of modern Judaic studies at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville.
Her mother, Melva Z. Novak, teaches fifth grade at Or Atid Synagogue School in Richmond.


New Yorkers Can Thank the Dead for Cherished Public Parks; Federal-Style Logic
To the Editor:
Re your news article on the Negros Burial Ground (Aug. 9): What is the Government doing building a new office building anyway when there is 60 million square feet vacant?
Surely there are better ways to increase the deficit!
JEROME MORLEY LARSON  Red Bank, N.J., Aug. 11, 1992


Two Officers In Shooting Were at Party
Two off-duty Newark police officers who shot and killed two teen-agers who had been joy riding in a stolen car early Saturday had attended a bachelor party shortly before the shootings but were not drunk when they fired the deadly shots, the Newark Police Director, William R. Celester, said today.
Amid questions about why the officers fired five shots at the stolen car as it sped away, Mr.
Celester staunchly supported the officers, saying he did not order alcohol tests on them because they appeared "cold sober" when he interviewed them at 5 A.M. on Saturday, an hour after the shootings.


The Talk of Hollywood; 'X' Shown, To Cheers, But Studio Worries
On a stifling afternoon last week, Spike Lee, the director, and the Warner Brothers brass walked into a plush screening room on the studio's lot in Burbank and watched, for the first time together, the completed, if still rough, version of Mr.
Lee's widely anticipated "Malcolm X." After 3 hours and 20 minutes, the biography of the slain black leader ended, the small crowd applauded, the lights went on and Mr.
Lee hurried off to catch a plane.
Before he left, Mr.
Lee agreed to meet shortly after Labor Day with the men who run Warner Brothers, Robert A. Daly, the chairman, and Terry Semel, the president, to discuss final editing of the movie.
Behind the cordial atmosphere, the tension level remains palpable.
The film, which stars Denzel Washington, is being handled nervously by Warner Brothers and watched with considerable attention by the movie industry.
"Malcolm X," which is scheduled for release on Nov. 20, is more than a little provocative, say those who have seen it, and Warner Brothers is more than a little uneasy.
Reasons to Be Fearful
For one thing, Mr.
Lee, who is Hollywood's most important black film maker, relishes the role of being often outspoken, sometimes even truculent, and he is certainly the opposite of publicity shy.
For the past year, Warner Brothers officials, who are normally buttoned down, have kept their mouths buttoned up (at least publicly) over reports of shouting matches with Mr.
Lee.
The disputes centered on the length of the film (Mr. Lee argued that if Mr. Stone's "J. F. K." ran more than three hours, so should his own film about the black leader) as well as its cost.


Julie Merkelson, Andrew Dermack
Julie Florence Merkelson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lloyd E. Merkelson of Bayside, Queens, was married yesterday to Andrew Jay Dermack, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy Dermack of Commack, L.I.
Rabbi Morris Barzilai officiated at Temple Beth-El in Great Neck, L.I.


Apartheid Has 9 Million Other Victims
To the Editor:
While the news that the United Nations may send 30 more observers to South Africa is welcome (news article, Aug. 8), one hopes they will pay some attention to the continued existence there of four allegedly independent black "homelands," in which more than one-quarter of all black South Africans are still prisoners of the apartheid policy, having even been stripped of their South African citizenship.
That the Government of President F. W. de Klerk still classes these 9 million black people as "aliens" was shown as recently as the first week in March of this year, when President de Klerk twice maintained that there were only 26 million "nonwhites" in South Africa in addition to the 5 million whites.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
Aug.
Wednesday  Durable Goods . . .
July  Thursday  Revised G.D.P. . . . 2d Qtr.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Personal Income . . .
July


Lisa R. Edelstein, Jonathan S. Sack (Robin Holland)
Lisa Robin Edelstein and Jonathan Scott Sack were married yesterday at the Estherwood mansion in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., by Rabbi Marc S. Sack, the bridegroom's brother.
Mrs.
Sack, 34 years old, is known professionally as Lisa Rollins.
She was until recently the arts and events production manager at the World Financial Center in Manhattan.
She graduated from Princeton University and will begin studying for a master's degree in poetry writing at Columbia University next month.
She is a daughter of Martha Edelstein of Jamaica Estates, Queens, and the late Arthur Edelstein.
Her father was the president of the Ardel Kinamatic Corporation, a maker of precision instruments in College Point, Queens.


Operation on Jordanian King Removed Malignant Tissue
Tissue removed by surgeons from King Hussein of Jordan during an operation Thursday has been determined to have been cancerous, a spokesman for the King said today.
"It was contained totally and it had not spread anywhere else," said Mohammad Adwan, the King's chief of protocol.
He added that the King is expected to make a full recovery.


Three Killed When Train Hits Their Car at Crossing
An Amtrak passenger train traveling from Boston to Washington slammed into a car at a railroad crossing in Wallingford, Conn., yesterday morning, killing all three people in the car, but injuring none of the train's passengers or crew.
The collision occurred about 10:15 A.M., three hours after the six-car train left Boston's South Station, at a crossing on a narrow dead-end street in Wallingford marked by only a single yellow-and-black warning sign.


Economists Skeptical Of Tax Plan
Maybe George Bush is a Republican, maybe he did run his own business, and maybe he does want to treat Wall Street to a cut in the capital gains tax.
But among many of the economists who shape the strategies of the nation's banks and investment houses, patience with the President ended with his speech last week.
The very highlight of his plan -- offsetting cuts in taxes and spending -- was widely denounced as poison for an economy in a joyless, jobless recovery.
"Almost every economist would agree that equal cuts in taxes and spending actually depress the economy," said Allen Sinai, chief economist of the Boston Company.
"It is not a growth program."


Seeing (Big) Red Over Cornell Deal
Last year when ESPN dumped Ivy League football, ROGER WEISS, a money manager and Cornell alumnus, financed a cable deal with SportsChannel America that had a twist: the package consisted of Big Red games against its seven Ivy League foes.
The arrangement, in which Weiss paid a six-figure sum to buy time on SCA, worked well enough.
Trans World International produced the games and sold 30-second spots at $2,000 each to companies like G.T.E. and Bristol-Myers.


Latin American Indians: Old Ills, New Politics
It had snowed a foot and a half deep three days earlier, and a biting wind whipped down the hills around the Atraico reservation in the stretch of Patagonian wasteland that is home to 22 families of the Mapuche Indian tribe.
Secundino Cona, a 65-year-old Mapuche with a square, weathered face, huddled with his wife, Dominga Miyaleo, and their two sons around the tiny wood-burning stove in their dirt-floor adobe hut, sipping mate, a drink steeped from dried leaves of a South American evergreen.


Slit Solves Ultramarathoners' Agony of the Feet
If the name of Warady rings forever in the world of ultramarathoning, it may not be because DAVID WARADY, who won the Runner's World Trans America Footrace on Saturday, was the winner of the first coast-to-coast race held in the United States in more than 60 years.
It's because Warady used a bit of novel ingenuity to popularize the sport during the 64-day California-to-New York event.
It seems that until Warady, a 35-year-old computer specialist, came along, ultramarathoners dealt with the inevitable blisters that develop on the sides and top of their feet during multiday races by cutting little holes out of their running shoes to relieve pressure on the sore spots.


Politics Just Might Help Mideast Talks
As delegates gathered here this weekend for a new round of Middle East peace talks, there was a pervasive feeling that local politics -- American, Israeli and Arab -- could lend some urgency to the discussions and produce real progress on substantive issues for the first time since the talks began last October.
Lawrence S. Eagleburger, who was sworn in as Acting Secretary of State today, taking over the duties of James A. Baker 3d, said in an interview on Thursday that the peace talks were resuming "in the context of an Israeli Government that is prepared to be far more forthcoming."


Youth Move on Yank Mound
The Yankees continued to reshape their pitching staff with youth as they recalled Bob Wickman and Jerry Nielsen from Class AAA Columbus yesterday after placing Tim Burke on the 15-day disabled list because of tendinitis in his right elbow.
The two joined Sam Militello and Russ Springer to give the team four rookie pitchers as they search for answers about next season.


Review/Cabaret; A Singer Blends Memories And Music
Midway in her early show at Michael's Pub on Thursday evening, the veteran blues and jazz singer Jo Thompson recalled a dinner with Billie Holiday at which Lady Day spoke of the role of music in her life.
"My singing is my doctor and my medicine," Ms.
Thompson remembered her saying.
"It's truly healing, and you really don't need anything else."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; 'Plain George' Plainly Tries To Be Likable
President George Herbert Walker Bush tried so hard this weekend to be just plain George: the neighbor in the tract house next door, a paneled-station-wagon, kids-in-the-back-seat, burgers-on-the-grill, Little League, God-loving kind of guy.
This President had no use for a jacket and tie.
As he toured the Illinois State Fair today, he alternated between a yellow "Illinois Corn" cap and a black one that said, "Pork, the other white meat." This President had no use for Washington, speaking derisively of the city that is his home.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  HEARINGS SET FOR GARBAGE PLAN
A week after the Dinkins administration and City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone struck a breakthrough deal on trash disposal, the plan gets its first public airing today when it goes before the full Council.
Two days of hearings have been set for the plan, which calls for the construction of a $550 million incineration plant at the Brooklyn Navy Yard and increasing the city's recycling efforts.
At stake is whether the city, which generates more waste than any other in the country, has found a politically acceptable way to get rid of its garbage.
A vote on the plan is expected on Wednesday, and supporters of incineration and recycling have already begun intense lobbying efforts.
B3.
WILL QUEENS STAND BY FLAKE?
To Floyd H. Flake, the minister-Congressman from Queens, the Democratic party machine is fighting his renomination because he has led a grass-roots movement that threatens local party stalwarts.
To Simeon Golar, a former New York City official whom the party organization is backing, Mr.
Flake, the Democratic incumbent, has been a "part-time Congressman" who has worked to forge a "church-based" political fief that "evokes scary reminders of Jonestown." Whatever the party leaders think of Mr.
Flake, many of his constituents remain loyal to him, but some think it is time for a change, though they say they know little or nothing about Mr.
Golar.
B3.
The police charged three Queens men in connection with a weeklong string of armed robberies on the streets of two quiet residential neighborhoods in Queens this month.
The suspects, including one released from a state Correctional Services work-release program the day before the robbery spree began, were arrested on Friday evening after a police officer in Jamaica spotted one of them driving a stolen car, the police said.
In seven days beginning Aug. 11, three armed men committed 27 robberies in Forest Hills and Briarwood.
Working mostly at night, they stole cash, jewelry and automobiles from residents as they walked on the streets or approached their cars, the police said.
B4.
IN CLASSES WHERE THEY MAY NOT BELONG
Young men, some with learning disabilities, others simply class clowns, are often lumped into a catch-all category called "emotionally disturbed." Once pegged as such, many end up in special education classes where they may not belong.
"They don't teach you nothing in this classroom," says one such student, confirming that, for one thing, he has not mastered grammar.
Critics say that too often assignment there is not driven by a handicap, but by money and expedience.
The Board of Education likes the classification because it can collect Federal and state money for small classes and teachers and counselors it otherwise cannot afford.
Metro Matters, B3.
REGION  THREE DEAD IN CAR-TRAIN CRASH
An Amtrak passenger train traveling from Boston to Washington slammed into a car at a railroad crossing in Wallingford, Conn., killing all three people in the car, but injuring none of the train's passengers or crew.
The collision occurred about 10:15 A.M. at a crossing on a narrow dead-end street in Wallingford marked by only a single yellow-and-black warning sign.
The train, which carried about 100 passengers, struck the car on a lane leading to a cemetery.
The accident has raised concern among residents in Wallingford about the safety of crossings, many of which are poorly marked.
B5.
FERRY TO EAST HAMPTON?
Visitors would like it for the convenience and business owners would welcome it to bring in a steady flow of tourists when the season, like this rainy dreary summer, is slow.
But long-term summer residents of East Hampton are horrified at the idea of a year-round ferry service from New London, Conn. to their beloved village on the South Fork.
"With all that ferry traffic, I'd never be able to get across the street," said Gary Brennan, 48, a writer who has been summering in East Hampton for the last 16 years.
"If I want gridlock, I can stay in Manhattan." East Hampton Journal, B5.
The Traffic Map B4  Chronicle B4


Dome Sweet Home for the Falcons
The Atlanta Falcons talked about, dreamed about and then became obsessed with making a splash in their new home, the Georgia Dome, especially with 66,834 fans on hand and with a national television audience tuned in, too.
So, in typical Jerry Glanville style, the Falcons on their first play from scrimmage, at their own 24, went for it all.
Receiver Michael Haynes heard the snap count and ran a "go" pattern.
On a "go" route, you simply run as fast as you can and don't look back until the ball comes your way.
Philadelphia Eagles cornerback Izel Jenkins fell flat while trying to reach for Haynes and the ball, and Haynes gathered it in and raced down the sideline for a 76-yard touchdown.


Quayle Tour Races Hurricane In Crucial Florida Campaign
With a hurricane bearing down on the region, Vice President Dan Quayle spent today on a bus tour through central Florida, an area where "Reagan Democrats" are as thick as the citrus groves.
Mr.
Quayle attended services at the First Baptist Church in Lakeland, where his remarks were interrupted by an AIDS protester, then headed north to a rally in front of the 20-story Citrus Tower in Clermont, a barbecue in Leesburg and a rally here.


CHRONICLE
Friends of the Hampton Day School on the Eastern end of Long Island have mustered some heavy-hitting artistic talent for their annual auction on Saturday.
For starters, the fund-raiser for the 27-year-old school in Bridgehampton will feature paintings donated by LARRY RIVERS, WILLEM DE KOONING, CHUCK CLOSE and JANE FREILICHER, among others.
The entertainment will be provided by the Art Attacks, a fiddle-guitar trio made up of the painters CONNIE FOX and AUDREY FLACK and the sculptor WILLIAM KING.
The three will also be donating artwork for auction.


Yanks Make a Mess of 9th, and Yet Another Game
The bottom of the ninth inning was messy yesterday at Yankee Stadium, fraught with the sort of inexcusable mistakes that insure last-place teams like the Yankees of staying entrenched in last place.
Bernie Williams totally misread a bunt situation and failed to move Mel Hall from second to third base with no outs and the score tied, 3-3, between the Yankees and Angels.
Then Hall raced off second when Randy Velarde stroked a sharp line drive to right field and was easily doubled off to stop a rally that could have won the game.


U.N. Asked to Yield Najibullah
As the United Nations evacuated its foreign workers from the Afghan capital today because of intense fighting, the Islamic coalition Government asked the world organization to turn over the former President, Najibullah, who has taken refuge in its compound.
Mr.
Najibullah sought protection there in April, after the old Soviet-installed Government was driven from power by Islamic rebels after 13 years of civil war.
Attacks by dissidents have since turned the city into a battlefield.


Adaptec Hires Executive
F.
Grant Saviers, a longtime senior executive at the Digital Equipment Corporation, has joined Adaptec Inc. as president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Saviers, who left Digital on July 1, had held several senior management positions in 24 years with the company, most recently vice president of the personal computer systems and peripherals group.


Market Place; A Cool Summer Hurts Aluminum
THIS year's cooler summer has been comfortable for most people, but it has meant fewer parched throats, and that has frustrated businesses ranging from utilities to ice cream makers.
Foremost among the disappointed, perhaps, are aluminum companies, which supply the raw material for soft-drink and beer cans.
Beverage cans account for about 30 percent of the nation's aluminum demand, analysts estimate, and with consumption of these beverages falling, so have profits at the nation's two largest aluminum makers, the Aluminum Company of America and the Reynolds Metals Company.


Three Charged in Queens Armed-Robbery Spree
The police charged three Queens men on Saturday in connection with a weeklong string of armed robberies on the streets of two quiet residential neighborhoods in Queens this month.
The suspects, including one released from a state Correctional Services work-release program the day before the robbery spree began, were arrested on Friday evening after a police officer in Jamaica spotted one of them driving a stolen car, the police said.


CHRONICLE
When My Sister's Place, a nonprofit agency in Westchester that helps battered women, was looking for enough money to buy a badly needed computer, it turned to the National Association for Female Executives, the country's largest businesswomen's organization.
The association promptly agreed to buy the computer and then decided to go a step further by throwing a fund-raising party on Thursday for the group.
For security reasons, the group prefers not to identify the precise location of its shelter, but its offices are in Tuckahoe.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congressional Races; Voter Anger Propels Term-Limit Push
This year, the simplest way to run for Congress and against it at the same time is to promise to try to put yourself out of the job you are seeking.
In a year when incumbents seem especially vulnerable, the issue of term limits may be a touchstone of change.
Dozens of candidates from both parties are backing the limits, especially in the 15 states that are expected to have term-limit initiatives on the ballot this November.
They argue that this is the way to bring Congress closer to the people, to curb the power of special interests and to get some new ideas in place to solve such intractable problems as the deficit or health care.


Self-Promoting With a Game
Modern Maturity magazine thinks it is time for a new board game, Reaching Maturity.
The magazine is sending copies of the game to current and potential advertisers.
"We are always looking for things that leave impressions on people," said Leda Sanford, advertising director at the magazine.
"We already did the mugs and fanny packs last year."


Voices of Stoicism, Fear and Revelry As Many Prepare to Ride Out Storm
Shortly before noon, with the sun still shining brightly but with reports of the approach of Hurricane Andrew beginning to throb with urgency, Karen Madsen drew the drapes, shut off the electricity and said goodbye to her waterfront condo here.
Like most of the other residents in her six-building complex overlooking Biscayne Bay, Ms.
Madsen, a 46-year-old banker, had not installed storm shutters and said she had no way to board up the huge plate-glass windows that give her fourth-floor apartment a spellbinding marine panorama.


Editorial Notebook; Shifting on the Shiites
In moving to shelter the rebellious Shiites of southern Iraq from Saddam Hussein's air force, the Bush Administration is not only reversing last year's cruel abandonment of an uprising encouraged by American rhetoric.
It is junking the strategic formula behind America's disastrous, decade-long flirtation with Saddam Hussein -- that a unified Iraq could best protect the region from the revolutionary Shiism of Iran.
In its place comes a new -- and equally dubious -- strategic calculation.
With Iraq now installed as public enemy No. 1, the threat of Iranian adventurism is dismissed as a lesser evil.
In some ways, it's simply the old failed policy in reverse.
Baghdad's control over the Shiite south was seen as a strategic bulwark against a fundamentalist Iran.
Denying that control is now seen as a strategic wedge against a defiant Iraq.


Accounts
*
Stadium Apparel, New York, to Kelsey Kravetz &amp; Partners, New York, to handle the children's sports apparel company's account, previously handled in-house.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Detroit Free Press, Detroit, to the Berline Group, Bingham Farms, Mich., for its account previously at W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Southfield, Mich.
Billings were not disclosed.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
American General Finance Corp., Houston, is offering $150 million of 5 percent notes due in 1995 at par through Salomon Brothers.
Noncallable for life, the notes are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Continental Corp., New York, an insurance holding company, is offering $100 million of 8 3/8 percent debentures due in 2012 at par through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Noncallable for life, the debentures are rated A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P.


Kodak Expands Digital Photo Line
The Eastman Kodak Company, which is basing the future of its snapshot business on electronics, will introduce professional versions of its Photo CD system today.
The Photo CD system for amateur use, first announced in September 1990 and now available, allows pictures taken with conventional cameras to be recorded on optical compact disks in digital form.
With an optical disk player, the pictures can then be displayed on television sets and computer terminals; they can also be transmitted over telephone lines.


In Film to Lure Officers, No Action, Just Service
It is not the ordinary police film.
There is no car chase.
No one pulls a gun.
The New York City Police Department's first recruiting film ever, previewed yesterday at Police Headquarters, focuses on a less adventurous aspect of police work: simply helping people.
The 12-minute film is aimed at attracting city residents, especially minority youths, to a department that is sometimes criticized for not reflecting the population of the city.
And the film tries to soften the image of a police force sometimes seen as the enemy in certain parts of the city.


'Can I Have the Keys?'


Sports of The Times; Owners Left Dollar Signs On the Trail
SOMETIME between going to work for President Nixon and going to prison, Attorney General John N. Mitchell made a statement that all sleuths, professional and amateur, should have heeded.
"Watch what we do, not what we say," Mitchell said, in 1969.
He was promising wonderful things, but his advice became prophetic not only for gauging political rhetoric but also the current shenanigans involving the baseball owners and their hired commissioner, Fay Vincent.
You can't hide your lying eyes, and you can't hide your center of gravity, either.


Arabs Hear Rare Harmony In Opening of Mideast Talks
Syrian and Jordanian negotiators said today that the new Government of Israel had displayed a more positive tone and taken a more constructive approach as the sixth round of Arab-Israeli peace talks opened here.
But they said today's talks focused more on procedure and basic principles than on concrete details of new proposals.
So it was not clear precisely how the new Israeli attitudes might be put into practice.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Tsongas Attacks Bush Plan But He's Tepid on Clinton's
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts came down here today to help Gov.
Bill Clinton do a bit of Bush-bashing.
Or so the visit was touted.
He did bash the President, calling the tax cuts and other economic proposals that Mr.
Bush offered at last week's Republican convention "cynical, outrageous nonsense" and asserting that Mr.
Bush had lost the will and capacity to govern.


Chess
Anatoly Karpov played in the Schweizerische Kreditanstalt International Tournament, which ended in early August in Biel, Switzerland, as though he was still angry at having been knocked out of the matches to pick the next challenger for the titleholder, Gary Kasparov.
The former world champion overcame the all-grandmaster field with gusto and dispatch, scoring 10 1/2-3 1/2.
Second prize went to Kiril Georgiev of Bulgaria, who tallied 9-5 in the double-round competition.
FINAL STANDINGS
Player
Pts.
Karpov
10 1/2
Georgiev, Ki.
9
Miles
7
Beljavsky
6 1/2
Lautier
6 1/2
Korchnoi
6
Shirov
5 1/2
Hansen, C.
4 1/2
In the ninth round, Karpov vigorously defeated Tony Miles of England in an avant-garde opening that has lately been attracting some attention from adventurous players who want to leave the beaten track.
The rarely played Keres Defense, which reveals itself after 5 . . .
Bb7, lets White tramp all over the center without lifting a finger to stop him.
Still, it is not easy to defeat.
A game between Aleksei Vyzmanavin and Miles in Ostend last year went 7 Nf3 O-O 8 Bd3 Nc6 9 O-O-O Ne7 and Black obtained reasonable play.
Karpov diverged with the much more aggressive 7 f4!?, which prepared to snow Black under in an eventual pawn avalanche.
After 7 . . . f5 8 e5 Nf7 9 O-O-O, Miles thrust 9 . . . g5 to give himself maneuvering space on the kingside and to diminish the white center with 12 . . . gf.
On 13 Qf4, Miles dare not stop for a pawn with 13 . . .
Rg2? in view of the crushing 14 Rhg1 Rg6 15 Nh4 Rg5 16 Bh5! h6 17 Nf3 Bf3 18 Qf3 c6 19 h4 Rg1 20 Rg1 Kf8 21 Qg3.
After 18 Rh6, the Englishman should have tried 18 . . .
Qg5, although 19 Qg5 Rg5 20 Re1 ed 21 cd Rh8 (21 . . . Re8? 22 Rh7 Rge5? 23 Re5 Re5 24 Rh8 sees Black walk into checkmate) 22 a3 shows White controlling the whole board while the black minor pieces remain out of play.
But there was nothing better.
Miles might erroneously have thought he was attacking something with 20 . . .
Re8, but Karpov disillusioned him at once with 21 g5, just waiting to punish 21 . . .
Qe5? by 22 Qe5 Re5 23 Rf8.
After 21 . . .
Kb8, Karpov took a monster grip on the black position with 22 Bh5 Reg8 23 Bf7 Rc8 24 e6.
Cold-blooded and precise as ever, Karpov advanced 27 b4 to deny the black queen any activity with . . .
Qc5.
On 28 Nd5, there was no chance for Miles to play 28 . . .
Ne7 because 29 Ne7 Qe7 30 Rd7 Qf8 31 e7 Qh8 32 e8/Q Re8 33 Qc7 leads to mate.
After 29 e7, Miles could already have thrown in the towel, but he carried on with 29 . . .
Rf7 30 Rf7.
On Karpov's 31 Rf8!, it was useless to play 31 . . .
Ne7 because of 32 Qc7 Ka8 33 Qc8 Qc8 (or 33 . . . Nc8 34 Nc7) 34 Rc8 Nc8 35 Nf6, which wins the h7 pawn and makes the endgame a snap.
After 33 Qf6!, Miles desperately played 33 . . .
Qh3, but after 34 Qe5 Qa3 35 Kd2, the white king would be perfectly sheltered following 35 . . .
Qa2 36 Ke1.
Miles, a ton of material down, gave up.
KERES DEFENSE
White
Black
Karpov
Miles
1
d4
e6
2
c4
Bb4
3
Bd2
Bd2
4
Qd2
b6
5
Nc3
Bb7
6
e4
Nh6
7
f4
f5
8
e5
Nf7
9
O-O-O
g5
10
Nf3
Rg8
11
Be2
Na6
12
h3
gf
13
Qf4
Qe7
14
g4
fg
15
hg
Ng5
16
d5
Nf3
17
Bf3
O-O-O
18
Rh6
Rg7
19
Rf6
ed
20
cd
Re8
21
g5
Kb8
22
Bh5
Reg8
23
Bf7
Rc8
24
e6
de
25
de
Nb4
26
a3
Nc6
27
b4
Qf8
28
Nd5
Qd6
29
e7
Rf7
30
Rf7
Qe6
31
Rf8
Ne5
32
Rc8
Bc8
33
Qf6
Qh3
34
Qe5
Qa3
35
Kd2
Resigns


A Surprise For Schools On Budgets
Many school superintendents across the city have found they are receiving significantly less money than they expected for the coming school year and are angry they will be forced to increase class sizes and trim staff.
In part, their disappointment reflects a letdown after the announcement last month of a budget agreement that Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and Mayor David N. Dinkins said virtually eliminated a $120 million shortfall hovering over the school system.
They promised that increases in class size would be averted.


CHRONICLE
A Haitian radio-journalist, JEAN MARIO PAUL, arrived in New York yesterday to collect a Freedom to Write Award from PEN, the writers' organization, and told of being arrested, imprisoned for six months and tortured in his native country.
Mr.
Paul, 25, a correspondent for Radio Antilles and political analyst for two Haitian newspapers, said he was released from jail in April, two weeks after he had been chosen for the award.
EDMUND KEELEY the president of the organization, a novelist and professor at Princeton, said, "We think PEN's award had a lot to do with the release."


Louisianians Calm but Fear Their Turn May Come
Warned that they might be the next victims of the hurricane that devastated South Florida, people in this region reacted quickly today, evacuating particularly vulnerable areas or making other emergency storm preparations.
They went to the store, taped windows, filled their car tanks with gasoline and made hotel reservations with the aplomb of people who have been through similar storms and floods before.
But there appeared to be concern that New Orleans, which has not been hit by a hurricane in recent years, may be due for a storm similar to Hurricane Betsy, which flooded some houses in the region to the rooftops in 1965.


Moe Ginsburg, 76; Men's Clothier Sold Inexpensive Garb
Moe Ginsburg, whose store offering quality men's clothing at inexpensive prices is a fixture of the New York retailing industry, died on Saturday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 76 years old and lived in Lawrence, N.Y.
Mr. Ginsburg died of heart failure after a brief illness, said his son, Paul.


Lenient Charges for Mother Who Killed Addict Daughter
A 68-year-old Queens woman who said she shot her crack-addicted daughter to death after enduring years of lies, thefts and threatening demands for money was indicted yesterday on manslaughter charges.
But by declining to bring the most serious charge, murder, the grand jury signaled a leniency that could lead to a plea bargain that would allow her to avoid prison.


Brazil Inquiry Finds Grounds to Impeach President
A special congressional panel issued a long-awaited report today accusing President Fernando Collor de Mello of accepting millions of dollars in illegal payments and benefits from business interests and said there was sufficient evidence to begin impeachment proceedings against him.
The 200-page report, produced after three months of investigation, deepened the political crisis for the 43-year-old Mr.
Collor, who in 1990 became Brazil's first popularly elected president in 30 years after waging a campaign against government corruption.


Review/Music; Mozartean Whatnot, Packaged In an Opera
At first glance, Mozart's "Schauspieldirektor" ("Impresario") seems tailor-made for the Mozart Bicentennial at Lincoln Center.
It offers an expandable framework of an opera, which can hold all manner of theatrical baggage.
For the first performance, in 1786, Mozart's librettist, Gottlieb Stephanie Jr., filled it with excerpts from contemporary plays.
The Lincoln Center festival, which likes to retire Kochel numbers by the handful, managed to fit nine of them into the work: the completed fragment of the opera "L'Oca del Cairo," an aria removed from "Cosi Fan Tutte" and various numbers added to operas by Mozart and others.
At another time, the assemblage presented on Friday evening at Alice Tully Hall as the second-to-last work in Lincoln Center's two-week Festival of Mozart Operas in Concert might have proved stimulating and satisfying.
The selection provided a mildly interesting cross-section of Mozart's stage work over two decades, and it came unified, more or less, with a spoken English connective text and light stage direction by the playwright Albert Innaurato.
But arriving on the penultimate evening of the larger 19-month festival, it seemed almost routine: just another Mozart grab bag, of which there had already been far too many.


Review/Music; The World of Richard Strauss, Murky and Not So Honorable
A useful idea has lately insinuated itself into the world of festival production.
Some musicians have found that with careful tinkering, aspects of a scholarly symposium can be crossbred with conventional musical presentation to yield a festival that is almost a contradiction in terms: a popular event at which serious issues are debated.
The format took root first in the early-music world, with the "Experience" weekends that the English conductor Roger Norrington began staging in 1987.
Leon Botstein, the president of Bard College here and the music director of the American Symphony Orchestra, has adopted this model for the Bard Music Festival since 1990.


Why Vote to Restrict Voters?
Voters in at least nine states will decide in November whether to throw the baby out with the bath water.
That's the inevitable result of proposals to limit Congressional terms, a superficially appealing idea endorsed by President Bush and embraced by Republicans at their convention.
The proposals would do much damage and little good.
Proponents of term limits have bounced back with a vengeance from their defeat in the state of Washington.
Six other states may soon have term limit proposals on the ballot, in addition to the nine.
Those 15 states have roughly one-third of the nation's population, so the results will be a good indicator of voter sentiment.


Yanks Ease the Pain of Rookie Pitcher's Debut
It could have been storybook time for pitcher Bob Wickman last night.
It was his major league debut for the Yankees.
It was against Milwaukee, the team he rooted for as a kid.
It was a scenario his father dreamed of two weeks ago.
But what could have been a charming tale of a rookie fulfilling his dream in the Bronx while his family watches back home in Wisconsin instead became the storybook tale for an entire team as the Yankees erupted for four runs in the eighth inning to rescue a game that seemed lost and emerge with a 9-8 victory over the Brewers at Yankee Stadium.


Maytag Sees A Profit Drop In 3d Period
The Maytag Corporation, citing slack demand and intense competition, said yesterday that it expected third-quarter earnings before one-time charges to drop one-third from the $24.2 million, or 23 cents a share, of net income it reported for the period a year earlier.
To address those conditions, Maytag said it would reorganize its North American and European operations.


The Times Reaches a Pact With the Mailers Union
The New York Times Company announced yesterday that it had reached a new labor agreement with the New York Mailers Union No. 6, and the pact will be presented to the union's membership on Sept. 14 for ratification.
Neither side would disclose details of the agreement.
A settlement of work conditions and staffing with the 900-member union was considered an important step toward the opening of The Times's new $450 million newspaper printing plant in Edison, N.J., this fall.
In May, The Times reached a long-term contract with newspaper delivery drivers that ended a bitter three-week labor dispute and was a major step toward opening the Edison plant.


Yet Another Milestone? Didn't Notice
His 3,000th hit should come in the next couple of weeks and Robin Yount will probably react as if it is just another stroke to help the Milwaukee Brewers stay in the divisonal race.
It is difficult to fathom how reaching such a plateau and solidifying a prominent place in baseball history would not make even Yount tingle with excitement, but true to his private nature, he is reluctant to talk about it.
Since Yount is not certain where the ball for his 2,500th hit is, it is evident he is not acting.


The Council's Tough Vote on Garbage
The City Council will have a rare opportunity to show political courage tomorrow, when it votes on the Dinkins administration's essential but unpopular trash disposal plan.
Critics are playing fast and loose with already exaggerated fears about its centerpiece -- a new incinerator plant.
Their tactics turn tomorrow's vote into a test of the Council's willingness to choose responsible government over demagoguery.
Nobody
likes
the idea of building a new incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
But after an unfortunately slow start, Mayor David Dinkins showed leadership by endorsing it, and Council Speaker Peter Vallone has courageously followed suit because the city is running out of places to put its enormous load of garbage.


Cook Denies He Killed Athlete on Beach
An unemployed cook was arraigned today in the slaying of Wayne Belliveau, a 23-year-old weightlifter and college football player who was shot during a melee at a beach in Rocky Point on July 5.
The suspect, Maximo Suriel, 27, of Coram, pleaded not guilty in Suffolk County Court.
He was arrested early Sunday after a friend of Mr.
Belliveau's, Scott Marchese, spotted him at a Port Jefferson bar and called the police.


Molecular 'Wires'
Scientists at the NEC Corporation say they have found a new method for manufacturing large quantities of a new cylindrical form of graphite that is only several atoms wide.
Existing as tubes within tubes, these novel fibers, called nanotubes, were inadvertently made last year in an experiment designed to produce the spherical graphite molecules known as fullerenes.
The structure and shape of the nanotubes instantly conjured up ideas of new structural materials and of molecular "wires" for microelectronics, but the lack of significant amounts of the material has hampered testing until now.


Mystery Bug Infestations? Call In the Insect Sleuth
THE large upstate New York hospital was desperate for help.
Flies appearing from seemingly nowhere had invaded the surgical suites, dropping onto patients and operating-room personnel in the midst of surgery.
With the hospital unable to stem the invasion, the whole surgical staff walked out in disgust and patients in need of operations had to be transferred elsewhere.
The administrator put in an emergency call to Dr.
Edgar Raffensperger, a professor emeritus at Cornell University with an unusual specialty.
Dr.
Raffensperger is an insect sleuth, a cultural entomologist who is an expert on the role that insects, spiders and other arthropods play in people's lives, like it or not.
The hospital, needless to say, did not like the flies and asked Dr.
Raffensperger to figure out where they were coming from and how to get rid of them -- fast.


COMPANY NEWS
AMTECH CORP., Dallas, and Motorola Inc. said they had agreed in principle to form a joint venture to develop a new generation of wireless electronic toll collection and traffic management systems.
FRANKLIN RESOURCES INC., San Mateo, Calif., and Templeton, Galbraith &amp; Hansberger Ltd. have received approval from the Federal Trade Commission to complete their $913 million merger.


Review/Cabaret; A Singer Pays Tribute To a Lyricist of Conscience
Early in "Fancy Meeting You," his superb cabaret tribute to the lyrics of E. Y. (Yip) Harburg, Phillip Officer describes the artistic philosophy of the man who wrote the words to "Brother, Can You Spare a Dime" and "Over the Rainbow."
"His credo was that all art should have its roots in social survival," the singer says, adding that Harburg, who died in 1981, "looked at things from a hopeful, cheerful point of view."


Jack Granofsky, 72, Clinical Psychologist
Dr.
Jack Granofsky, a clinical psychologist and former Hofstra University professor, died on Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 72 and lived in Manhattan.
Dr. Granofsky died of lymphoma, said his son, Richard.


Pro-Choice Doesn't Force Abortions on Women; Poor and Desperate
To the Editor:
David R. Carlin Jr.'s "Tyranny of the Pro-Choice Snobs" (Op-Ed, Aug. 10) ruffled my equanimity.
He accuses pro-choice advocates of anti-intellectualism because they refuse to recognize the fetus as a person.
A fetus is a figure with the potential for life after it has been in the uterus for three months.
Most abortions are performed during the first trimester of pregnancy, and my focus is on that interval.
I have an advanced degree in human anatomy, have taught the subject in medical school and venerate the jewels in the crown of the Lord's achievement.


People
*
Bill Evans, 61 years old, chairman emeritus of Gray Kirk/VanSant, Baltimore, said he planned to retire. *
Six vice presidents at Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. , New York, were promoted to senior vice presidents: Walter Bishop, Brenda Broido, Roberto Calderin, Lee Nicholson, Grant Pace and Thomas Parkes.


Pro-Choice Doesn't Force Abortions on Women; Free Speech Denied
To the Editor:
Re David R. Carlin Jr.'s "Tyranny of the Pro-Choice Snobs" (Op-Ed, Aug. 10): We live in a town that has been the target of out-of-town Operation Rescue agitators on a regular basis for the last couple of years.
On any given Saturday there is a risk of encountering increasingly smaller clots of people carrying increasingly larger color posters of maimed, bloody, dead infants.
There have been incidents where these out-of-towners sneaked into the high school and slipped postcard-sized copies of such photos into the children's lockers, as well as putting them in local mailboxes.
These tactics have offended even the antichoice locals, including the local Roman Catholic churches, who will have nothing to do with them.


Beijing Journal; No Praise, Please! He Wants to Be the Premier
Of all the names being bandied about these days as potential prime ministers, one evokes a special tingle -- depending on your vantage point -- of either hope or horror.
Zhu Rongji, a former rightist who has spent more years in disgrace than in power, is the fastest-rising star in China's political firmament.
But Mr.
Zhu, a fluent English-speaker and aggressive advocate of economic change, faces a horrendous image problem within the party leadership: admirers abroad have affectionately dubbed him "China's Gorbachev."


PRO FOOTBALL: Injured Hostetler Out for Now While Nagle Seems In as No. 1; Giants Are Uncertain He'll Start the Opener
The Giants received mixed reviews today about the health of Jeff Hostetler, their starting quarterback.
X-rays showed no broken bones, but his back spasms continued, and he has been ruled out of practice this week and out of the final preseason game, against the Steelers Saturday night in Pittsburgh.
Hostetler suffered a bruised pelvis and lower back when he was driven to the ground by the Jets' Dennis Byrd on Saturday night.
Today, Hostetler drove to the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, where he underwent tests and was examined by Dr.
Russell Warren, the Giants' orthopedic surgeon.


Officer in Booty Case Is Ousted From Army
An Army captain who is challenging the military's standards for punishment in war-booty cases, has been dismissed and sentenced to 12 months in jail for bringing back six Iraqi assault rifles from the Persian Gulf war.
The officer, Capt.
John M. Gargaro, 30 years old, a quartermaster in the 528th Special Operations support battalion at Fort Bragg, N.C., was sentenced by a military judge on Saturday after a court-martial at Fort Bragg.


Immigrants Swindle Their Own, Preying on Trust; Race, Religion and Ethnic Background Give Con Artists an Inside Track to Victims
When Satya Paul Gupta sold his share in a gas station in Mount Kisco, N.Y., he knew exactly what to do with the $80,000 he netted.
He turned every penny over to Deepak Gulati, a compatriot featured as an expert on the "You and Your Money" segment of a television program aimed at New York's Indian immigrants.
Mr.
Gupta, who is 58 years old, said he had "greedy faith" that his life savings would be safe with a fellow Indian, particularly the soft-spoken television celebrity with an office on Madison Avenue and an offer of what amounted to 12 percent yearly interest on four-month promissory notes, or I.O.U.'s.


Optical Imaging Offers Gentler Way to Monitor Human Brain at Work
RESEARCHERS have developed a new technique that allows them to see and photograph areas of the brain's surface as it deals with language, memory and other tasks.
Using fiber-optic light and a special camera attached to a surgical microscope, a team of scientists at the University of Washington School of Medicine in Seattle has become the first to make optical images of the surface of the human brain as it responds to nervous stimulation.


Alan R. Liss, 67, Manhattan Publisher
Alan R. Liss, the founder of the publishing house named after him, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 67 years old.
His family said he died after a long illness.


Officers' Conduct at Party Is Part of Shooting Inquiry
The Essex County Prosecutor, investigating the fatal shooting of two teen-agers by two Newark police officers, today ordered detectives to interview guests at a bachelor party that the officers attended Friday before the shootings.
James A. Mulvihill, the acting prosecutor, said he had given his staff a list of questions he wanted answered before he presents the case to a grand jury.
He said one area of interest was the bachelor party "and the conduct of the officers while they were there."


Ripken Is Signed For $30.5 Million
Cal Ripken Jr., the Baltimore Orioles' remarkable shortstop, who hasn't missed a game in more than 10 years, signed the second most lucrative contract in baseball history yesterday, agreeing to a five-year deal for $30.5 million.
The average annual value of $6.1 million is surpassed only by the $7.1 million average of Ryne Sandberg's contract extension that takes effect next year.
The agreement, which came on Ripken's 32d birthday, was announced to Oriole fans last night in a home-plate ceremony minutes before the team's game with the California Angels.
It culminated a seasonlong effort to keep Ripken permanently in the only uniform he has worn in the major leagues.
Post-Retirement Offer
"We also have extended to Cal an offer of post-retirement employment in a front-office capacity," Larry Lucchino, the Orioles' president, said by telephone from Baltimore.
"He can decide after he retires whether to accept that, but we plan to have him here until he retires."


No TV Access in Round 1 Of Allen-Farrow Battle
Opponents in the Woody Allen-Mia Farrow child-custody case actually agreed on something yesterday as lawyers for both sides joined forces to try to keep television cameras out of the courtroom.
In a legal argument pitting public access to information against the children's right to privacy, lawyers for Mr.
Allen and Ms.
Farrow argued that the case involved potentially damaging evidence that should not be disclosed.
But a lawyer for the New York Broadcasters Pool, a media professional group that sought access to the proceedings, said it was already too late for that.


After Fight For Light, Vines Rule Forest Top
ONE of the most distinctive features of tropical forests is the vines that festoon trees in great tangles or run from branch to branch in a network of aerial highways for the creatures of the forest canopy.
This intriguing family of plants plays a vital role in the life of the forest and is a cornucopia of unusual chemicals, yet remains largely a mystery to biologists.
One reason for the neglect, perhaps, is that many vines flower only in the inaccessible high canopy.
Yet their importance was spotted long ago by Charles Darwin, who published a treatise entitled "Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants" in 1875.
To maintain their upwardly mobile life styles, vines have adopted special searching and climbing behaviors.
They have radically altered their internal anatomies and devised powerful chemical defenses, which have provided humans with everything from latex to birth-control drugs.
In the first comprehensive work on vines since Darwin's essay, researchers have recently published their latest findings in "The Biology of Vines" (Cambridge University Press).
"It's hard not to be fascinated with these plants once you see them," said Dr.
Francis Putz, a forest ecologist at the University of Florida and a co-editor of the new volume.
"It's becoming apparent that depending upon other plants for support has important consequences that are felt in every aspect of the vines' lives, from rooting patterns to chemistry, even their flowering and fruiting cycles. As plants, in some ways they are really odd, since they even have real behaviors."
Noel Holbrook, a graduate student in ecology at Stanford University, said vines zipped along as though they had "been liberated in a sense, just crawling around, free from the cares of having to support themselves. But there are difficulties in being a vine; it's not a perfect life style."
The life of these so-called structural parasites demands an endless search for trees on which they can slither toward the bright light above the canopy.
Unlike self-supporting plants, which can send their shoots and leaves directly up to the sun, vines must find help in trying to escape the shadowy forest floor.
Scientists have found that vines send out exploratory shoots that trace circles in the air as they search sightlessly for something to climb.
"The tip will grow in a way that moves it, even in completely still air, in a wide circle sometimes a yard and a half in diameter in an hour," Dr.
Putz said.
Researchers have recently reported that plants can even sense the presence of a nearby support.
When a vine's exploratory groping brings it near a tree, even though it has yet to make contact, it begins to extend farther in the tree's direction.
Scientists suggest that vines may be able to "smell" their prey, detecting chemicals that are given off by useful supports like trees.
But just finding a tree is no promise of making it to the sunlight.
Not every vine can climb every tree, and not every tree is the towering redwood a vine might prefer to ascend.
Vines that use tendrils to climb can only ascend plants with branches small enough for them to grasp.
On the other hand, vines that twine around stems, and can circle the entire trunk, can grip even the slippery, smooth trunks of small saplings and trees.
Other vines mount with curved hooks or even touch-sensitive leaves that wrap the necks of their leaf clusters around branches and twigs.
If a snared tree turns out to be too short for a vine to reach the sunlit forest canopy, the vine will search for others, often lassoing a whole series of progressively taller trees in its steady ascent skyward.
Although vines may drape half the trees in a rain forest, most never find a ticket up and out of the forest shadows.
When researchers placed artificial trellises on the forest floor, eager vines raced up their newly found supports.
Dr.
Putz said that as many as a quarter of the seedlings on the floor of a tropical forest could be vine seedlings that had not yet found supports.
Some tropical plants manage to shake off vine attacks by giving refuge to swarms of ants that drag away the soft tendrils of intruding vines.
If plants are not able to fend off the vines, they become weighed down and debilitated.
When one enveloped tree falls, it will often drag down all the others snared in the vine's far-flung tentacles.
Reaching the Top
When a vine reaches the forest canopy, it crowns its efforts with a burst of light-catching leaves.
A vine two inches in diameter will sprout as many leaves as a tree a foot across.
To supply the leaves with water, according to Ms.
Holbrook, the vines have wider water-carrying tubes than other plants.
Some vines are thought to have life spans of hundreds of years, so they must also be prepared to survive the demise of their hosts.
In most plants, stiff water-conducting tubes are bundled together toward the center of the stem, with softer tissues encircling the entire package.
In vines, the different tissues are dispersed, enabling the vines to withstand extensive twisting and crushing because their stiff tubes are well padded by the softer tissues that surround them.
"We could twist some vines several full rotations before they stopped transporting water," Ms.
Holbrook said, "whereas a tree would stop after a quarter of a turn."
Observations of small-scale disasters in the forest bear this out.
According to Dr.
Putz, 1 to 2 percent of the trees in a tropical forest die each year, and many topple over.
While only some of the trees sprout again from the broken stem, virtually all the vines sprout.
Startlingly rapid growers, vines can move along at a clip of half a foot a day.
Some grow as thick as a man's thigh and as long as two redwoods placed end to end.
Poised to invade any open space and choke off cleared areas, vines are a major pest confronting forest managers.
"In these immense vine tangles, you'll see them smothering bushes, shrubs, seedlings, whatever is there," Ms.
Holbrook said.
"They're incredible opportunists." Dr.
Putz said that particularly large tangles, like the vine forests in Borneo, could span acre after acre.
Vines can be a serious obstacle even for those who simply want to get past them.
"In some spots, like the sunny sides of rivers, the perfect conditions for climbing plants, there are often curtains of vines that essentially close the forest on its edge, draping down like a green curtain and making entry into the forest somewhat challenging, with several meters of vines to chop through," Dr.
Putz said.
Food and Medicine
Although vines pose a threat to trees, they are also a precious source of food, transport and medication.
According to Oliver Phillips, a graduate student in ethnobotany at Washington University in St.
Louis, yams and sweet potatoes harvested from vines are two of the major foods that feed people in the tropics.
A whole range of other food-producing vines are found throughout the world, including melons, cucumbers and squashes.
Vines provide nectar to birds and insects, and their fruits are one of the most important food sources for primates in the American tropics.
While Tarzan may have been the only human to get extensive use out of vines for transportation, these bushropes serve as public transit for many other animals, from howler monkeys to ants, that prefer to traverse the forest canopy without setting their feet on the ground.
"Without vines, trees a few yards apart would be isolated. As it is, with so many vines around, there are plenty of pathways for animals," Ms.
Holbrook said.
"It's a highway network up in the forest canopy."
Rattans, the climbing palms that provide the raw material for patio furniture and handicrafts sold around the world, have become the most important nontimber forest product in Asia.
Mr.
Phillips said this multibillion-dollar industry was still largely based on the harvesting of wild vines from the rain forests of Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines.
Perhaps the most intriguing uses of vines are medicinal.
Early studies have suggested that vines as a group may be the best source of drugs in the plant world.
Curare, a drug used in surgery, and diosgenin, a steroid used in oral contraceptives, were first discovered in tropical vines.
People living in rain forests derive from vines a variety of substances, like poison for darts, ant-bite and snakebite remedies, and drugs to treat diarrhea, conjunctivitis and syphilis.
For many Indian peoples in the Amazon basin, vines are a source of hallucinogenic drugs, like a drink called ayahuasca, which is made from the bark of a tropical vine.
The importance of these vines in Indian religion can be seen by an extensive field knowledge of these hallucinogen-carrying vines, as well as by the prominence of drug-induced visions in Indian art.
As indigenous peoples adopt more modern life styles, they may be losing the knowledge of how to identify vines and pick out the useful ones.
Ethnobotanists say that scientists need to make quick use of that source of information because vines can be difficult to classify.
"Often all you can see of a canopy vine is a long, thin stem that disappears up into the trees," Mr.
Phillips said.
"The fact that their leaves and flowers are often in the canopy makes them hard to identify from the ground, and the knowledge about which kind of vine is poisonous and which is medicinal is often the first to go when indigenous peoples lose their traditions."
Dr.
Putz said: "Whatever science may have to say about them, maybe more than anything, these plants are really gorgeous. They make the exotic atmosphere in movies and novels about the jungle, bushropes hanging everywhere. Even though I've worked on vines for a lot of years, I'm still stunned by the beauty of their form."


A New Judge for New York's Top Court
In picking George Bundy Smith for a vacancy on New York's highest court yesterday, Gov.
Mario Cuomo named a competent replacement for Fritz Alexander, who left the court this spring to become New York City's Deputy Mayor for Public Safety.
The Governor chose from a diverse list of judges and lawyers provided by a nominating panel, vindicating again the state's repudiation of elections for its highest court.
That 1977 reform has enabled New York to diversify a formerly all-male, all-white high bench with qualified minority and female candidates who might otherwise be unable to afford or survive statewide election.
Mr.
Cuomo was wise to choose Justice Smith, a black member of the Appellate Division's downstate region, thereby maintaining previously achieved racial and geographic balance.


Little League Lights On; Jersey Wins
It was 8 P.M. and the start of the first night game in Little League World Series history, under a newly installed $98,000 lighting system, was moments away.
The hundreds of family members and self-appointed community cheerleaders supporting the Nattingham team from Hamilton Square, N.J., were singing and cheering and even howling in the stadium packed with 20,000 fans.


Cambodia Comes Back To Life
For 13 years, Vath Roeum lived in a refugee camp across the border in Thailand, cut off from her three children who stayed behind.
Today, Mrs.
Vath has returned and wonders why she ever fled.
"I made the wrong choice," she says.
"I can't tell you now what was so frightening that I abandoned my children and my motherland."
The U.N.
High Commission for Refugees has repatriated nearly 100,000 Cambodian refugees, a third of whom were liberated from dictatorial camps run by the Khmer Rouge.


Review/Fashion; For Resort Wear, Spirited Classics
It is not surprising that Donna Karan's clothes for the resort-cruise collection emit a special kind of high-voltage energy.
"Resort collections are always my favorite," said Ms.
Karan, who was among the major sportswear designers to show resort lines this month.
"It's the one time in the year when you are working on clothes for the kind of life you are leading. It's my most personal collection."


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Senator Al Gore  TODAY: 7:35 A.M., NBC, "Today," interview. (Channel 4 in New York.)  Gov.
Bill Clinton  TODAY: 8 P.M., C-Span, town hall meeting in Dallas.


No Headline
The roof just fell down right on us.
We stayed there and just put mattresses over ourselves and hoped that we would live. -- BRENDA HILL, who lived through the hurricane near Miami.  [ B7:1. ]


Patterns
A No for Furs
A sign of the decline in the popularity of furs: Macy's Herald Square store has stopped carrying furs and has converted its fur salon, a prime space on its third floor, into a boutique called Designer Separates.
Don't expect to find famous designer labels there.
The shop features the season's hot fashion items pulled together in one place to make it easy for the customer in search of the new.
"It's a collection of items from different designers," said Bruce Binder, the store's fashion director, "little people who do separates rather than collections. The kind of designers who usually sell in specialty stores rather than department stores. We never knew where to put their things before.  Now we have a showplace for them."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Connecticut Visit; Hard-Hit City Gets Glimpse of Bush
President Bush came to this depressed one-time manufacturing center this afternoon, said thanks for "a great send-off" to the thousands of people who had waited hours in a sweltering stadium, and promptly left, the blades of his helicopter flattening the ball field grass in a moment of Presidential pomp.
It was the biggest thing to happen to Ansonia in a long time, yet it hardly seemed enough for the many people who have lost jobs here and have not been able to find new ones.


PRO FOOTBALL: Injured Hostetler Out for Now While Nagle Seems In as No. 1; Toughness Outweighs Lack of Experience
Coach Bruce Coslet all but officially named 24-year-old Browning Nagle as the Jets' starting quarterback today when he picked Nagle over Ken O'Brien to start against the Philadelphia Eagles' powerful defense in the exhibition-season finale on Thursday.
The Eagles almost broke Nagle's jaw and gave him a welt to remember in the Jets' first preseason game, and Coslet could have decided to give his younger, infinitely inexperienced quarterback a bench seat on Thursday to watch the old hand, O'Brien, start.


CHRONICLE
September has been proclaimed poetry month in New Jersey by Gov.
JIM FLORIO, who said, "Poetry in our time is largely unknown, unremembered and unheralded, and is the least recognized of the arts." The inspiration was the Geraldine R. Dodge Foundation's three-day poetry festival on Sept. 17, 18 and 19.
As it has been doing every other year since 1986, the private philanthropic organization, based in Morristown, N.J., will be bringing together master poets and the lesser known, as well as 2,500 students from New Jersey high schools, and 400 teachers from New Jersey, New York and Connecticut.
The site will be the restored 19th-century village of Waterloo, in Stanhope.


LEAVE IRAQ ALONE, U.S. TELLS IRANIANS
The United States has warned Iran not to try to take advantage of the Western plan to protect the Shiites in southern Iraq from Iraqi air strikes, American officials said today.
The Administration's message was transmitted recently through a third party, the officials said.
Diplomatic communications are normally relayed through the Swiss Embassy.
Iran did not respond.


State Dept. Fills Posts After Baker Departure
The State Department today announced the names of officials who have assumed the responsibilities of those who moved to the White House with James A. Baker 3d.
Mr.
Baker was Secretary of State until Sunday, when he became White House chief of staff, responsible for orchestrating President Bush's re-election campaign.


Is It Most Valuable, Or Most Noteworthy?
Gary Sheffield, the San Diego Padres' third baseman, who is flirting most seriously with becoming the major leagues' first Triple Crown winner in a quarter-century, is undoubtedly the National League's player of the year.
But is Gary Sheffield the National League's most valuable player?
Careful now before you answer, because someone like Cecil Fielder, or Terry Pendleton, or Mark McGwire, or Barry Bonds might demand an explanation to the oft-asked question: Just what does constitute the most valuable individual performance by a player in a league in any given season?


U.S. Suffers Setback on Ex-C.I.A. Agent in Sweden
Swedish security authorities, who last week arrested the only C.I.A. officer ever to defect to the Soviet Union, took a step today that could undermine American efforts to return him for trial on espionage charges in the United States.
In an announcement, Swedish officials said the security police had dropped an inquiry into whether Edward Lee Howard, who eluded Federal agents and fled to Moscow in 1985, engaged in espionage in Sweden, where he has lived since last fall.
Mr.
Howard remains in jail in Sweden on a visa violation.


Raccoons Getting Shots to Slow Spread of Rabies
Guided by the beam of a tiny flashlight, Dr.
Susan M. Stehman crossed the lawn of a darkened house and disappeared into a hedge.
A few feet into the brush, she stopped at a small cage.
"We've got another one," said Dr.
Stehman, a veterinarian, as she shined her light on the familiar masked face of a wild raccoon, trapped as part of an experiment to stop the spread of rabies.


Bridge
In the early stages of the World Bridge Federation's Team Olympiad here, the United States open team is well placed, but the women's team is in some trouble.
After five rounds of play, the Americans defending the open title that they won four years ago in Venice were in third position in the B group.
These were the standings: first, the Netherlands, 112 victory points; second, Finland, 107; third, the United States, 105; fourth, Sweden, 102; fifth, Iceland, 95, and sixth, Pakistan, 92.


South Korean Leader Hails Pact With China
President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea announced today in a speech in Seoul that the cold war had drawn closer to an end in northern Asia with the signing in Beijing of an agreement to open diplomatic relations with China.
He also said he would visit China soon for a summit meeting with leaders who for 45 years had been implacable foes.
Amid his florid language, marking an occasion that would have seemed incredible just a few years ago, there were several important points in President Roh's speech.
For one, he brushed aside concerns about whether opening relations with Beijing might hinder unification talks with North Korea, whose most solid ally since the Korean War has been China.


Still Party Animals After All These Years
LARRY ROSNER'S big white mustache quivered because the ice had cost more than the soft drinks on this morning.
But his outrage was interrupted by a friend using that understanding language that guys reserve for teammates.
"Hey, Rosner! If you don't bowl soon, we'll have to call this game for darkness."


Edberg Gets Winning Sendoff for Open
The second-best tennis player in the world had expected to spend his day relaxing on the golf course, but there he was, punching in on Monday morning with the rest of the working stiffs in order to complete his weeklong stint here at the rain-ravaged Volvo International.
Stefan Edberg, the defending United States Open champion, had only one title to his name in 1992, but he changed that today by defeating 16th-ranked MaliVai Washington, 7-6 (7-4), 6-1, in a final in which the first set was hotly contested but the second was a runaway for the determined Swede.


Market Place; Calm After the Storm Seen for Insurance Rates
After battering South Florida with the fiercest blows of any storm in 35 years and now taking aim at the Texas-Louisiana Gulf Coast, Hurricane Andrew is likely to make a bad year of losses worse for many property insurers.
But analysts say the damages would have to be extraordinarily high to cause the insurance industry to raise rates substantially, possibly buoying their stocks.


Walsh a Bundle of Nerves As Stanford Opens Season
With Sleeping Beauty's Castle as a backdrop, the coach with the white hair stood stiffly as he was welcomed back to college football by a quarterback named Mickey, a cheerleader named Minnie and a friend of theirs dressed as a referee.
The sight of Bill Walsh shaking hands with the referee raised one more question about the coach's return as coach of the Stanford Cardinal: Which one is Goofy?


Citing Budget Shortfall, Moody's Lowers Rating on Trenton's Debt
Citing shortfalls in the New Jersey budget, Moody's Investors Service downgraded the state's credit rating today, moving it from Aaa, the top class, to Aa1, the second highest.
The downgrading means the state will have to pay higher interest rates when it sells bonds to finance public works.
New Jersey has more than $3.3 billion in general obligation debt outstanding, and more than $5 billion in total tax-supported debt.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER Juventus Wins Easily Over U.S.
Team  The Italian club Juventus of Turin overpowered the United States national team, 3-0, yesterday and won the Baretti Trophy exhibition tournament in St.
Vincent, Italy.
It was the sixth straight match in which the Americans failed to score and their 12th blanking this year.
The United States has not scored in 616 minutes, not since a 1-1 tie with Italy's national team in June.
The United States finished last in the four-team tournament, losing to Fiorentina by 4-0 on Friday.
Russia beat Fiorentina, 1-0, in yesterday's other game at Aosta on a goal by Dmitri Radchenko with five minutes remaining.
Juventus, which got goals from Gianluca Vialli, Fabrizio Ravanelli and Roberto Baggio, had no problems with the United States team, which was missing all of its European-based players. (AP)  TENNIS  Connors Advances Into Second Round Jimmy Connors defeated Nicklas Kulti, 6-3, 6-4, in the opening round of the Waldbaum's Hamlet Cup in Commack, L.I.
Joining Connors in the second round of the United States Open tuneup was seventh-seeded Aleksandr Volkov, a 6-3, 6-4 winner over Marc Rosset, the Olympic gold medalist, and No. 8 Brad Gilbert, who defeated Clinton Marsh, 6-3, 6-2.
Kulti led by 2-0 in the second set when his service was broken and led by 30-15 with the games tied at 4-4 when Connors won seven of the last eight points.
"I played well," said Connors, who turns 40 next week.
"I'd be happy playing like this for the next two and a half weeks." (AP) Succeeding in Singles: Mark Woodforde, ranked No. 2 in doubles but No. 54 in singles, used his serve-and-volley game to upset second-seeded Carlos Costa, 6-2, 6-3, in the first round of the OTB International, a men's and women's hard-court tournament in Schenectady, N.Y.
Woodforde played a nearly flawless game against the 10th-ranked Spaniard, who has made his mark exclusively on clay.
Seventh-seeded Paul Haarhuis advanced when German Lopez retired because of sprained ankle at 3-3 in the first set.
In the women's draw, Florencia Labat upset sixth-seeded Natalya Medvedeva, 4-6, 6-3, 6-2.
Third-seeded Barbara Rittner cruised past Iva Majoli, 6-3, 6-2. (Reuters) Rehe Prevails: Despite serving 29 double faults, Stephanie Rehe outlasted Mercedes, Paz 6-7 (5-7), 7-6 (7-5), 6-4 in a 3-hour-31-minute opening-round match in the Mazda Classic in Carlsbad, Calif.
Top-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, who received a first-round bye, will begin play tonight against Kimberly Po, who advanced with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Gretchen Magers. (AP)


As Georgia Chief, Shevardnadze Rides Whirlwind
Eduard A. Shevardnadze, who has been struggling since March to stabilize a turbulent Georgia and give it some international credibility, is now facing a maze of conflicts that threaten both Georgia's integrity as a unified state and his own as a man of peace.
Militia loyal to the deposed President, Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia, continue to disrupt western Georgia, while two other regions, Abkhazia and South Ossetia, are trying to secede.
A Georgian military occupation of the Abkhazian capital, Sukhumi, only reluctantly supported by Mr.
Shevardnadze, has not put an end to resistance, and Georgia's main railway link to Russia and Armenia has now been cut, deepening an economic crisis.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY MOTHER INDICTED IN DAUGHTER'S KILLING
A 68-year-old Queens woman who said she shot her crack-addicted daughter to death after enduring years of lies, thefts and threatening demands for money has been indicted on manslaughter charges.
But by declining to bring the most serious charge, murder, the grand jury has opened the way for a possible plea bargain that would allow her to avoid prison.
A1.
Indictment reflects a growing tendency to recognize strain of crime, experts say.
B3.
NEW INCINERATOR SEEN AS LIKELY
Mayor Dinkins is virtually assured of prevailing ultimately in the City Council on his long-term garbage-disposal plan, which includes building a new incinerator in Brooklyn, two senior Council staff members say.
The Mayor and the Speaker have enough votes to succeed, they said, because even if a majority on the Council should reject the plan tomorrow, the opponents do not have enough votes to override a mayoral veto of that action.
B3.
ACCESS TO COURTROOM SOUGHT
Opponents in the Woody Allen-Mia Farrow child-custody case have actually agreed on something as lawyers for both sides joined in trying to keep television cameras out of the courtroom.
In a legal argument pitting public access to information against the children's right to privacy, lawyers for Mr.
Allen and Ms.
Farrow argued that the case involved potentially damaging evidence that should not be disclosed.
But a lawyer for the New York Broadcasters Pool, a media professional group that sought access to the proceedings on behalf of Court TV, said it was already too late for that.
The judge denied access to cameras for a hearing today, but did not rule on the possibility of future televised hearings.
B3.
A new police recruiting film emphasizes good deeds, not excitement.
B2.
The Times and the mailers union reach a new labor agreement.
B3.
REGION  TRENTON RATING ON DEBT LOWERED
Citing shortfalls in the New Jersey budget, Moody's Investors Service has downgraded the state's credit rating, moving it from Aaa, the top class, to Aa1, the second highest.
The downgrading means the state will have to pay higher interest rates when it sells bonds to finance public works.
Although Governor Florio said that he was disappointed by Moody's decision, he said that New Jersey still had the best rating in the Northeast.
B5.
A VISIT FROM THE PRESIDENT
President Bush came to Ansonia, Conn., a economically depressed onetime manufacturing center, where he was met by a crowd of 8,000.
It was the biggest thing to happen to Ansonia in a long time, yet it hardly seemed enough for the many people who have lost their jobs and have not been able to find new ones.
A18.
AN ARREST IN A LONG ISLAND KILLING
An unemployed cook has been arraigned in the slaying of Wayne Belliveau, a 23-year-old weightlifter and college football player who was shot during a melee at a beach in Rocky Point, L.I., on July 5.
The arrest on Sunday came after a friend of Mr.
Belliveau's spotted him at a Port Jefferson bar and called the police.
B5.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B4  Chronicle B4


Jet Sales to Saudis and Taiwan Weighed
With thousands of military industry jobs at stake in states like Ohio and California, the Bush Administration is poised to approve multibillion-dollar sales of fighter jets to Saudi Arabia and Taiwan that it once opposed or considered too controversial to pursue immediately, Administration officials say.
Under pressure to help the ailing military industry, the Administration in recent weeks has also dropped its longstanding opposition to spending $1.5 billion on the V-22 Osprey aircraft, which is being developed in Texas and Pennsylvania, and rescinded a Federal rule that hindered contractors seeking to convert military technology to nonmilitary uses.


Chicago (Not in Standings) Now in First
There is no more pervasive a television entity in baseball than the Chicago Cubs' owner, the Tribune Company.
CBS, ESPN and WTBS look like wimps in the wake of the Chicago company's breadth of baseball broadcasting.
Apart from its lawsuit against Commissioner Fay Vincent to block his plan to shift the Cubs and St.
Louis Cardinals from the National League's Eastern to Western Division, the Tribune company's magnitude has been and will be apparent.


Juries Reflect Fears of Crime
A Queens grand jury's decision to charge a mother who killed her crack-addicted daughter with manslaughter but not murder reflects a growing tendency of juries and prosecutors to recognize the terrible strain that fear of urban crime can place on people who would otherwise obey the law, legal experts said yesterday.
In several recent cases, they said, prosecutors have dropped, or juries have dismissed, charges against people who took drastic and even lethal action to protect themselves or their families against perceived threats.


Pro-Choice Doesn't Force Abortions on Women; Casey at the Convention
To the Editor:
In "The Tyranny of the Pro-Choice Snobs" (Op-Ed, Aug. 10), David R. Carlin Jr. states that Gov.
Robert Casey of Pennsylvania was not permitted to address the Democratic National Convention because he was pro-life.
Bob Casey, our Governor, was for three to four months before the convention the biggest Bill Clinton-basher in the country, spending his time running all over the United States telling people that Bill Clinton would bring the most devastating loss to the party ever.
Bob Casey makes former Gov.
Jerry Brown look like the president of the Bill Clinton fan club.


Pro-Choice Doesn't Force Abortions on Women; U.S. Effectively Decides
To the Editor:
In "The Tyranny of the Pro-Choice Snobs" (Op-Ed, Aug. 10), David R. Carlin Jr. correctly identifies the central abortion question as, "Is the fetus a person or not?" That question has been answered by no less an entity than the United States Government.


BERNARD CHAUS, APPAREL MAKER, POSTS PROFIT
Bernard Chaus Inc., a women's sportswear and dress company, is back in the black, reporting a profit for its fourth quarter and fiscal year.
For the quarter, Chaus had net income of $2.2 million, or 12 cents a share, compared with a loss of $2.6 million in last year's fourth quarter.
Sales were up less than 1 percent to $62.1 million.
For the year, net income was $5.5 million, or 30 cents a share, compared with a $12 million loss for the previous fiscal year.
Sales increased 9.4 percent in fiscal year 1992 to $254.2 million, compared with $232.4 million a year earlier.


Books of The Times; A Calculating Monster, Cold and Single Minded
Sin By Josephine Hart  164 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.
Josephine Hart's first novel, the much talked about "Damage" (1991), created a quick, stunning portrait of sexual obsession and its consequences for an upper-class British family: A heretofore retiring and morally upright Member of Parliament becomes obsessed with his son's girlfriend, and ends up wreaking destruction on everyone around him.
In her latest novel, Ms.
Hart turns from lust to another deadly sin: envy.
The result is another short, nasty and brutal book, a book reminiscent, in terms of both subject and style, of the work of such French writers as Racine and Choderlos de Laclos.
As in "Phedre," the narrative is stripped down to a single, inexorable story line that centers on the destructive power of passion.
And as in "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," innocence and virtue are cruelly and deliberately betrayed, as the reader looks on with mingled shock and fascination.


Preparing for a Funeral After Police Shooting in Newark


Dinkins Is Expected to Prevail on New Incinerator
Mayor David N. Dinkins is virtually certain to prevail in the City Council on his long-term garbage-disposal plan, which includes building a new incinerator in Brooklyn, two senior Council staff members said yesterday.
The Council's staff was still working hard yesterday to assemble an outright majority to support the compromise proposal worked out last week between the Mayor and the Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, and the outcome of the vote scheduled for tomorrow was still in doubt.


How Tuna Keep Warm
Scientists have long suspected that bigeye tuna are able to regulate their body temperature because they routinely swim actively for long periods in the cold depths of the sea, then swim quickly through the warmer surface layer without any sign of stress from heat or cold.
But only recently have they found out just how good the tuna are at thermoregulation.
A team of researchers in Hawaii has demonstrated that the bigeye tuna can change its heat conductivity, the rate at which it loses or gains warmth, by 100-fold in about 45 seconds.
The scientists, led by Dr.
Kim N. Holland, a researcher at the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology, reported their findings last month in the journal Nature.


Review/Music; The World of Richard Strauss, Murky and Not So Honorable
A useful idea has lately insinuated itself into the world of festival production.
Some musicians have found that with careful tinkering, aspects of a scholarly symposium can be crossbred with conventional musical presentation to yield a festival that is almost a contradiction in terms: a popular event at which serious issues are debated.
The format took root first in the early-music world, with the "Experience" weekends that the English conductor Roger Norrington began staging in 1987.
Leon Botstein, the president of Bard College here and the music director of the American Symphony Orchestra, has adopted this model for the Bard Music Festival since 1990.


Several Cheers for Integrated Programs
MOST people who are new to personal computers, unless they have specific and demanding tasks that call for one of the big-time names in software, are probably better off making an integrated program their first purchase.
An integrated program contains two or more applications, a word processor and a database manager, for example.
It is certainly true that the individual parts of an integrated program are not going to be as powerful or versatile as the major stand-alone equivalents.
If you are going to churn out reams of copy, get Wordperfect.
If number-crunching is your business, get Excel.
If you are managing vast amounts of data, get Filemaker Pro. (Substitute the names of your favorites; the ones used here are just by way of illustration.)


PRO FOOTBALL Banks Ends Holdout And Signs 1-Year Pact
Carl Banks, the Giants' ninth-year outside linebacker, ended a long holdout today by signing a one-year contract.
His salary will be about $1.15 million, more than the $1.1 million the Giants had been offering but less than the $1.5 million he had been seeking.
"Both sides compromised," Banks said.
"I didn't get what I wanted, and they didn't get me where they wanted."


A TANGLED PATH TO IMPEACHMENT
Over the last four decades, Brazilian Presidents have been removed from office by suicide, by resignation, by military coup and by a stroke.
But impeachment, now being considered, is an untested route.


Supporters Of Vincent Seek Answers
While some major league owners marshall forces in an attempt to force the ouster of Commissioner Fay Vincent, other owners are either coming to the defense of Vincent or expressing their intention to find out just what it is he has supposedly done so wrong to deserve such a movement.
In light of the Sept. 3 meeting called by the league presidents yesterday to discuss Vincent's future, Haywood Sullivan, the general partner of the Boston Red Sox, called the situation demeaning for the game.


Man Is Charged in Killing
A man who was dismissed last week as a custodian in a Brooklyn building that houses a real estate company was arrested last night and charged with killing an employee of the company during a robbery, the police said.
The body of the employee, Tiberine Feldman, 45 years old, was found about 10:30 A.M. yesterday at Urban Realty, 5319 Fort Hamilton Parkway in Borough Park, the police said.
He had been shot twice in the chest and an undetermined amount of money was missing from the office.
The suspect, Frank Rodriguez, of 1921 Avenue I, was arrested about 11:30 P.M. and charged with murder, robbery, burglary and criminal use of a weapon, the police said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Rochester's model health care system is being studied by the G.A.O. for a report to Congress.
Close cooperation -- in contrast to fierce competition nationally -- among physicians, hospitals and local businesses, has kept medical costs 25 percent lower per capita than national levels, and most people are insured.
The city's doctors are conservative in medical practice.  [ Page A1. ]
Five diet companies petitioned the F.T.C. to set standards and regulations for fair advertising in the $33 billion industry, which has been under Federal investigation.
Critics called the petition a delaying tactic.
The companies are Jenny Craig, NutriSystem, Physician's Weight Loss, Diet Center and Weight Watchers.  [ D1. ] International
The dollar plunged 2 percent against the German mark, to a new low of 1.4015, despite central bank intervention.
The mark is attractive because of high German interest rates.  [ D1. ]


FUNDAMENTALISTS LEAD IN LEBANON
Fundamentalist Muslims backed by Teheran made substantial gains Sunday in Lebanon's first general elections in 20 years, prompting charges of fraud and the resignation of the Speaker of Parliament today.
The accusations have deepened divisions over the elections, which were boycotted by the majority of Christians, who wanted voting postponed until Syrian forces pulled out of the country.


Separate States Aren't Answer in Somalia
To the Editor:
On behalf of Somalis in New York, I would like to express our appreciation for your coverage of the tragedy in Somalia, and for bringing the plight of the Somali nation to the attention of the American people and the world.
As you show, the areas of the greatest need right now are in Mogadishu and the Juba River towns, because they are the areas of the worst fighting and lawlessness.
However, the need is there in central Somalia.
There is also fighting in the port city of Berbera in the north with the attendant misery to civilians.


Islanders Obtain Mullen From Sharks
The Islanders acquired right wing BRIAN MULLEN from the San Jose Sharks yesterday in exchange for MARKUS THURESSON of Sweden, an 11th-round draft choice in the 1991 entry draft.
A native New Yorker, Mullen played four seasons for the Rangers before being sent to San Jose for TIM KERR before the 1991-92 season.


Nicotine Spray May Help Heavy Smokers Quit
NASAL nicotine spray can help people stop smoking and can be especially effective for heavy smokers, a yearlong study has found.
To test the nicotine spray, scientists at the National Addiction Center at London University studied 227 people at a hospital smoking clinic.
The participants were randomly split into two groups: one was given a nasal spray containing nicotine and the other a placebo spray.
All of the patients used their assigned spray at will and received six group-therapy sessions.


INSIDE
U.S. Warns Iran on Iraq
The U.S. has told Iran not to exploit a Western plan that would protect Shiites in southern Iraq from Iraqi air strikes, officials said.
Page A11.
Swindling Fellow Immigrants
Using new foreign-language TV shows, newspapers and the Yellow Pages, unscrupulous immigrants prey on fellow newcomers.
Page B1.
Dollar Keeps Losing Value
The dollar fell further, putting pressure on Germany's central bank to lower interest rates.
Page D1.


Packing Up


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Tells of Plan For More Spending To Train Workers
Declaring that the nation "cannot afford to waste the talent of one single worker," President Bush said today that he would ask Congress next year to approve a major expansion of Federal job training programs that would provide about $10 billion in additional money over five years.
The proposal would provide vouchers that could be used to pay tuition at trade schools, colleges and community colleges for unemployed adults and some others in danger of losing their jobs.
The plan is clearly a response to accusations in the political campaign that Mr.
Bush has been insensitive to the American work force.


CHRONICLE
With help from the composer MARVIN HAMLISCH, a new synagogue is to be built soon in Westhampton Beach, L.I., and a three-year controversy resolved, said Rabbi MARC SCHNEIER of the Park East Synagogue in Manhattan.
Three summers ago, Rabbi Schneier held Orthodox services in his house in Westhampton Beach.
But when village officials objected on the grounds that the services posed a fire hazard in the wooden structure, he moved them into a tent in the back yard.
The rabbi called the village's court injunction an attack on religious freedom; it was soon overturned on appeal.


Review/Country; An Evening of Others' Greatest Hits
Hank Williams Jr. was singing about football.
He was standing on the stage wearing his trademark look of black hat, black sunglasses, black shirt and black jeans, and he was invoking that very special moment of the week when so many American men must find themselves crazy with delight: the start of "Monday Night Football." Every week, the program opens with Mr.
Williams's theme song for it, and he opened his show at Nassau Coliseum here tonight with that song.
"Are you ready for football?" Mr.
Williams bellowed, and the men in the audience climbed onto their seats, hoisted their beer cups into the air and bellowed along with him.
Football, beer and bellowing are at the core of Mr.
Williams's appeal.
He is the beer belly as esthetic.
He doesn't have a strong voice, and although he plays guitar, fiddle and piano, his instrumental work has little distinct style.
The son of the country legend Hank Williams and a performer since he was barely old enough to walk, Mr.
Williams has since the late 70's inhabited a niche with his flaccid and frequently moronic country-rock songs about drinking, partying, chasing women and being a proud southern American.
His theme songs -- besides the "Monday Night Football" theme -- include "All My Rowdy Friends," "A Country Boy Can Survive" and a recent addition, "Hotel Whisky," from his latest album, "Maverick" (Capricorn).
But Mr.
Williams is more than the voice of men consigned to couches, six packs and football on a Monday night.
Like them, he is a spectator.
At least half of his show was material made famous by others.
He did Lynyrd Skynyrd's "Gimme Three Steps" and Aerosmith's "Walk This Way"; he played the piano like Fats Domino and the slide guitar like Lightnin' Hopkins.
At one point he even did a wheezy, crooning impersonation of Elvis Presley singing "I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry" (presumably this was late-period Elvis).
And of course, he did some of his father's other songs: "Move It on Over," "Hey Good Lookin'," "Your Cheatin' Heart." Despite the popularity of his rowdy, beer-drinking persona, Mr.
Williams seems most like himself when he is trying to be someone else, living vicariously off the thrills of others.


Self Broadens Beauty Coverage
Self magazine will expand its beauty coverage to report on women of all skin colors by introducing a monthly section called "Global Beauty," beginning in its September issue.
The magazine's editorial coverage "has been universally oriented toward white women," said A. G. Britton, Self's beauty editor, adding that the decision to introduce the section followed the introduction by many large cosmetic companies of products for women of other skin colors.


Q&amp;A
On the Other Hand
Q.
Are there any truly ambidextrous people?
Some people eat left-handed but play sports right-handed.
How does that happen?
A.
The notion of ambidexterity is valid, and some people do show equal proficiency in various manual skills with both hands, said Dr.
George Michel, an associate professor of psychology at DePaul University in Chicago.
However, he said, hand-use preferences are on a continuum, and a mere three categories of left-handed, right-handed and ambidextrous are artificial divisions.


A Groundbreaking With Plastic Shovels


Plant Study Questions Nature of Ozone Risk
AN experiment involving alfalfa seedlings indicates that plant genes are less vulnerable than had been thought to damage from the increased solar radiation resulting from the depletion of the earth's protective ozone layer, scientists at Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island have reported.
But other experts said that plants vary widely in their response to the harmful ultraviolet rays and cautioned that it would be unwise to make generalizations on the basis of an experiment involving one species.
They also raised a number of other caveats.


New York's Deal on Grand Prix Race Glorifies a Proven Killer
To the Editor:
In "Smoking and Politics" (column, Aug. 5) Anna Quindlen rightly chastises politicians for their failure to take a public stand against tobacco products.
For an additional example of political hypocrisy, look no further than New York's Dinkins administration plan to play host to the Marlboro 200 Grand Prix Auto Race, sponsored by the cigarette giant Philip Morris.
"We must remind our children that smoking and sports just don't mix," said the Mayor when he called in 1990 for the removal of tobacco ads from sports complexes.
Yet the Mayor this year entered into a 10-year contract to play host to the Grand Prix, with the first race to be held next July.
This race would be little more than one long Marlboro television commercial -- an evasion of the ban on tobacco broadcast advertising.
In past races, the Marlboro logo has appeared some 6,000 times, 49 percent of the race air time.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congressional Race; Oklahoma Lawmaker Faces 4 Rivals and a Scandal
Representative Mickey Edwards plaintively folded his hands at his waist like a choir boy ready to confess as he recalled to a group of voters his 386 overdrafts at the House bank.
"If my own mother had been alive, even she would not have voted for me," Mr.
Edwards, the fourth-ranking Republican in the House, said with a bittersweet grin.
"My son Patrick told me, 'Now you've really screwed up.' "


Dow Off 25.93 as World's Stocks Fall
Stock prices retreated around the world yesterday as the dollar's sharp fall spread concern about the unsettling consequences of a weakening American currency.
In the United States, the Dow Jones industrial average lost 25.93 points, to 3,228.17, and has now dropped 75 points in the last two trading sessions.
Worse, major stock indexes dropped more than 2 percent yesterday in London, Paris, Zurich and Hong Kong, and 1.3 percent in Frankfurt.


By Design; Berets Are Back
Every few years the beret resurfaces as the head covering of choice.
So if you're thinking about a hat for fall, consider the beret.
It was a hit in Paris last year and was shown by a whole raft of American designers this year.
And no wonder.
The beret adds youthful insouciance to the long skirts of the season, teamed with a ribbed poor-boy sweater or a soigne fitted jacket.
And it doesn't require any special flair to carry off, the way a feathered fedora does. (Every schoolgirl knows that.) It is, in the words of Kalman Ruttenstein, Bloomingdale's fashion director, "a perfect hat for women who don't wear hats."


Beyond Cold War, and Old Wars, in Asia
South Korea and China set aside cold war antagonisms with their announcement yesterday of formal ties.
Four decades ago these countries fought a hot war, with U.S. and U.N. troops engaged on the South Korean side.
But this bridge building between old enemies risks heightening the isolation of North Korea and Taiwan.
It will also be perceived as anti-Japanese by Tokyo's nationalists.
The post-cold-war era ought to mean more than swapping one set of hostile alliances for another.
To keep that from happening, all the region's powers, including the U.S., need to begin planning for a broad, NATO-like institution to promote peace in the Pacific.


Plotting Storm's Possible Course
Predicting the course and strength of a hurricane is a chancy art.
But with that caveat, meteorologists yesterday gave this estimate of the future progress of Hurricane Andrew:
TODAY: The storm will move northwestward at 15 to 20 miles an hour across the Gulf of Mexico toward the coast of Louisiana and Mississippi, where weather will deteriorate throughout the day.
The center of the hurricane will probably go ashore after 8 o'clock tonight just west of New Orleans.
New Orleans would get the brunt of the hurricane's winds, expected to range from 110 to 130 m.p.h.


PRO FOOTBALL: Injured Hostetler Out for Now While Nagle Seems In as No. 1; Toughness Outweighs Lack of Experience
Coach Bruce Coslet all but officially named 24-year-old Browning Nagle as the Jets' starting quarterback today when he picked Nagle over Ken O'Brien to start against the Philadelphia Eagles' powerful defense in the exhibition-season finale on Thursday.
The Eagles almost broke Nagle's jaw and gave him a welt to remember in the Jets' first preseason game, and Coslet could have decided to give his younger, infinitely inexperienced quarterback a bench seat on Thursday to watch the old hand, O'Brien, start.


New Woody Allen Film to Open Early
Tri-Star Pictures today advanced the opening of Woody Allen's new film, "Husbands and Wives," and widened its release.
Initially scheduled to open on Sept. 23 in only eight cities, including New York, the movie is now set to open on Sept. 18 around the country.
Tri-Star executives acknowledged that moving up the release of the film -- and opening the movie on a single day around the nation -- was a direct result of the extraordinary publicity over the last week involving the film maker's personal life.
Generally, Mr.
Allen's films, depicting urban angst and slippery relationships, open in a few major cities, where his work is popular, and are gradually released around the country after building positive reviews and word of mouth.
The new film is to be released on one day in more than 800 theaters, which is highly unusual for a Woody Allen film.
Free Publicity and a Missing Print
In advancing the release of the film, Mike Medavoy, the chairman of Tri-Star, which is distributing the movie, insisted that "we always think in terms of what the competitive marketplace is like, and we didn't want to clash with other films of the same kind." On the face of it, no films comparable to the Allen movie are scheduled to be released at this time.
But Mr.
Medavoy admitted, "The controversy certainly doesn't make this film an unknown quantity."


Pro-Choice Doesn't Force Abortions on Women
To the Editor:
David R. Carlin Jr., in his Op-Ed obloquy ("The Tyranny of Pro-Choice Snobs," Aug. 10), misses a rather important part of the pro-choice stance: no one is trying to force abortions on those who are morally squeamish about them.
A corollary, if the antichoice rhetoric is taken seriously, cannot be found on the other side of the issue, whose proponents most certainly would force every pregnant woman to give birth, despite individual beliefs and well-being.


Rabin Cancels Expulsion Orders Against 11 Palestinian Suspects
In another gesture to improve the climate of the Middle East peace talks, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin revoked expulsion orders today against 11 Palestinians who were accused of inciting terrorism in Israeli-occupied territories.
The action, which overturns orders issued last January by the previous, right-wing Government, came a day after Mr.
Rabin announced the release of 800 Arab prisoners and a loosening of some restrictions on Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Virginia Sale, 93, Actress in Hundreds Of Character Roles
Virginia Sale, a character actress whose career in theater, film, radio and television spanned more than four decades, died on Sunday at the Motion Picture and Television Hospital in Woodland Hills, Calif., where she lived.
She was 93 years old.
She died of heart failure, her family said.


Leonard Burkat, Writer, 73, Dies; Supplied Musical Program Notes
Leonard Burkat, a music writer whose program notes were used by many orchestras and ensembles around the world, died on Sunday at his home in Danbury, Conn.
He was 73 years old.
His son, Howard Burkat, said he died of Paget's disease, a degenerative bone disorder.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Vice President; New Angle In the Jabs At Clinton
Vice President Dan Quayle suggested today that Gov.
Bill Clinton, who has signed four death warrants, was soft on capital punishment because he had mentioned Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo as a possible appointee to the Supreme Court.
The New York Governor has vetoed death penalty bills in each of the 10 years he has been in office.
At the same time, Mr.
Quayle said, support for the death penalty should not be a litmus test in the selection of Supreme Court Justices.
But when asked at a news conference in Knoxville, Tenn., why it was then bothersome that Mr.
Clinton might name a death penalty opponent to the High Court, Mr.
Quayle would only say that he was trying to make a point about Mr.
Clinton's consistency.


Digital's New PC Line Will Be Made in Taiwan
Seeking to become a serious contender in the cutthroat world of personal computer sales, the Digital Equipment Corporation introduced a line of competitively priced high-performance PC's yesterday that the company is manufacturing in Taiwan.
For several years, Digital has sold personal computers manufactured by the Tandy Corporation with only modest success.
Starting today, Digital will sell its own DECpc LP (for "low profile") line.
The entry-level system starts at $899; it has a 386SX processor that runs at 33 megaherz, 2 megabytes of internal memory, a 52-megabyte hard drive, and it comes with the Microsoft DOS operating system and Windows.
Monitors are extra.
There are six models.
The top-of-the-line version uses Intel's fastest 486 processor.


Europeans Cooling on Bosnia Partition
Two days before the start of international talks on ending the fighting in the former Yugoslav republics, European leaders appear to be backing away from a policy of partitioning Bosnia and Herzegovina along ethnic lines as an expedient way to curtail the violence, a senior Bush Administration official said today.
The two-day conference on the Balkans, sponsored by the European Community and the United Nations, will take place here in London on Wednesday and Thursday.


Executives Are Fuming Over Data on Their Pay
Corporate America is quietly seeking to muzzle the compensation consultants who routinely provide information about executive pay to the business press or to regulators, even though much of that information is already in the public domain.
Leading the charge are John S. Reed, chairman of Citicorp, and H. Brewster Atwater Jr., chairman of General Mills, with several other members of the Business Roundtable, an influential group of chief executives.


Mastercard Picks Ammirati To Energize Lagging Effort
MASTERCARD INTERNATIONAL said yesterday that it had selected Ammirati &amp; Puris Inc. in New York to handle the creative portion of its United States account, estimated at $60 million.
The decision ended a six-month search by the bank credit card issuer for an agency to reinvigorate its advertising and marketing efforts, which have been perceived as too sluggish and unfocused for its intensely competitive market.
The decision on the closely watched review, which began Feb. 25, went down to the wire, as executives from the two finalist shops -- Ammirati and Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis -- met yesterday in New York for one more time with Mastercard's top management and a committee of executives from Mastercard member banks.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on July 7 about different types of office chairs misstated the origin of the Grahl chair.
The chair is made by Grahl Industries of Michigan, though some research and design work is done by a German affiliate.
The company pointed out the error in a letter to The Times last week.


Receiver Roy Green Is Hoping He Can Still Make a Cut in N.F.L.
Roy Green should make the Philadelphia Eagles' roster cut to 60 players -- all National Football League teams must trim to that number today -- but gaining entry among the Eagles' final 47 next Monday is touch and go for the 35-year-old wide receiver.
Green has played 13 seasons in the N.F.L. and ranks 15th in receptions on the N.F.L. career list.
His skills and savvy as a receiver remain sound, his wisdom astute and his attitude that of the consummate professional.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; In 1992, Willie Horton Is Democrats' Weapon
In a year when subtlety has found little favor in political discourse, it is no surprise that Willie Horton's name is being cited with increasing frequency in the 1992 Presidential campaign.
But unlike four years ago, it is not Republicans who are seizing on Mr.
Horton's image to frighten people out of voting for Democrats.
This time, Democrats are pushing the name of Massachusetts's most notorious murderer-rapist to the front of the political stage to remind voters of the excesses indulged in by Mr.
Bush's supporters in 1988.


Business Scene; Health-Care Costs Dampen Hiring
THIS could be the first recovery crippled by medical costs.
Employee benefits -- health insurance in particular -- have become so expensive that manufacturers are increasingly coping with weak demand by cutting payrolls, not overtime.
And laws meant to discourage overtime might now be having the opposite effect.
Even in the past, sluggish growth -- less than 2 percent annually -- has not been enough for businesses to add employees instead of overtime.
Many companies are now wary of rehiring, much less training new workers, until they are certain that stronger orders will persist.


Nissan Is Replacing Advertising Theme
The Nissan division of the Nissan Motor Company's United States sales arm said yesterday that it would adopt the slogan "It's time to expect more from a car," replacing "Built for the human race," its advertising theme for the last five years.
The change comes as Nissan, seeking to stimulate sluggish American car and truck sales, is bringing out new models like the Altima, a midsized sedan, and Quest, a mini-van.


Review/Music; Four Bands A-Playing At the Pool
The layered confusions of Charles Ives's music derived in part from his youth, when from one vantage point along a parade route he would hear the trailing away of one marching band mingled with the approach of another.
There was something of that Ivesian sensation in Henry Brant's "500: Hidden Hemisphere." Here, during one hour late Sunday afternoon, four stationary bands called to one another across Lincoln Center's Reflecting Pool.
Mr.
Brant described it as "A Spatial Quadruple Compendium."
This was a piece that collects rather than winnows.
Snippets of steel-band ostinato, twittering winds, booming drums and chimes, big-band harmonies, marches, chorales, jazz, village-green entertainments, freelance noodlings and calculated patterns -- all created a music either to be sorted out at will or else appreciated in a pile.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.20
5.63
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.06
5.40
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.16
5.47
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.23
6.03
7.73
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.34
8.14
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.44
8.34
9.15
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.31
6.99
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Times Company to Shut Suburban Atlanta Paper
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it planned to close The Gwinnett Daily News, a suburban Atlanta paper that it acquired five years ago.
The offices, equipment and subscription lists of the Gwinnett County paper are to be sold to Cox Enterprises Inc., publisher of The Atlanta Journal and Constitution.


Rochester Serves as Model In Controlling Health Cost
In the search for ways to slow the surge in national medical spending, policy makers and economists are paying growing attention to this prosperous industrial city of 232,000 in upstate New York.
Health-care experts say Rochester is one of the few American cities that have systems that work.
Although medical costs have also been rising rapidly here in recent years, they are still at least 25 percent lower per capita than national levels.
And in Rochester, only 6 percent of the population does not have insurance, according to a survey by Louis Harris &amp; Associates, far below the 14 percent national rate.


Pot Scrubbers for Cows
Researchers have found that by inserting a plastic pot scrubber into the first stomach, or rumen, of a cow, they can satisfy its need for roughage.
This could save ranchers up to $50 per cow without jeopardizing the animal's health.
A cow's diet is normally about 10 to 15 percent fiber, most of it in the form of hay, which is very low in calories.
To make cattle gain weight, the farmer must feed them as much corn as possible.
But substantially reducing fiber in the herd's diet makes the cattle lose their appetites and stop gaining weight because their stomachs are not being stimulated by roughage.


Derring-Do on the Screen and Off Brings Success for Film Forum
New Yorkers will turn out for just about anything that flickers on a movie screen, but they drew the line when the Film Forum in SoHo presented a series on early Swedish cinema in 1988.
For two weeks, the theater was as silent as most of the movies.
In her office at the Film Forum, Karen Cooper, the theater's director, turned a gleefully malicious eye on her director of repertory programming, Bruce Goldstein, and cited the series, "Sjostrom and Stiller: The Screen's First Masters," as the only "don't" she could think of for film programming.


Hurricane Rips Through Florida and Heads Into Gulf
One of the strongest Atlantic hurricanes of the century slammed into South Florida yesterday, causing at least nine deaths, leveling thousands of houses south of Miami and all but destroying an Air Force base.
As the hurricane swirled westward into the Gulf of Mexico, residents of coastal Louisiana and Mississippi began preparing for the storm's relentless winds by stocking up on food and taping windows.
The National Hurricane Center in Coral Gables, Fla., issued a hurricane warning for the area from Pascagoula, Miss., to Vermilion Bay, La., and said it could strike the Gulf Coast as early as tonight.


Crazy Weather Got Started in Kuwait
To the Editor:
"Northeast's Strange Weather: Don't Blame It All on the Volcano" (Science Times, Aug. 4) omits what may be the key factor in this area's changing weather patterns: each of the 500 wells that were set ablaze in the oil fields of Kuwait.
According to information published by Friends of the Earth International (summer 1991), on June 8, 1991, the Friends of the Earth team, flying 120 miles south of Kuwait, "found the plume had reached an altitude of 16,400 feet."


Accounts
*
Duracell International's United States unit, Bethel, Conn., to Marquardt &amp; Roche Inc., Stamford, Conn., to handle its industrial products and hearing-aid battery accounts, previously at Martin Williams Advertising Inc., Minneapolis.
Marquardt already handles Duracell's photographic-battery business.
Billings were not disclosed. *
New England Oldsmobile Dealers Association narrowed the review for its $2.5 million account, previously at Lawner Reingold Britton &amp; Partners, Boston, to four finalists: Clement &amp; McCabe, Avon, Conn.; McDougall Associates, Peabody, Mass.; Rossin, Greenberg, Seronick, Boston, and Trainor Associates Inc., New Hartford, N.Y.
A final decision is expected early next month.


A Way to Make Easy Even Easier
COMPUTER users will argue about it endlessly, but a strong case can be made that the Apple Macintosh is the easiest personal computer to use.
The reason is Apple's operating system, which uses point-and-click commands.
Even so, Apple has developed a new program that makes it even simpler to use the Mac.
The software is called At Ease, and it is intended for children, teachers, business executives and people who hate computers.
At Ease ($59) is actually a facade for Apple's regular System 7 operating system.
Just as Microsoft's Windows hides the DOS operating system behind a pretty shell, At Ease hides the Macintosh's regular screen display behind a new screen design.
It works only with System 7.0 or newer versions of the Mac operating system, and it requires a minimum of two megabytes of system memory.


Bid for Delay Fails In Kidnapping Trial
A Federal judge today rejected a defense motion to delay the trial of the man charged in the fatal abduction of a top Exxon executive.
At a 20-minute hearing, Judge Garrett Brown Jr. also rejected a motion to dismiss some of the charges in the seven-count indictment against the defendant, Arthur D. Seale.


5 Diet Companies Ask U.S. For Uniform Rules on Ads
In an unusual show of common cause, five competing diet companies joined forces yesterday to petition the Federal Trade Commission to establish industrywide standards and regulations for fair advertising.
They say they want all competitors in the field to operate under uniform and fair rules.
But their critics contend that they are trying to stall the commission's enforcement of such regulations.


Gold Bar Journal; An Espresso Rush in the Northwest
In the beginning there was just coffee, black or with cream.
About 35 cents a cup.
Refills free.
And the finest cup of joe in the land came from the timber towns of the Cascade Mountains, or so went the legend that grew with the television series "Twin Peaks."
But caffeine is not so simple anymore in this valley cut by the cold flow of the Skykomish River, about 50 miles northeast of Seattle.
Only a handful of cafes remain where waitresses call everybody Sweetie and pour the old-fashioned bottomless cup.


Kentucky Airport Prices Bonds
The Kenton County Airport Board of Kentucky yesterday tentatively priced for sale to the public $96.04 million in tax-exempt revenue bonds for the Cincinnati-Northern Kentucky International Airport.
Paine Webber Inc., the lead manager of the underwriting, said all the bonds being sold were covered by insurance from Financial Security Assurance.
The coverage gives the bonds a triple-A rating by both Moody's Investors Service and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Doctors Aid in Cost Control
Doctors make many of the critical decisions in any health-care system, strongly influencing the cost and quality of care.
In Rochester, they have had an integral role in keeping costs down.
Almost all of the local doctors work with the city's two health maintenance organizations, and most are graduates of the University of Rochester, which vigorously advocates conservative medical practices, said Dr.
Paul F. Griner, president of Strong Memorial Hospital, the university's 707-bed principal teaching hospital.
Doctors learn "not to assume that the more you do, the better the outcome," he said.


Japan Plans Computer To Mimic Human Brain
EVEN as it closes the books on its disappointing Fifth Generation computer project, the Japanese Government is embarking on a new 10-year quest to develop extremely fast computers that can mimic the human brain, understand speech and interpret facial expressions and gestures.
When it was started a decade ago, the Fifth Generation Project set off fears around the world, which proved to be unfounded, that Japan would take over the computer industry.
The new effort, known as the Real-World Computing Program, is raising some suspicions that Japan is trying to tap into advanced American technology, but for the most part it is eliciting more puzzlement than fear.


Second Thoughts on Johnson's Move
Shoulder surgery for Howard Johnson was only 24 hours away and it was as if the moment for candor from Jeff Torborg had at last arrived.
The manager of the Mets, saying Johnson was theoretically scheduled to begin 1993 in left field, added that starting Johnson in center in 1992 perhaps was not the greatest brainstorm ever.


PRO FOOTBALL Banks Ends Holdout And Signs 1-Year Pact
Carl Banks, the Giants' ninth-year outside linebacker, ended a long holdout today by signing a one-year contract.
His salary will be about $1.15 million, more than the $1.1 million the Giants had been offering but less than the $1.5 million he had been seeking.
"Both sides compromised," Banks said.
"I didn't get what I wanted, and they didn't get me where they wanted."


A New York Accent In 3-Year-Old Picture
New York may not have had a better day at the races than last Saturday.
More than 46,000 people packed Saratoga Race Course in a state-fair mood and bet a record total of $6.5 million.
More than $15 million was bet statewide on the Saratoga races.
For the first time in this century, a horse bred in New York won the $1 million Travers Stakes.
And Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo not only paid his first visit to a New York race track in nine years but also announced that he was betting on the homebred, Thunder Rumble.


Pilots and Machinists Accept A Proposal to Save T.W.A.
Trans World Airlines said yesterday that it had reached agreements in principle that could soon transform the privately owned carrier into an employee-owned airline.
Plagued by mounting debt and a weak national economy, T.W.A. has faced the perception that it could soon go the way of the defunct carriers Pan American and Eastern.
If the agreement is approved by all the interested parties, it will give a new lease on life to T.W.A., which has been losing almost $1 million a day in recent weeks.


Executive Changes
DYNAIR TECHNOLOGIES INTERNATIONAL INC., Reston, Va., a unit of Dyncorp that offers customized technical and professional assistance to the airline industry, appointed Thor Johnson executive vice president.
GENERAL CINEMA CORP., Chestnut Hill, Mass., named John R. Cook senior vice president and chief financial officer of General Cinema and the Neiman Marcus Group, the company's 63 percent owned specialty retailing operation.


Cuomo Says He'll Name Black Judge To Top Court
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he would nominate George Bundy Smith, a justice on the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, to be an associate judge on New York State's highest court, the Court of Appeals.
Justice Smith, who is 55 years old, is known as a pragmatic jurist.
Sidney H. Stein, a partner in the Manhattan firm of Stein, Zauderer, Ellenhorn Frischer and Sharp, who tracks the court in a column for the New York Law Journal, said, "I have no reason to think his presence on the bench is going to change anything drastically." Some lawyers and legal scholars say the court has become more conservative in recent years.


Bonds Are Shaken by Dollar's Fall
The sinking dollar continued to rattle the American bond market yesterday, and foreign bonds also fell sharply, as Europe was hit by the uncertainty that the dollar is unleashing and by the threat of higher interest rates.
The corporate and municipal bond markets were also stunned, with several big new municipal issues halted because of the chaos in the Treasury markets.
Among the delayed issues was a $666 million offering of revenue bonds by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority of New York.
Traders said several corporate financial officers who were ready to sell new securities had also pulled back for now.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about insurance against theft of telephone services described Travelers' policies incompletely, based on information provided by the company.
Travelers offers coverage in $1,000 increments from $50,000 to $1 million.


Muslims at U.N. Talk of 'Genocide' in Bosnia
Led by Islamic nations, representatives of more than 40 countries took the floor at the General Assembly today to condemn what one of them called a "systematic campaign of genocide" against Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The two-day session was called to consider a resolution offered by Turkey that would invoke a section of the United Nations Charter permitting military intervention.
Turkey raised the issue of invoking Chapter 7 of the Charter on behalf of the 47-member Islamic Conference.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stocks prices declined here after volatile afternoon trading.
The Nikkei average of 225 issues was down 247.19 points, or 1.49 percent, to 16,380.77.
On Monday, the Nikkei surged 411.08 points, or 2.53 percent.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; Perot Gave $12 Million to Aborted Campaign
Ross Perot gave his Presidential campaign $5,910,166 in July, the month he dropped out of the race, bringing his total contributions to $12,271,803.
His campaign filed its monthly report to the Federal Election Commission today, showing that Mr.
Perot, the Texas billionaire, kept giving money after he dropped out on July 16.
At that point he estimated that he had spent $10 million of his own money on the race, but the report shows that he had actually put $9,251,803 in by then and that he added $3,020,000 in the second half of the month.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
BellSouth Capital Funding Corp., a unit of BellSouth Corp., Atlanta, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $500 million of debt securities.
Common Stock


Recently Found Prints Tell of Mastodon's Slip
ELEVEN thousand years ago, an adult male mastodon walked alone along the edge of a pond in what is now Michigan.
The elephant-like animal stepped unexpectedly on a large log in its path.
Its front leg slipped and, losing its balance, the mastodon suddenly moved its hind leg to steady itself.
Regaining its composure, it continued along the shore.
Paleontologists know about this momentary misstep because of the tracks the mastodon left behind.
Dr.
Daniel Fisher, a professor of geology and biological sciences at the University of Michigan, recently discovered the 50-meter (165-foot) trail of more than 20 footprints.
Captured in the firm clay-rich sand of what is now a peat bog in Saline, Mich., these tracks are considered the longest set of mastodon steps and the best-preserved record of the animal's behavior ever documented, Dr.
Fisher said.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Amid Wreckage, Survivors Tell Their Stories
The 40 miles along Route 1 stretching south from Miami to Florida City were transformed today from comfortable suburban sprawl to a trail of devastation.
A drive that would normally take less than an hour was a daylong obstacle course of downed trees, limp power lines, wrecked vehicles and ambling bands of looters.
By morning light, it was clear that Miami and points north had been spared the worst of Hurricane Andrew.
The greatest damage was in the southern stretch of Dade County and was shared by migrant workers, retirees, struggling young families and the rich.


An Added Sweetener: Gooden's Home Run
The season's workload has totaled 23 starts and 145 innings pitched.
There have been 11 defeats, not nearly enough strikeouts and too many exhausting, even embarrassing innings.
It is unlikely, then, that Dwight Gooden has experienced a more exhilarating moment than in the fourth inning tonight at Candlestick Park.
It was a 360-foot journey, one that began as a short sprint, eased into a trot and ended with a single, satisfying step on the plate.


GOODEN HOMERS
Dwight Gooden hit his fifth home run of his career last night. Page B13.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  ISRAEL REVOKES EXPULSIONS  To improve the climate of the Mideast peace talks, Prime Minister Rabin revoked expulsion orders against 11 Palestinians who were accused of inciting terrorism in Israeli-occupied territories.
A1  Syrians and Jordanians see a positive tone from Israel.
A10


A Bush Bounce: Comparing Polls
Gov.
Bill Clinton retains a lead over President Bush, but Mr.
Bush has reduced the size of the gap, according to four pairs of polls taken both before and after the Republican convention.
In two polls taken by the Gallup Organization for CNN and USA Today, Mr.
Clinton's lead over Mr.
Bush tightened from 19 percentage points before the convention to 10 points after.
In the latest poll, taken Friday and Saturday with 754 registered voters, Mr.
Clinton led Mr.
Bush by 52 percent to 42 percent.


Review/Music; The World of Richard Strauss, Murky and Not So Honorable
A useful idea has lately insinuated itself into the world of festival production.
Some musicians have found that with careful tinkering, aspects of a scholarly symposium can be crossbred with conventional musical presentation to yield a festival that is almost a contradiction in terms: a popular event at which serious issues are debated.
The format took root first in the early-music world, with the "Experience" weekends that the English conductor Roger Norrington began staging in 1987.
Leon Botstein, the president of Bard College here and the music director of the American Symphony Orchestra, has adopted this model for the Bard Music Festival since 1990.


Ex-St. John's Guard Gets Rutgers Post
MIKE MOSES, a former guard for St.
John's, was named as assistant basketball coach at Rutgers.
Moses, 30 years old, replaces EDDIE JORDAN as an aide to the head coach, BOB WENZEL.
Moses comes to Rutgers from the University of Delaware, where he was an assistant coach and recruiting director.
He was the starting point guard on the 1984-85 St.
John's team that went to the N.C.A.A.
Final Four.
Jordan was named last month as an assistant coach with the Sacramento Kings.


Capricious Fury Unloosed At Big Condominiums
Even after all the dire warnings, Beatrice Garner was not ready for what she found when she returned to her luxurious condominium in Coconut Grove this morning.
With Hurricane Andrew bearing down on Miami on Sunday night, she had headed inland to her brother's one-story house, figuring that South Florida might be devastated but that her two-bedroom apartment would probably not suffer all that much.


With Vincent as Target, Owners Call Meeting
The National and American League presidents yesterday called a meeting of the 28 club owners for Sept. 3, acting after Commissioner Fay Vincent had rejected their request to do so.
The move immediately raised the question: Will the owners who oppose the commissioner attempt to fire him at the meeting?
Vincent's opponents say they have a majority of the 28 owners with them, although they have never offered names of those supposedly in their group.
However many they have, it isn't clear if all of the owners they say they have would vote for dismissal of the commissioner, who has been in office for nearly three years and whose term is not scheduled to expire for more than 19 months.


Observer; Mugged By Facts
There are good reasons why everybody should heed politicians' advice not to believe the media.
One of the best is that the media report what politicians say.
For instance, the other night when Ronald Reagan exhumed a 1916 bromide by the Rev.
William J. H. Boetcker and passed it off as the wisdom of Abraham Lincoln, television instantly pumped the fraud into millions of American skulls.


'Deadlocked' Iran-Contra Jury Told to Deliberate
The jury in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George was ordered today to keep deliberating after it twice said it was unable to reach a unanimous verdict on any of the nine counts with which the former senior official of the Central Intelligence Agency is charged.
After receiving two notes from the jurors that they were deadlocked, Judge Royce C. Lamberth of Federal District Court instructed the eight women and four men to "re-examine your own consciences" in hope of reaching a verdict.
The jurors recessed for the night and were to resume deliberations on Tuesday.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; For Running Mates, A Chance to Soar
The candidates for Vice President are not getting a free ride as they campaign against each other, but they are being offered one by an airline.
As part of a continuing campaign to promote a fare plan called Business Friends Fly Free, Southwest Airlines in Dallas and its agency, Cramer-Krasselt in Chicago, are introducing a television commercial that uses the running mates to illustrate how the fare works.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Criticizes Clinton as Hard On Car Industry
President Bush ventured into the backyard of the American automobile industry today to depict his Democratic rivals as environmental extremists whose policies would throw hundreds of thousands of Michigan residents out of work.
Under rain clouds at an outdoor rally in this township that is home to both laid off General Motors workers and affluent executives, Mr.
Bush strongly criticized Gov.
Bill Clinton's support of a proposal to raise automobile fuel efficiency standards to 40 miles a gallon by the turn of the century from the current 27.5.
He also contended that the Governor had started with a bad environmental record in Arkansas and then moved too far in the other direction.


INSIDE
Senate Fight on the Airwaves
The race for the Democratic Senate nomination from New York has at last moved onto the real battleground: the television set.
Page B1.
Loosening School Standards
New Hampshire plans to eliminate virtually all minimum school standards.
Education, page B7.
Baghdad Regroups Aircraft
Baghdad has removed its combat planes from a southern zone where the allies are expected to announce a ban on Iraqi flights.
Page A10.
Fury in a German City
Neo-Nazi youths staged a third night of attacks on foreign refugees, inciting official outrage.
Page A3.
Defector's Encore Escape
Eluding U.S. agencies again, a former spy who had defected to Moscow fled when Sweden freed him.
Page A7.


Microwave Cooking
WONDERFUL ripening fruits can be turned into welcome cold desserts.
On the hottest days of summer, few things are more cooling, more sensuous on the tongue, than the slither of a fragrant ice, beaten to a froth of tiny crystals.
All you need to know is the simplicity of making a sugar syrup in the microwave oven.
All summer long I keep a container of cold sugar syrup in the refrigerator.
I put some in a pitcher on the table so guests can sweeten iced tea or lemonade.
I use it to make the fruit-based alcoholic drinks of summer, and I always have the makings of sorbet.
I so love sorbet that is just frozen, but not solid, that I have invested in an electric ice-cream machine that requires no ice.
I set the machine going as we sit down to dinner.
When I clear the first course, I scrape the chilled sorbet mixture into the machine.
By dessert time, the sorbet is generally ready.


No Headline
You can't get any cash from the money machines because all the computers are down because there's no electricity, and you can't get gasoline because the pumps all operate on electricity too.
Today was supposed to be payday for me, but I can't get paid, because my office isn't open, and I'm running out of gasoline driving around looking for places that are open and selling food or gasoline.
It's a crazy situation. -- DIANE KENT of Kendall, Fla.  [ D21:5. ]


Argentina Plans Fund to Calm Stocks
In an extraordinary step to halt what some see as a "free fall" of the Buenos Aires stock market, Argentina's Economy Ministry announced plans to set up a fund that will buy stocks in an effort to support prices and stabilize the market.
Argentine stock prices have plunged more than 50 percent since June, a decline that continued this week with a 5.4 percent drop in the General Index on Monday.
Today, after the ministry's announcement, the index rebounded 2.5 percent.


BEIJING SENTENCES, THEN RELEASES FOE
In what appears to be the last political trial related to the Tiananmen Square democracy movement, China sentenced an influential economist today to three years in prison for counterrevolutionary crimes and then released him for time served.
Wu Jiaxiang, a 37-year-old theorist who was detained on July 17, 1989, was allowed to return home this afternoon after his sentence was read out to a courtroom, a family member said.
Mr.
Wu was jailed for five weeks more than his official jail term, and one of the reasons appears to be that officials wanted to end the three-year series of Tiananmen political trials by allowing the last person tried to walk away from his sentencing a free man.


CHRONICLE
Each November, ANN ROCKEFELLER ROBERTS and others organize "A Giving of Thanks," an evening of music, dance, rituals and story telling to give the 26,272 American Indians in New York City more visibility.
The fifth annual celebration will be on Nov. 28 at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
"It all began as a way of saying that other things happen during Thanksgiving, apart from turkey and balloons -- even though the annual Macy parade is wonderful," said Ms.
Roberts said yesterday.
She is co-chairwoman of the observance, serving with Chief OREN LYONS of the Onondaga Nation.
"Thanksgiving should remind us of how the Pilgrims survived their first winter with help from Native Americans and how the two cultures celebrated the harvest as equals, as peers, and not as conquerors and conquered -- at least at that time."


Brazilians in 25 Cities Demand Ouster of President
Demonstrations demanding the impeachment of President Fernando Collor de Mello erupted today in 25 cities as Brazil reacted to a congressional report accusing the President of profiting from a multimillion-dollar influence peddling ring.
From Brazil's southern industrial heartland to the poor coastal cities in the northeast, hundreds of thousands of Brazilians joined a protest movement that grew Monday when a congressional panel issued a report accusing President Fernando Collor de Mello of taking millions of dollars in illegal payments and benefits from business interests and said there was enough evidence to start impeachment proceedings against him.


Linebacker Kelly, Reporting for Duty
Although the initial preseason depth charts listed Joe Kelly as the Jets' starting right linebacker for the last two seasons, this summer has not been the best of times in his career.
That's why Kelly, a six-year starter beginning his seventh season in the National Football League, went AWOL for Monday's practice after finding out he would be a reserve middle linebacker this year.
But the 6-foot-2-inch, 235-pound Kelly was back at Jets camp today to take part in the drills.


O.K., Ball, Take That! Bonilla Homers Yet Again
Who knows exactly what the message of his campaign is.
But it's got momentum and style, and Bobby Bonilla is clearly enjoying waging it.
Bonilla, angry at the media, depressed about his physical misfortune and evidently hungry for some personal satisfaction, is taking it all out on the baseball.
It's becoming a lopsided fight.


A Broader Role For Bush Hinted In Iran Affair
Iran-contra prosecutors disclosed in legal papers filed in Federal court today that they had found a provocative hint that George Bush as Vice President may have embraced the secret arms sales to Iran more enthusiastically than he has publicly acknowledged.
Mr.
Bush has always treated his role in the Iran-contra affair gingerly, carefully stepping around detailed explanations of his actions while insisting in interviews and in an autobiographical book, "Looking Forward," that he went along with the arms-for-hostages plan as a loyal subordinate of President Ronald Reagan.


HURRICANE ANDREW: When a Monster Is on the Way, 'It's Time to Get Out of Town'; In Louisiana, Bracing for the Familiar
"If they let me stay, I believe I would have," said Lanson Hebert, who was evacuated from his home to the south in Galliano and was spending the night at the Howard Johnson's motel here.
But after a pause he added, "But then again, I've got grandkids, and you never know what these storms can do."


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page yesterday misidentified one newly appointed senior vice president at Backer Spielvogel Bates.
She is Belinda Broido.


Microwave Cooking
WONDERFUL ripening fruits can be turned into welcome cold desserts.
On the hottest days of summer, few things are more cooling, more sensuous on the tongue, than the slither of a fragrant ice, beaten to a froth of tiny crystals.
All you need to know is the simplicity of making a sugar syrup in the microwave oven.
All summer long I keep a container of cold sugar syrup in the refrigerator.
I put some in a pitcher on the table so guests can sweeten iced tea or lemonade.
I use it to make the fruit-based alcoholic drinks of summer, and I always have the makings of sorbet.
I so love sorbet that is just frozen, but not solid, that I have invested in an electric ice-cream machine that requires no ice.
I set the machine going as we sit down to dinner.
When I clear the first course, I scrape the chilled sorbet mixture into the machine.
By dessert time, the sorbet is generally ready.


HURRICANE ANDREW: When a Monster Is on the Way, 'It's Time to Get Out of Town'; In Texas, a Line of Cars 50 Miles Long
Laced with bayous and crammed with oil refineries and petrochemical plants, the swampy East Texas coast seemed such a vulnerable target for Hurricane Andrew that those fleeing the storm made a line 50 miles long by this evening.
As soon as local officials recommended evacuation of the coastal area near the Texas-Louisiana border early this morning, the big plants put emergency plans into effect and let most of their workers leave.
Within hours, streams of cars filled highways going inland.
By 5 P.M., the Texas Department of Public Safety reported bumper-to-bumper traffic for 50 miles on U.S.
Route 69, the major artery heading north of here.


For Banks, It's Long Time, No Tackle
Carl Banks, absent for five weeks in a contract dispute, returned to the Giants' practice field today as a second-string outside linebacker earning $1.15 million a year.
But it will probably be only a matter of days until he returns to his starting job, and he is almost certain to be there when the Giants begin their regular season 12 days from now against the San Francisco 49ers.
In this afternoon's practice, the starting outside linebackers were Lawrence Taylor and Kanavis McGhee.
The rotating backups were Banks, Corey Miller and Bobby Abrams.


Chemical Ban Needs Global Backing
Gas warfare could become just a grisly memory as the result of a new treaty to ban chemical weapons from the globe.
That treaty, eight years in the making, is now ready for submission to the United Nations.
The sooner all nations sign and ratify it, the sooner stocks of these dread devices will be destroyed.
Holdouts like China and Pakistan complain that the treaty is too intrusive in seeking to verify that chemical plants are not producing weapons, and too restrictive in controlling the export of dangerous chemicals.
But the treaty's language has already been compromised enough.
Further loosening would leave the world unsure that these barbaric weapons had truly been eliminated.


Justice Worrall F. Mountain, 83; Served on New Jersey High Court
Worrall F. Mountain, a retired justice of the New Jersey Supreme Court, died on Monday at the Princeton Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 83 years old and lived in Hightstown, N.J.
Justice Mountain died of pneumonia after a brief illness, said a stepson, Peter D. Oram.


13 Are Shot in the Bronx
Thirteen people were shot, two of them seriously, at a Bronx intersection early this morning, the authorities said.
It was not immediately known what prompted the shooting, which occurred about 1 A.M. at the intersection of East 161st Street and Prospect Avenue in Melrose, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen.
The sergeant said she did not known how many suspects were involved.
Capt.
Jack McGonnigle, of Emergency Medical Services, said the 13 victims were taken to Lincoln Hospital and Bronx Municipal Hospital Center.
Further details were not immediately available.


Food Notes
Yankee Barbecue
For those who understand barbecue to mean meat prepared in the smoky, slow-cooked Texas style, Stick to Your Ribs in Long Island City, Queens, is a fine source for chopped pork, sliced beef brisket or big meaty ribs to take out and enjoy at the beach or at home.
This country-style storefront, which has a few tables, sells most of the meats for $12.60 a pound.
Chicken, $3.99 a pound, can be a trifle dry, but the spicy beef and pork sausage, $11.60 a pound, quickly shifts the appetite into high gear.
The succulent pork is also sold in overstuffed sandwiches on Portuguese rolls ($4.40 for chopped pork or pork in the North Carolina style: with sweet-and-sour sauce).


AIDS Obsession on the School Board
A new school year looms and there's plenty to worry about.
For starters, will there be enough teachers, textbooks and classrooms to accommodate all students?
Yet New York City's Board of Education seems able to focus on only one issue: AIDS.
Last week the board revised a pledge for guest speakers in schools, making them promise to stress abstinence as the preferred way to avoid AIDS.
The pledge was intended to insure that outside groups complied with a resolution, passed by a 4-to-3 majority of the board in May, requiring all lessons in AIDS prevention to emphasize abstinence more than other preventive measures, such as condoms.


Banks Planning to Lend To Aid Florida Cleanup
Florida's largest banks said yesterday that they were ready to play a big role in financing the cleanup of South Florida in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew.
The First Union National Bank and Barnett Banks Inc. announced that they would each provide $1 billion in loans to businesses and communities in the areas hit by the storm.


Fugitive in Idaho Cabin Plays Role of Folk Hero
To hear the supporters of Randy Weaver tell it, the man holding off nearly 200 police officers and Federal agents from his mountaintop cabin here is not the violent racist depicted by the authorities.
But rather, as with other notorious fugitives who have found refuge in this remote wilderness just south of the Canadian border, he is a folk hero.
In the five days since a deputy United States marshal, William F. Degan, and Mr.
Weaver's 13-year-old son, Samuel, were killed in a shootout, crowds of people have been steadily harassing the officers who are trying to detain the fugitive.
He has vowed to die, and to take his three daughters and his wife, Vicki, with him if necessary.


Books of The Times; Ids, Egos and Murders Most Foul
The Saturday Morning Murder  A Psychoanalytic Case  By Batya Gur  Translated by Dalya Bilu. 294 pages.
Aaron Asher Books/HarperCollins. $20.
For the Sake of Elena  By Elizabeth George  388 pages.
Bantam Books. $20.
"The Saturday Morning Murder" by Batya Gur introduces a new detective to American readers: Chief Inspector Michael Ohayon of the Jerusalem police.
Ms.
Gur's appealing character is a 38-year-old Moroccan-born Israeli, a former Cambridge scholar with an unfinished doctoral paper on guilds during the Middle Ages, a divorced father juggling a hopeless love affair, and a shrewd observer of the human condition.
Inspector Ohayon, head of the capital's major crimes unit, is just the man you'd want on the case when a woman is found murdered on a Saturday morning in Jerusalem.


Slight Gain Managed By Dollar
After falling sharply against the German mark in the last week, the dollar stabilized in volatile trading yesterday, but many traders predicted that it would soon drift lower.
Foreign exchange traders said some people were selling marks to take profits now that the dollar has plunged some 17 percent against the mark in four months.


Most Iraqi Planes Leave South, but Mirages Arrive
As the United States and its allies prepared to impose a ban on Iraqi military flights over southern Iraq, now expected on Wednesday, the Pentagon said today that Baghdad had completed withdrawing fixed-wing aircraft from the southern region.
Under the allied plan, intended to protect Shiite Muslims who have come under air attack, Iraqi planes that ventured south of the 32d parallel could be shot down.
The Iraqis have been moving their planes and some of their helicopters to bases just north of the line in recent days, apparently in an attempt to avoid immediate confrontations.


Review/Rock; The Black Crowes Circle Back to the 60's They Never Knew
Chris Robinson of the Black Crowes has an entire repertory of dance moves.
There is the arms-akimbo, back-of-hands-on-back-of-hips boogie: his Mick Jagger Jr. dance.
There is the one-hand-on-hip, one-arm-in-air stomp: his fop senorita dance.
There is the spin-around-really-fast, point-one-finger, split-kick combination: his teen-ager with over-abundant energy dance.
There is even a little dance where Mr.
Robinson puts his index finger to the top of his head and turns himself around like a toy ballerina.
This must be his I-don't-know-how-silly-I-look dance.
At the Beacon Theater on Monday night, in the first of four sold-out concerts, Mr.
Robinson's dance moves were one of several elements that kept the crowd entertained.
Musically, the show had its peaks and valleys.
The Black Crowes have earned a large following by revamping the music of the late 60's and early 70's for a young crowd that never knew it firsthand.
The sound borrows heavily from the two-guitar thrust of the Rolling Stones and the Southern boogie of the Allman Brothers, as well as the soul and rhythm-and-blues that both those groups poached.
At their best, the Black Crowes overcome their self-inflicted genre exile: "Twice as Hard," "Jealous Again" and a version of Otis Redding's "Hard to Handle" (all from the band's debut album, "Shake Your Money Maker") were as groove-worthy as Mr.
Robinson made them out to be.


Dollar's Fall Alters Bond Dynamics
Bad economic news is usually good for the bond market.
Traders, speculators and investors translate a decline in car sales, or a sluggish increase in jobs, into the expectation of slow economic growth, which in turn means that inflation will decline and the Federal Reserve may cut interest rates.
And low inflation and low interest rates send bond prices higher.
But the plunge in the dollar since the end of last week seems to have temporarily changed that formula.


Can't Sleep? Behavior Change May Work Better Than Pills
GOOD news for insomniacs: a new study shows that behavioral methods can be even more effective than sleeping pills in treating insomnia, especially for people who have spent years futilely trying to get a good night's sleep.
The findings are likely to encourage a move away from sleeping pills, prompted in part by the recent publicity surrounding adverse side effects of Halcion and other common sleep medications, including confusion and amnesia.


Have Backyards Supplanted Parks? Survey Says No
AS more people have moved to the suburbs in the last generation, life has become increasingly hidden and private.
The gradual but inexorable exodus from cities has been inspired in part by the desire for a personal piece of paradise, for a backyard bit of greenery conducive to tossing a football or barbecuing some chicken.
Essayists and trend watchers have been saying that life in this country has become "privatized," both in cities and suburbs, with families retreating into cocoons, watching videos and ordering in food, and avoiding the messy social contact that is a part of community life.


METRO DIGEST
ALLEN AND FARROW MEET IN COURT
In the eye of an extraordinary media storm, Woody Allen and Mia Farrow met in court by proxy and later in person in the chambers of Judge Phyllis B. Gangel-Jacob, seeking an end to the custody battle that has opened their private lives to the public.
B2.
QUESTIONS RAISED ABOUT BUILDER
In another attempt to derail plans to build a new incinerator in Brooklyn, City Comptroller Holtzman has raised questions about the integrity of the company that will get a $1 billion contract to construct and operate the plant.
In letters distributed to Mayor Dinkins and Council members, Ms.
Holtzman said the company, Waste Management Inc., had violated environmental, antitrust and public corruption laws in cities across the country.
B6.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; French Tourist Office Conducts a Review
The French Government Tourist Office in New York is conducting a mandated review, held every three years, on its estimated $4 million account.


Mississippi Slow to Act On Integrating Colleges
Although the Supreme Court ruled last June that Mississippi had not done enough to desegregate its public universities, the Justices left it up to the state to figure out what else needs to be done.
So far, the only thing on which state officials and the plaintiffs seem to agree is that resolving the issue will be as complicated as the thorny legal maneuvering that brought the case before the Supreme Court, 17 years after it was filed.


Center at Bedford Hills Has Official Support
To the Editor:
I appreciate the generous praise of the Children's Center at the Bedford Hills, N.Y., Correctional Facility and of myself by Nomi Schwartz in "Born Behind Bars" (letter, Aug. 4).
However, it is a gross injustice to both the administration of the Bedford Hills facility and the Department of Correctional Services to say that "Most of these successes occur despite the authorities, with their shrinking budgets and capricious regulations."


Ex-Inmate Wins Award In Bias Case
A Buffalo woman with AIDS has been awarded $155,000 for what a Federal judge said was the humiliating and improper treatment she received when she was in the Erie County jail on bad check and forgery charges.
The woman, Louise K. Nolley, was placed in a five-cell forensic unit usually reserved for mentally disturbed and suicidal inmates, forced to wear plastic gloves when she used a typewriter in the jail library and denied regular attendance at Roman Catholic services.


60% OF STOCK IN MINERALS CONCERN TO BE SOLD BY PFIZER
Pfizer Inc. said yesterday that it had filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell 15 million shares of common stock in Minerals Technologies Inc., its restructured minerals unit.
The sale represents 60 percent of Minerals Technologies, which analysts said had a total value of about $400 million.
Sixty percent of the estimated total value is $240 million, so the shares will be offered at $16 each, analysts said.


James A. Batts Jr., 78, Doctor and a Professor
Dr.
James A. Batts Jr., professor emeritus at the Medical College of Pennsylvania and a former director of obstetrics and gynecology at Harlem Hospital, died Saturday at the college's medical center in Philadelphia.
He was 78 years old and lived in Philadelphia.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Suspect, 17, Held in Death Of Store Clerk
A 17-year-old Bronx youth has been charged with being part of the gang that beat a Hispanic bodega clerk to death in what the police are calling a case of mistaken identity.
The youth, James Doran, who lives at 708 Sagamore Street in Morris Park, has been charged with second-degree murder in the death of Carmelo Rivera, and the police say they are seeking four other young men in the killing.


HURRICANE ANDREW: When a Monster Is on the Way, 'It's Time to Get Out of Town'; In Texas, a Line of Cars 50 Miles Long
Laced with bayous and crammed with oil refineries and petrochemical plants, the swampy East Texas coast seemed such a vulnerable target for Hurricane Andrew that those fleeing the storm made a line 50 miles long by this evening.
As soon as local officials recommended evacuation of the coastal area near the Texas-Louisiana border early this morning, the big plants put emergency plans into effect and let most of their workers leave.
Within hours, streams of cars filled highways going inland.
By 5 P.M., the Texas Department of Public Safety reported bumper-to-bumper traffic for 50 miles on U.S.
Route 69, the major artery heading north of here.


Transactions
Baseball National League
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Signed Brian Carpenter, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Signed Anthony Bowie, guard.
Agreed to terms with Litterial Green, guard, and Donald Royal, forward.
Continental Basketball Association
FARGO-MOORHEAD FEVER -- Signed Carlos Norton, guard.
GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Signed Roy Coleman, forward.
LA CROSSE CATBIRDS -- Acquired Kevin Williams, guard, from the Yakima Sun Kings for Kelby Stuckey, forward, and future considerations.
OKLAHOMA CITY CAVALRY -- Acquired Jawann Oldham, center, from the Quad City Thunder for 1993 first- and fourth-round draft picks.
Canadian Football League
BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Quincy Williams, defensive tackle.
Hockey  National Hockey League
BOARD OF GOVERNORS -- Announced the resignation of Brian O'Neill, executive vice president, effective Sept. 30.
Announced the resignation of Joel Nixon, vice president of broadcasting.
Announced the re-election of Jim Gregory, Ken Sawyer and Steve Ryan, vice presidents.
ST. LOUIS BLUES -- Signed Vitaly Prokhorov, left wing.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Signed Paul MacDermid, right wing.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Traded Shawn Cronin, defenseman, to the Quebec Nordiques for Danny Lambert, defenseman.
Colleges
METRO ATLANTIC ATHLETIC CONFERENCE -- Named Michele Dubert administrative intern.
SOUTHWESTERN ATHLETIC CONFERENCE -- Stripped Alcorn State of all the 20 baseball victories from last season for use of an ineligible player.
CLEMSON -- Michelle Nelson named women's assistant basketball coach and Paul Kruse men's assistant tennis coach.


Police Recruit Faces Drug Charge on L.I.
A 21-year-old New York City police recruit was arrested yesterday by the Nassau County police on charges of selling small amounts of cocaine to undercover Nassau narcotics officers in the Massapequa Mall earlier this year, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
Mark Ruggiero, who lives at 10 Magnolia Avenue in Lake Grove in Suffolk County, is accused of selling drugs on Feb. 5 and March 4, said Chief of Inspectional Services Robert J. Beatty.
Mr.
Ruggiero is a recruit in the class that entered the police academy on June 30.


Devils Focus on Burke for Deal
The Devils are trying harder than ever to make a deal for SEAN BURKE, their disgruntled goaltender who sat out last season rather than play behind CHRIS TERRERI.


Mets' Johnson Has Surgery
Howard Johnson underwent surgery today in New York to correct his damaged left shoulder and clean up debris in both knees.
He had a cartilage tear in the right knee arthroscopically repaired, and doctors at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan also removed a degenerated piece of tendon in Johnson's left knee.
The Mets characterized the procedures as successful and announced that Johnson, whose shoulder will be in a sling for three weeks, was expected to be 100 percent well before the start of spring training in 1993.


TV Violation Seen by F.C.C.
The Federal Communications Commission has ruled that Mario J. Gabelli, a New York money manager, appears to be violating regulations limiting the number of television stations a company can own.
In an order released last week, the commission said it would begin a proceeding that could require Mr.
Gabelli to pay fines or sell some broadcast interests owned by investment funds he controls.


2 More Lebanese Ministers Quit to Protest Election
A day after the Speaker of Parliament resigned in the controversy over Lebanon's first general elections in 20 years, two cabinet ministers said they too would resign if the next two rounds of voting were not postponed.
In the first round of elections, on Sunday, the fundamentalist Party of God had the strongest showing.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Controversial Mitchell Victory
Dennis Mitchell took advantage of what appeared to be a false start to beat Carl Lewis in the 100 meters yesterday at the BT Games in Copenhagen.
Mitchell, a bronze medalist at the Barcelona Olympics, beat Lewis by .03 seconds, winning in a wind-aided 9.92.
Lewis, who failed to qualify for the Olympic sprints because of an illness, finished second in 9.95.
After the race, many of the 11,999 fans at Osterbro Stadium jeered loudly as a replay of the start, shown several times on the scoreboard, strongly indicated that Mitchell shot out of the blocks way too early.
"It's not a scandal," Lewis said.
"And this has happened to me before. You just have to run. Otherwise from that, I felt great. I thought I'd catch him. I felt good all the way. I ran my own race." Joe Douglas, Lewis's manager, didn't want to point a finger at the runners or the Danish organizers, who admitted they made a mistake, but he unsuccessfully sought to have Mitchell disqualified.
Kevin Young took the lead early and won the 400-meter hurdles in 48.57 seconds, almost two seconds off the world record of 46.78 he set in the Barcelona Olympics.
Quincy Watts captured the 400 meters in another relatively slow winning time of 44.85 seconds, finishing half a second ahead of fellow American Steve Lewis.
Frankie Fredericks won the men's 200 in 20.21 seconds, edging Mike Marsh by .07 seconds.
Gwen Torrence lost the women's 200 by .09 seconds to Irina Privalova of the Commonwealth of Independent States, whose winning time was 21.93.
Nourredine Morceli of Algeria, the world's premier middle-distance runner, held off Kenya's Wilfred Kirochi down the stretch to win the mile in 3:51.96.
Kirochi finished in 3:52.56, .13 seconds ahead of Jim Spivey of the United States. (AP)


Hurricane Surprised Forecasters
When the subtle atmospheric ripple that would become Hurricane Andrew first appeared over West Africa about 10 days ago, there was nothing to distinguish it from dozens of similar ripples that form in the region every summer.
Most are carried out over the tropical Atlantic Ocean by the trade winds and die.
Only a handful develop into a tropical storm, and fewer still into a hurricane.
And even after the ripple had gone against the odds, growing strong enough to be given a name, it weakened so much that it was on the verge of disintegration.


Macy to Post Positive 4th-Period Cash Flow
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company has told its suppliers and their financial advisers that it expects to report positive cash flow for its fourth quarter ended July 31, reversing the results of the two previous quarters.
Although Macy will not issue financial statements for the fourth quarter or for July until the end of October, it disclosed information about its liquidity and its cash flow projections in a report to agencies that monitor retailers' credit as well as to garment industry financiers and some suppliers.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug 21
Aug 14
Aug 23
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
3.0
Gasoline stocks
209.2
211.4
207.6
Distillate stocks
123.5
121.3
124.6
Crude imports, daily
6.5
7.4
6.9
Product imports, daily
2.1
1.9
2.3
Crude stocks
331.1
328.0
348.6
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
90.1
90.4
89.2
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Editors' Note
A music review yesterday described "The World of Richard Strauss," a music festival at Bard College, which included a re-creation of a 1938 exhibition of Nazi propaganda against "degenerate" modern music.


Harvard Review Editor
T.
George Harris, a former editor of Psychology Today and American Health, will take over immediately as editor of the Harvard Business Review, Harvard Business School officials confirmed yesterday.
The school named Laurance Allen, a longtime executive of The Financial Times, as publisher, effective Sept. 1.
Both appointments had been expected.
The job was open because Rosabeth Moss Kanter, the noted Harvard professor, stepped down as editor.


Bush's Gains From Convention Nearly Evaporate in Latest Poll
President Bush's gains from four days in the spotlight at the Republican National Convention have almost completely evaporated, as the President failed to convince the public that he is committed to change and to reviving the economy, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas re-established a strong lead, holding a 51 percent to 36 percent edge in the poll, which was taken Sunday and Monday.
That is about the same margin he held before last week's convention.


Thousands Homeless in Florida Storm
One of the century's most powerful hurricanes barreled across the Gulf of Mexico and slammed into the Louisiana coast last night, carrying torrential rains and gale force winds into coastal Mississippi and Texas, as the storm's toll in lives and property climbed in South Florida.
Gov.
Lawton Chiles of Florida said the number of people killed had reached 12, but the figure seemed certain to rise as relief crews sifted through the rubble of thousands of houses destroyed by Hurricane Andrew's 160-mile-an-hour winds.


Bonds Priced In California
The Local Transportation Authority of Orange County, Calif., has priced $350 million of sales-tax revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.2 percent for the portions of the issue due in 2008 and 2011.
The remaining serial bonds were offered at prices to yield from 2.8 percent in 1993 to 4.8 percent in 1997, 5.7 percent in 2002 and 6.15 percent in 2007.


Gen. Clyde Eddleman, 90, Leader In Combat and Vice Chief of Staff
Gen.
Clyde D. Eddleman, a former Vice Chief of Staff of the Army, died last Wednesday at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington.
He was 90 years old and lived in Arlington, Va.
General Eddleman died of respiratory failure, an Army spokeswoman said.


POSTAL SERVICE LIFTS SUSPENSION OF EMERY AIR FREIGHT
Consolidated Freightways Inc. said yesterday that the United States Postal Service had agreed to lift its temporary suspension of the company's Emery Worldwide air freight unit's right to participate in new postal contracts.
On June 29, the Postal Service suspended Emery from new contract awards, citing an inquiry into disputed reimbursement claims submitted by Emery for emergency service during the Persian Gulf war.


Furor in New Hampshire on Vote to Cut Standards
Angering parents and school officials, the New Hampshire State Board of Education has voted to eliminate virtually all minimum education standards in the first attempt by a state to rescind such benchmarks.
The change would free cities and towns to set their own standards for maximum class size; ratio of guidance counselors to students; the size of a school library; whether art, music, physical education and other non-academic classes are offered, and whether to have programs for gifted and talented youngsters.


Cultural 'Experiment' Changes Name at 60
In 1932, when a young couple in Syracuse began a program to bring people of different cultures together through one-to-one citizen exchanges, they called it the Experiment in International Living.
Sixty years and thousands of successful exchanges later, it is no longer an experiment.
Not only does the organization have millions of alumni worldwide,but it also now administers 260 different programs in 67 countries.
The Experiment's directors thus took the occasion of its 60th anniversary yesterday to announce a name change; it will be called World Learning Inc.


Proceed With Caution on Census Adjustment
To the Editor:
In "Pound Foolish on Census Data" (editorial, Aug. 7), reconsideration of the 1990 census adjustment appears in new clothing: the official census count is ignored in favor of estimation procedures that assert, as it were, that the original decision not to adjust the count was in error.
However, decisions to ride two divergent horses seriously undermine the confidence of the data user in the statistical results and open to court dispute any issue that depends on census counts (or postcensus estimates) where the choices yield different results to parties experiencing windfalls or misfortune.
I would urge the statistical standards office in the Office of Management and Budget and the Secretary of Commerce to proceed carefully so as not to compound this collection of problems with further alternatives.


Networks Unite On Child Abuse
Because of unusual cooperation among broadcast networks, a documentary on child abuse next week will be the first nonnews program to run simultaneously on three broadcast networks.
The program, "Scared Silent: Exposing and Ending Child Abuse," is an independently produced documentary paid for with a grant from the USAA insurance agency.
It will be broadcast on Sept. 4 at 10 P.M. on CBS, NBC and PBS.
ABC will delay the broadcast until Sept. 6, also at 10.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; Quayle Sells Message By Land, Sea and Air
Trains, planes and automobiles.
Such has been the life of Vice President Dan Quayle, who has tried a different mode of transportation in each of his last three days of campaigning across the South.
On Sunday, it was a custom-fitted bus, rolling through the flatlands and tourist traps of central Florida.
On Monday, he flew to Knoxville, Tenn., and Newport News, Va., where, incidentally, he spoke before the backdrop of a cargo ship.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; American Express In Global Campaign
For the first time, American Express is introducing a global multimedia advertising campaign aimed exclusively at international travelers.
"We feel it's time to communicate with the traveler's mindset at every stage throughout the trip," said Elisabeth Coleman, a spokeswoman at the American Express Travel Related Services Company in New York.


Fear Returns to Sidewalks of West 96th Street Along With Homeless Man
For the residents of West 96th Street, the quiet of summer was shattered last week with the news that Larry Hogue was back on the streets.
Since 1985, Mr.
Hogue, a homeless man who the police say becomes violent when he smokes crack, has been a frightening fixture for the residents of the Upper West Side neighborhood.


Alan Burke Dies at 69; Talk Show Host of 60's
Alan Burke, the host of a syndicated television talk show in the 1960's who was known for his acerbic put-downs of his audience and guests, died yesterday at Boca Raton Community Hospital in Florida.
He was 69 years old and lived in Boca Raton.
His family said only that he died after a long illness.


Iraq Prepares to Plead Its Case Before Security Council


60-Minute Gourmet
I HAVE frequently touted pork as a versatile, low-fat meat that lends itself to all kinds of recipes suitable for time-pressed cooks.
There is something about the texture and delicate flavor of pork that allows it to work well with a wide variety of sauces, from spicy hot to rich to sweet.
The recipe here calls for a sweet touch in the form of port and fresh orange.
I have devised several pork recipes using port.
In one, chops are seasoned with cumin and paprika, then sauteed with rosemary.
Another sauce is made in the same pan with onions, garlic, port and vinegar.


Wine Talk
YOU'VE heard of the Napa Valley, of course, and if you like chardonnay you probably know about the Edna Valley as well.
But what do you know about the Mimbres Valley or the Umpqua Valley?
Sonoma is a familiar name, but what about Sonoita?
They are all American Viticultural Areas, or A.V.A.'s as wine people call them.
An A.V.A. is a grape-growing region.
Its boundaries are proposed by the people who grow grapes within it, and set by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.


U.N. Chief Asks a Force of 3,500 for Somalia
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali recommended today that the United Nations send a force of 3,500 to escort relief supplies in Somalia, where 4.5 million people are in desperate need of food.
In a report to the Security Council, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali said he needed the 3,500 troops or guards in four port areas, including the 500 Pakistani soldiers about to be deployed in Mogadishu, the capital.


Topics of The Times; Dan Quayle's Constitution
Vice President Dan Quayle says Bill Clinton is trying to straddle the death penalty issue by declaring that he might appoint someone like Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York to the Supreme Court.
Mr.
Quayle accuses Mr.
Clinton of inconsistency for claiming to favor the death penalty while saying that Mr.
Cuomo, an opponent of capital punishment, would make a good justice.
"You can't have it both ways," says Mr.
Quayle.
The Vice President displays ignorance or indifference about the basic distinction in the American legal system between policy and constitutionality.


Bank Yields On Accounts Decrease
Yields on bank money-market accounts and certificates of deposit were squeezed in the latest period ended today, The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest rate publication, indicated.
But a closer look shows money-market accounts are down a bit more than C.D.'s.
This is because the money-market accounts reflected recent market trends for short-term rates before the weakened dollar drove the short-term rates up again.
That rise was not that significant, however, because rates have remained at historic lows.


The Many 'Non-Negotiable Demands'
Leaders of the many factions in the former Yugoslavia go to the negotiating table in London on Wednesday with what are essentially irreconcilable positions on all major issues.
Serbia
Belgrade will seek recognition of the new Yugoslav state, made up of Serbia and Montenegro, as the legitimate heir to the former Yugoslavia.


Mr. Bush, Crossing the Line
During the Republican Convention President Bush left the demagoguery to his surrogates, mainly Patrick Buchanan and the fundamentalist minister Pat Robertson.
But he shed his restraint at a religious gathering in Dallas last weekend.
Emboldened by the evangelical company he kept, Mr.
Bush crossed a line he had observed in Houston, questioning the religious convictions of his opponents because the word "God" does not appear in the Democratic Party platform.
In the short term, such rhetoric threatens to divert attention from Topic A, the economy.
But the graver danger is that the fundamentalist impulses at large in the Republican Party could divide the nation along religious lines.


Bridge
Both American teams did well here today in the qualifying stages of the World Bridge Federation's Team Olympiad.
After seven rounds of play in the open series, the Americans led in Group B. The standings were: first, the United States, 143 victory points; second, Iceland, 141; third, the Netherlands, 138; fourth, Sweden, 133; fifth, Norway, 130.


U.N. REPORT SEES HOPE ON CYPRUS
A solution to the decades-old problem of a divided Cyprus may be nearer than at any time since 1974, said a report to the Security Council issued today by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
The report indicated that the two leaders of ethnic groups on the divided island, President George Vassiliou, a Greek Cypriot, and the Turkish Cypriot leader, Rauf Denktash, are closer on fundamental issues than Greek and Turkish leaders have been.


A Savory Feast of Fresh Vegetables
AFTER an appointment at 19th Street and Broadway on a Friday afternoon, I found it only natural to saunter over to the Union Square Greenmarket.
I never miss a chance, especially when Jersey tomatoes and corn are in season.
It took no effort to walk among the stalls brimming with the vibrant colors of August's fruits and vegetables to dream up a menu for this column.
Everything for the dishes on the menu comes from the market except the salt, pepper, cumin, vinegar, olive oil and sugar.


Raymond R. Corbett, 77, Is Dead; Was Leader of State A.F.L.-C.I.O.
Raymond R. Corbett, one of New York's most influential labor leaders who headed the state A.F.L.-C.I.O. for 22 years, died on Monday at New Rochelle Hospital.
He was 77 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
An avid golfer, he died after suffering a heart attack as he played in a tournament at the Winged Foot Golf Club in Mamaroneck, said Victor Stewart, editor of the newsletter of the iron workers union in New York City.


Review/Television; Behind the Glitter, There's Not Much Gold
Tonight's edition of "48 Hours" focuses on fakes.
They include the phony Rolex watches, Chanel handbags and Montblanc pens on sale along Canal Street in Manhattan; injections for perpetual youth, $36,000 for 24, peddled by a churchgoing Palm Beach doctor to susceptible members of the congregation; 19th-century masterpieces of art that were painted just yesterday, and Alan Abel, a self-described professional hoaxer, known for conning newspaper editors and television producers into treating his fiction, including his own obituary, as fact.
The liveliest scenes in this patched-together hour are of a police raid on a Florida store that sells T-shirts bearing forged logos and vigilante action in New York City by an angry rapper and some strong-armed associates against sidewalk sellers of bootlegged tapes.


Why School Must Require Community Service; An Important Lesson
To the Editor:
"True 'Service' Can't Be Coerced" (editorial, Aug. 2) questions the validity of Maryland's mandating community service for high school students as a requirement for graduation.
As one whose school has developed such a requirement, I disagree.
The answer to "Does it help the beneficiaries of community service if students are forced to participate?" is a resounding yes.
The Jewish religion, along with others, requires its adherents to perform acts of kindness.
This is not optional conduct.
In an ideal world it would be wonderful were everyone to visit the sick, comfort the mourner and give charity because he or she wants to.
In the real world, however, most people do these because they know they ought to.


Why School Must Require Community Service; Helping Themselves
To the Editor:
Until last year I would have agreed that "True 'Service' Can't be Coerced" (editorial, Aug. 2).
However, in research under a grant from the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, I discovered that only 15 to 20 percent of students volunteered for a community service program.
The large majority rejected this opportunity because: they work after school; parents require that they devote after-school time to study; there is insufficient time for community service during the school day; students who volunteer are seen as different.
These findings, based on two junior high schools in New York City, are consistent with findings on all grade levels throughout the country.
Thus, the majority of students are deprived of potential benefits, perhaps the most important of which comes from helping someone else.
People of all ages are especially helped themselves when they help others.
Community service also opens the student to all manner of learning, in providing service and preparing for it.


Over-the-Counter Open Positions on Short Sales Rise 2%
For the fifth monthly period in a row, the number of shares sold short and not covered in over-the-counter trading set a record, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
Short interest totaled 423.6 million on trades settled by Aug. 15, a slight jump of 2 percent more than the 415.3 million reported a month ago, and a hefty 13.2 percent higher than the 374.3 million shares in April, when the record-setting trend began.
The number of companies with shares sold short also inched ahead, to 3,628 issues, compared with 3,641 last month.


GTE Leads Major Test of Personal Phone Devices
Following the spectacular success of cellular telephones, which are used today by more than 7.5 million Americans, the telecommunications industry is looking to "personal communications devices" as the Next Big Thing in wireless phones.
Four major telecommunications companies led by the GTE Corporation outlined yesterday the largest market trial to date of these future phones, which will be cheaper and more specialized than cellular devices.


A Fond Look at the Little Lights of the Big City
"OH, you're the guy who writes about the small stuff," a real estate tycoon said to me last week.
That kept grating.
But I let go of it on Friday night, as my wife, Suzanne, and I treated ourselves to a sunset sailboat ride in the harbor.
As rose-colored hues gave way to darkness, New York seemed a jumble of monumental cliff houses, lights twinkling in airborne caves like a million diamonds.
It seemed so impossibly big.


Lillian Libman, 80, Manager and Agent of Many Performers
Lillian Libman, a manager, press agent and personal representative for many leading instrumentalists, opera singers and dancers, died on Monday at her sister's home in Larchmont, N.Y.
She was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of lung cancer, said her sister Bernice Lewis.


The Talk of Salzburg; In Salzburg, Head Wins Out Over Heart And the Tongues Wag
The rapturously received new production of Richard Strauss's "Salome" on Thursday night at the Salzburg Festival starred the light-voiced, hard-working Catherine Malfitano in the title role and the sumptuously sonorous Bryn Terfel as John the Baptist.
Christoph von Dohnanyi conducted the Vienna Philharmonic.
Rightly, much of the audience's attention was directed to them.
But the most striking moment came with Luc Bondy's staging of the entrance of the Five Jews.
Meticulously differentiated as to sect, precisely dressed in various shades of Orthodoxy, rocking back and forth in the form of prayer known as davening, they squabbled and bickered, as per Oscar Wilde's text, over the true meaning of the Messiah's coming.
The one thing they all knew was that Jesus was
not
the Redeemer.


In Newark Streets, a Grief Edged With Defiance
The world of this city's young car thieves is one mapped in skid marks and the latitudes of a survivalist ethic of "Do what ya gotta." Stealing cars and challenging authority while doing it is merely part of growing up, and no one should be shot and killed for that, according to the logic here.
And so there was not just grief, but anger and outrage about the weekend slayings by off-duty police officers of two teen-agers who were riding in a stolen car.
"It's real messed up," said Deanae Starks, an 18-year-old woman who spoke as she took a break from spraying graffiti on the pavement of a street in her downtown neighborhood about midnight.
"They didn't have no business shooting at them."


Review/Film; Ah, to Live And Fight In Brooklyn!
"Laws of Gravity" was shown as part of the 1992 New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 21.
The film opens today at the Waverly Theater, 323 Avenue of the Americas, at Third Street, Greenwich Village.
Nick Gomez makes an impressive debut as the writer and director of his first feature, " Laws of Gravity," a vividly acted and extremely well photographed tale of three days and nights on the Brooklyn streets.


Holtzman Renews Fight On Disposal Of Garbage
In another attempt to derail plans to build a new incinerator in Brooklyn, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman has raised questions about the integrity of the company that has a $1 billion contract to construct and operate the plant.
The City Council is to vote today on a long-term garbage-disposal plan that includes the incinerator.


Sifting for Profits in Keating's Desert Monument
Sprawled across 130 desert acres on the southern slope of Camelback Mountain, the $300 million Phoenician resort is one of the most expensive hotels ever built.
The guests have tea amid a $1.7 million art collection, play on a top-notch irrigated golf course and swim in a pool that is lined in mother-of-pearl tile.
Some travel magazines rate it among the top resort hotels in the world.
"It's a spectacular property," said Saul F. Leonard, hotel consultant based in Los Angeles.
"But was it built to make money or as a monument?"


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Senator Orrin G. Hatch worked on behalf of B.C.C.I. behind the scenes and pressed the bank to lend $10 million to a close business associate, interviews with bank lawyers and an examination of documents showed.
The Utah Republican and an aide became an integral part of the bank's efforts to escape Senate scrutiny after it pled guilty in 1989 to Federal charges.  [ Page A1. ]


Beaches Shouldn't Practice Topless Segregation
To the Editor:
Like Carlin Meier, I hope there will be no segregation of topless bathers from topped bathers ("Women's Breasts: So What?", Op-Ed, July 29).
In the early 1980's, when I was a practicing nudist at Riis Park beach, Federal law determined that to protect those who did not wish to view anatomies in toto, nudists would be restricted to one section of the beach.
That section was near an old age home, on the theory, I suppose, that those folks had already seen it all.
At first, like Ms.
Meier, I sunbathed at Riis Park satisfied with my breast size and buttock shape; certainly nothing I saw at Riis Park put me to shame.
However, what I heard began to affect me.
Male gawkers circled this section like coyotes.
They catcalled and loudly discussed breast size and buttock shape.
Their analysis was comparative.
I soon felt jealous of the women they harassed most.
My sense of self-esteem was diminished, and I began to think of enhancing and reducing parts of myself.


Jury Begins Deliberation In 3 Murders
A Bronx jury began deliberations yesterday in the triple-murder case against Alejandro Henriquez on a day when the emotions of a long and tedious trial erupted as a prosecutor asserted that the defendant strangled his victims "for the pure thrill of it."
Tension in the courtroom has been mounting over the last week, in part because of the nature of case.
In the most serious of crimes, the evidence against Mr.
Henriquez, a 31-year-old livery-car driver, is largely circumstantial.


Review/Film; Lust, Greed, Murder, Blackmail: Big Wrongs in the Big Easy
"Storyville" is the kind of enjoyably overstuffed Deep South melodrama that Hollywood turned out in the 1950's and 60's, sometimes based on works by William Faulkner.
The provenance of "Storyville" is not that high-toned -- it is said to have "evolved" from an Australian novel, "The Juryman," by Frank Galbally and Robert Macklin.
The film is apparently something quite different.
Set in and around contemporary New Orleans, "Storyville" is about politics, lust, greed, oil leases, murder and closeted skeletons crying to get out.
More particularly, it's about Cray Fowler (James Spader), the scion of a nouveau riche family, a young lawyer who is running for Congress both because it's expected of him and because he has nothing better to do.


The World Needs An Army on Call
Americans are not enthusiastic about having the United States stand alone as the policeman of the world.
There is a feeling that we simply no longer have the resources, given the pressing need to rebuild our strength at home, to play that role any longer.
This does not mean, however, that Americans have been lulled by the dangerous siren song of the new isolationists.
We understand more clearly than ever that our economic well-being and national security depend on developments and relationships outside our borders.


SWEDEN RELEASES EX-C.I.A. OPERATIVE
The only former Central Intelligence Agency officer to defect to the Soviet Union was released from Swedish custody today and immediately left for an undisclosed country, most probably Russia, frustrating attempts by Federal law enforcement authorities to force his return to stand trial.
Edward Lee Howard's departure abruptly closed the latest chapter in a spy saga that began in 1985 when he escaped into the New Mexican desert, and today's events seemed to emphasize his ability to elude United States efforts to catch up with him.


ISRAEL OFFERS PLAN FOR ARABS TO RULE IN OCCUPIED LANDS
Israel gave Palestinian negotiators a detailed set of proposals today for Palestinian self-rule in the occupied West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
On the second day of the latest round of Middle East peace talks, the Israelis, representing the new Labor-dominated Government, said the proposals would allow the Palestinians to run many aspects of daily life through an elected "administrative council." Elections could be held in April or May of next year, the Israelis said.


Gains in Vehicle Sales Are Less Than Expected
Sales of cars and light trucks built in North America rose a disappointing 10.2 percent in mid-August, compared with a weak period last year.
The increase fell far short of the recovery that auto makers had been expecting.
The seasonally adjusted annual rate of car sales was 6.2 million, up from 5.7 million in the first third of the month but well below the 7.0 million level that would herald the stirrings of robust demand.


Topics of The Times; New York's Indoor Autumn
New York City has summer, too much summer usually.
It has winter, not enough winter recently.
It has spring, too, sometimes spectacularly.
But New York doesn't have autumn.
True, the skies start darkening earlier about this time of year; in a few months the chestnut vendors will be on the street.
The air will have a little nip and the subways a smell of woolens just out of mothballs.
But is autumn in New York the same as in Vermont and the other places leaf-peepers go to swoon?
Not exactly.


State Dept. Aide Quits Over Yugoslav Policy
The State Department official in charge of managing the United States' day-to-day policies toward the Balkans resigned today in a dispute over the American stance in the Yugoslav fighting, The Washington Post reported.
The official, George D. Kenney, was said to have quit to protest what he called the Bush Administration's "ineffective and counterproductive" handling of the Yugoslav crisis.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Vice President Quayle  THURSDAY: 10 P.M., ABC, "PrimeTime Live," interview. (Channel 7 in New York.)  Gov.
Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore 9 P.M., The Nashville Network, "Nashville Now," interview.


A Howdy on Cut Day For Rice and Howard
Jerry Rice and Desmond Howard were brought into their folds yesterday, while Carlos Huerta and a flock of other hopefuls were sheared from their teams as the 28 National Football League clubs moved simultaneously to sign reluctant players and trim their rosters to the interim 60-man limit.
Rice, the All-Pro wide receiver, agreed to a three-year deal with the San Francisco 49ers that will reportedly pay him about $2.5 million a year, making him the highest-paid nonquarterback in the league.


G.M. Orders Staff to Pay Part of Health-Care Cost
One of the most generous health-care packages in American business became a little less so today, as the General Motors Corporation informed salaried workers and retirees that they must bear more of the expense, including paying monthly premiums.
The cost-cutting move sets the stage for what are certain to be tense negotiations next year with the United Automobile Workers union, during which G.M. will seek to reduce its health-care costs.


Huddled in Shelter, Clan That Can Never Go Home
"So what am I? A senior without a school?" Goldie Washington said with a grimace as she looked down at the walkway of her second Red Cross shelter in two days.
In fact, her school, South Ridge High School, is still standing.
But the neighborhood around it, and much of the rest of Miss Washington's hometown of Cutler Ridge, is not.
So for all practical purposes, the 17-year-old girl who was to be the senior class president has no school.
No neighborhood.
No home.
And no idea of what happens now.


N.H.L. Settles for a Jab in Confrontation With Goons
Faced with a chance to radically change their sport's rules about fighting, the lords of the National Hockey League put up their dukes for debate today and then backed off from the essence of the confrontation.
Instead of voting for or against a proposal to eject all fighters, the Board of Governors tabled that motion and settled for a compromise solution that calls for only the instigators to be ejected.
Currently, players deemed by referees to be instigators are given a two-minute minor penalty in addition to five minutes for fighting.
Last season, the minor penalty for instigation was assessed in fewer than one-third of the fights.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues: Abortion Rights; Agency Opens the Airwaves For Vivid Anti-Abortion Ads
The Federal Communications Commission has ruled that anti-abortion political advertisements featuring a dead fetus are not "indecent" and are not subject to restrictions that would prevent them from being broadcast between 6 A.M. and 10 P.M.
The ruling, issued in a letter last Friday by the agency's mass-media bureau, is likely to clear the way for other graphic anti-abortion television advertisements at a time when abortion is a major political issue.


Sports of The Times; Baseball's Strange Bedfellows
LET'S try to understand this.
The Chicago Cubs, owned by the Tribune Company, are in the forefront of a crusade to get Fay Vincent.
One of the major reasons a group of owners wants to get Vincent is that baseball has serious economic problems, which he hasn't solved and won't let them solve by trying to bust the union.
But the Tribune Company, which happens to have a history of taking severe positions against unions, is also the outfit that allowed the Cubs to make Ryne Sandberg the highest-paid player in baseball history.
Leapfrogging over the $6 million plateau -- Bobby Bonilla had reached $5.8 million -- the Cubs signed Sandberg last March to a contract extension, effective in 1993, that will average $7.1 million a year.


Ferraro and Foes Begin Vying for the Viewer Vote
After months of quiet campaigning and a week of bitter exchanges over personal integrity, the race for the Democratic Senate nomination from New York has at last moved squarely onto the real battleground: your television set.
With character fast becoming a central campaign issue, candidates have begun spending hundreds of thousands of dollars on ads to show themselves as they would have voters see them, and to take their rivals down a peg -- all in a three-week push to position themselves not only against one another but also against the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato.
A Caustic Ad
Yesterday, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman, trailing badly in the polls, released a blistering 30-second commercial that is to begin appearing today, attacking the front-runner, former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro, for taking more than $300,000 in rent from a pornographer who was a tenant in a building owned by her husband and a partner.
Ms.
Holtzman says that would make a tempting target for Mr.
D'Amato.


Brewers Brag About Shortstop
Pat Listach has become a popular topic for Milwaukee Manager Phil Garner.
The rookie from Louisiana with the quick feet and smooth hands has become somewhat of a favorite son.
Five months ago in spring training, Garner dispatched the shortstop to a minor league camp with the standard "you need to play everyday" goodbye speech.
Today, he all but calls Listach the savior of the Milwaukee Brewers.


Militello (3-0) Dips Out of Danger and Delivers
Sam Militello kept dancing away from danger last night.
The Milwaukee Brewers had runners on in almost every inning, but the Yankee right-hander stranded them over and over.
One-step, two-step, throw a fastball or slider and waltz to the dugout.
That was Militello's approach.
The only thing spoiling his fancy footwork and fancy pitching was a quiet offense as the Yankees were held to one run by Bill Wegman through the first six innings.
So Militello continued dancing, leaving eight Brewers perched on the bases over seven innings and waiting for the bats to awake.


Deere Profit Falls 70.9%; Sales Weak
Deere &amp; Company said yesterday that its net income fell 70.9 percent, to $9.1 million, or 12 cents a share, in the third quarter.
Sales were down slightly, to $1.75 billion, as the nation's largest maker of farm equipment was buffeted by soft market conditions worldwide for its products.


For the Determined, the Search For a Rare Taste of Senegal
T was 1 P.M. on a Tuesday.
Robert Sietsema and Abdoulaye Kamara were lunching near Times Square in a two-room apartment, up two flights of stairs, known to devotees from the Bronx to Brooklyn as Bettye and Fatou's.
Bettye M'Baye and her mother, Fatou M'Baye, are recent immigrants from Senegal, and in their living room there, which also happened to be their tiny restaurant (it has since moved), they were proprietors, cooks, waitresses and dishwashers.
Then situated just a few steps from Restaurant Row, the block of West 46th Street between Eighth and Ninth avenues, Bettye and Fatou's had one four-burner stove, one table and six chairs, a mattress on the floor for extra seating, a color television set that was almost always on (tuned that day to Greek dancing) and a view of an air shaft.
Lunch was an astonishing $4 for all you could eat.


Oil Industry Is Battened Down
The oil industry braced for Hurricane Andrew today, completing evacuations of thousands of workers from the 3,700 drilling platforms in the Gulf of Mexico and scaling back or shutting down operations at dozens of gasoline refineries in Texas and Louisiana.
In financial markets, there was little worry that Hurricane Andrew would disrupt the nation's gasoline supplies.
After rising more than 2 cents in trading on Monday, unleaded gasoline for September delivery fell 0.60 cent today, to 62.13 cents a gallon.


Housing For Homeless By Union Sq. Is Approved
A proposal to build housing for the homeless on East 13th Street next to the Palladium nightclub, which has angered many Union Square residents, cleared what was expected to be its toughest hurdle yesterday when it was approved by a City Council subcommittee.
On the steps of City Hall before the vote, two dozen protesters from the neighborhood insisted that they had once supported the construction, proposed by Andrew Cuomo's organization HELP.
But the demonstrators, carrying signs that said, "We Want Answers from Andrew" and "Say No to Cuomo," said they felt they had been misled about the $13 million project, which will house 96 homeless and low-income families.
Originally, critics of the project said, they had been told that 70 percent of the building would be offered for rent or sale at market value.


CHRONICLE
JIMMY CONNORS had a 40th-birthday party yesterday, pushed a week or so ahead in order not to conflict with his playing at the United States Open in Flushing Meadows.
His birthday is Sept. 2, two days after the start of the Open next Monday..
Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS, also a tennis player, had an early birthday greeting: "Jimmy, life is like tennis: if you're still serving at 40, the game is almost yours. And that's not a backhanded compliment -- because nobody ever had a better backhand than you."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues: Military Record; Clinton Confronts Draft Record In a Frank Address to Veterans
Gov.
Bill Clinton asked the nation's veterans today not to vote against him in November because he did not serve in the military during the Vietnam War.
In an unusually frank discussion of an issue that has repeatedly troubled his candidacy, the Democratic Presidential nominee called on Americans who have been in uniform to "judge me fairly, because that's the American way."


So Many Chocolates, So Little Time
SOME chocolate lovers couldn't care less about the nuances.
As long as it's chocolate, anything goes.
But for professionals who cook and bake with chocolate, the fine points of flavor, aroma, sweetness and texture make all the difference.
With chocolate, as with other ingredients like seafood and flour, the products available to professional chefs come in many more varieties and levels of quality than those available to home cooks.


Pilots' Union Leaders Back Plan for T.W.A. Revamping
An agreement to restructure the ownership of struggling Trans World Airlines cleared another hurdle today when it was approved by leaders of the pilots' union.
Under the proposed agreement, the 2,800-member Air Line Pilots Association will exchange about $40 million a year in wage and benfit concessions over three years for partial ownership of the airline.


Lawmaker's Defense of B.C.C.I. Went Beyond Speech in Senate
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, the powerful Republican from Utah who is a member of the Judiciary Committee, worked behind the scenes on behalf of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International while at the same time pressing the bank to make a $10 million loan to a close business associate.
From documents and interviews with bank lawyers, a picture emerges of Mr.
Hatch and an aide as integral parts of the bank's efforts to escape Senate scrutiny and avoid bad publicity after the bank pleaded guilty in 1989 to Federal charges of illegal laundering of drug money.


More Shells Hit Sarajevo


Air Discount Is Criticized
The fare war among the airlines turned into a verbal exchange yesterday as American Airlines labeled Northwest Airlines' new discount coupon offer as "crazy." Northwest responded by describing American as "the Freddy Kruger" of the airline industry, a reference to the razor-fingered villain of the "Nightmare on Elm Street" films.
American, however, reluctantly agreed to accept the coupons rather than give a competitor a price advantage.


Brown Is Weight Watcher
Simon Brown said he never spent a day in the hospital until James (Buddy) McGirt put him there.
"Not even when I was born was I in a hospital," Brown said recently.
"I was born at home, not a hospital, in Clarendon, Jamaica."
But after McGirt defeated him to take his World Boxing Council welterweight title last November, Brown spent four days in a hospital in Las Vegas, Nev.


Europe's Envoy in Yugoslav Crisis Quits
Lord Carrington, the European Community envoy who for nearly a year tried and failed to negotiate peace in the Balkans, resigned today on the eve of an international conference on the region.
Talking to reporters after his resignation, Lord Carrington, a former Foreign Secretary in Britain, said this was a good moment to step aside because, "Things are going to change."


With Business Adrift, Marinas Cut Their Fees
It's been what Eliot Howell delicately terms a very quiet summer at Corrigan's Yacht Yard and Marine Sales on the Shinnecock Canal.
Slips have gone begging, even though rates are down about 20 percent.
Rain has washed out weekend after weekend.
Even on sunny days, fewer boats venture out, and often only for short trips.


Tunisian Trial of 300 Is Rife With Abuses
To the Editor:
"Tunisia Puts Nearly 300 Muslim Militants on Trial" (news article, Aug. 3) distorts the trial of 289 supporters of the banned An-Nahda (Renaissance Party) and overlooks international human rights violations that invalidate the proceedings.
Scores of soldiers, security officials and fundamentalists are not being killed every month in Tunisia, as you would have us believe.
The level of violence in the conflict between militant Islamic groups and the Government has, mercifully, not reached the levels to be found in Algeria and Egypt.
In lumping together these three diverse situations, you provide grist for the Tunisian Government's propaganda mill, which likes nothing better than to focus on the "Islamic threat" while disregarding its own widespread human rights abuse.


Mistrial Threat in Agent's Trial
The Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George, a former top official of the Central Intelligence Agency, moved close to a mistrial today as the jury reported for the second day that it was deadlocked.
Judge Royce C. Lamberth urged jurors to reconsider their feelings overnight and said that if they felt the same way after further deliberations on Wednesday morning he would declare a mistrial.


Tompkins Square Park Reopens Amid Tensions
In a test of the Dinkins administration's determination to keep homeless people from overwhelming public spaces, New York City reopened Tompkins Square Park on the Lower East Side yesterday, hoping that a new curfew and a $2.1 million renovation will return the park to the neighborhood.
But even as city officials tried to celebrate a new era for the 158-year-old park, the tensions that have long plagued it burst to the surface.


COMPANY NEWS
BERGEN BRUNSWIG CORP., Orange, Calif., a medical products wholesaler, formally raised its bid for Durr-Fillauer Medical Inc. to $33 a share, or about $470 million.
DOMINION TEXTILE INC., Montreal, a textile company, sold its Wayn-Tex Inc. carpet-backing unit in Waynesboro, Va., for about $60.5 million to management and Mancuso &amp; Co., a New York investment group.


Royal Dial-a-Scandal: Is It the Voice of 'Di'?
Like a soap opera spun out of control, the travails of Britain's royal family have taken another twist this week, centered on a taped telephone conversation that purports to record the Princess of Wales making an apparently illicit date with a man and calling her marriage to Prince Charles "torture."
Coming just days after the publication of pictures showing the Duchess of York topless and kissing a Texas businessman, the tapes were variously seen as an elaborate hoax, a cruel invasion of privacy or the most serious in a relentless series of public relations crises for the monarchy.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
Early morning.
Downtown E train.
Me: Suit.
Briefcase.
Chromosomal white hair.
Shoulder tapped.
She: Striking young woman cautiously asking directions.
Me: Picking up the sonorous song of her hesitant speech, ask, "Parla italiano?" She: Transformed, surprised at her native language coming from my smiling but decidedly Celtic face.
Jung.
Synchronicity.
She.
Me.
Exiting at the same station, West Fourth Street.
Me: "Come se chiama, Lei?" She: "My name is Grazia. I'm from Catania, Italy." What prescient parents to bestow a name of such poetic beauty.
Me: Shepherding her through Washington Square, reaching back to capture my once-facile command of Grazia's language, "Andiamo, Grazia." Dodging traffic.
She: Laughing.
We: Sharing stories of New York.
Astor Place.
Shaking hands, slowly.
Ciao.
Grazie, Grazia.
Grazie, New York. -- TOM MALVEY
The scene:
A Second Avenue bus heading south.
Dramatis personae:
Two middle-aged men, each absorbed in his newspaper.


AT DINNER WITH: Rob Morrow; He's No Peevish Dr. Fleischman, But He's at Home in Bagel Town
ROB MORROW was looking nothing like a petulant small-town doctor as he padded in to dinner in a baggy blue suit that could have been fairly cheap or very expensive: it was hard to tell. (Expensive, it turned out. "Issey Miyake," he confessed, abashed. "I'm a clothes horse and wish I wasn't, but I am.")
Mr.
Morrow seemed a bit smaller in person than he does on television, and his face was overwhelmed by a thicket of hair and a beard he had let grow between seasons of his show, "Northern Exposure." He is now in Seattle, shorn again, filming episodes for the show's third season, which begins on CBS next month.
He plays Joel Fleischman, a persnickety doctor from New York forced to begin his career in a backwater Alaskan town to repay the state of Alaska for sending him through Columbia medical school.


Marine Corps Chaplain Says Homosexuals Threaten Military
The chaplain of the Marine Corps has distributed to senior military officers a position paper that says homosexuals in the armed forces are a "physical and psychological" threat to other troops.
The six-page paper, which has won praise from the Marines' top general, staunchly defends the armed forces' ban on gay men and lesbians, arguing that repealing the prohibition would hurt recruiting, undermine morale and increase the number of AIDS cases in the military.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Gillette Damage Award Shakes Agencies
An apparently unprecedented ruling that an agency can be forced to pay damages in connection with false claims made in a client's advertising caught the agency involved off guard and sent lawyers scrambling to assess its potentially chilling effects.
"We were really surprised," Elizabeth Mason, president of Friedman Benjamin Inc., said in her first interview since the ruling on Friday by United States District Judge Kimba M. Wood in New York.


The Pop Life
New for Bobby Brown
Four years ago the singer Bobby Brown released his "Don't Be Cruel" (MCA) and changed the black-pop firmament, relegating older styles to the pop dustbin.
Mr.
Brown and two other acts, Keith Sweat and Guy (and their producers), came up with new jack swing, a style that mixes hip-hop rhythms and pastiche with soul singing and fervor.
Mr.
Brown not only sold six million copies of his album but also got himself arrested in Columbus, Ga., for lewdness during a performance.
Since then he has formed his own record label, fathered some children, lavishly married the singer Whitney Houston (who is pregnant) and toured.
But four years is a long time, and in pop terms Mr.
Brown, who had built an audience of both black and white teen-agers, has to start all over again with his new album, "Bobby" (MCA).
Second albums after huge successes have been wilting recently; just ask Hammer, Slaughter, Firehouse and Wilson Phillips.
At this point, is Mr.
Brown a player at all?


Cobbler Is a Computer (But Price May Still Pinch)
Foppery in footwear has never been fast.
Or cheap.
To make a pair of custom-fitted shoes, a skilled cobbler may take weeks or even months to carve a last, the wooden model of the foot upon which fine leather is formed and re-formed over several fittings.
And time is money.
A pair of hand-lasted pumps or oxfords can run $1,500 or more.
Now, Dimensional Measurement Systems Inc., a start-up company in East Rutherford, N.J., is developing a computer-aided way to measure feet for shoes.
The method could provide the luxury of patrician footwear at prices that are much lower -- though hardly pedestrian.
Such shoes would probably still sell for hundreds of dollars.


Wireless Phones: Different Visions
The race to create a network linking wireless pocket telephones and laptop computers anywhere on the globe has shaped up as a contest between a luxury plan and a host of bargain-basement approaches.
Five American companies with competing visions of the future have developed rival proposals for encircling the globe with relatively small satellites.
The spacecraft would act as relays within easy reach of battery-operated wireless telephones, paging devices and computers.


Democratic Leader May Face Challenge
Lawrence B. Seabrook, a State Assemblyman from the Bronx, said yesterday that he would seek to replace George Friedman, another Assemblyman, as the Bronx Democratic leader.
Mr.
Seabrook charged that Mr.
Friedman "fears the election of new black and Hispanic representation solely committed to their Bronx constituents and not the party apparatus." At a news conference on the steps of City Hall, Mr.
Seabrook, who is black, also contended that Mr.
Friedman, who is white and has headed the Bronx Democratic party since 1986, had "adroitly played a political game of pitting racial, religious and ethnic groups against each other in order to maintain power."


Paul Winter, 78, Dies; Violinist and Teacher
Paul Winter, a violinist and music teacher, died on Saturday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 78 years old and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Margaret.


Why School Must Require Community Service
To the Editor:
"True 'Service' Can't Be Coerced" (editorial, Aug. 2), on Maryland's new high school graduation requirement of 75 hours of student service, is disappointing.
Reasonable people can certainly disagree over the wisdom of such a requirement.
What is disappointing, however, are your reasons.
You ask what about students who hold outside jobs.
Students have from 6th through 12th grades to satisfy this requirement.
Thus, 10 hours a year, or less than one hour a month, would suffice.
This is hardly in conflict with after-school jobs, the hours of which are limited by law.


An Unneighborly Reception for Dinkins at Tompkins Square Park


Campus Journal; Think of the Brainy as Fuel-Efficient
Dr.
Richard Haier of the University of California at Irvine says he knows an intelligent brain when he sees one.
And what he sees, using a special scanner, is a lean, energy-efficient learning machine.
"What our studies are suggesting is that in the brain, less is more," Dr.
Haier said.
"That is, it's not how hard your brain works that is related to intelligence, but rather how efficiently it works."


Eating Well
THE story of food irradiation bears a striking resemblance to the story of silicone breast implants: proponents are ignoring the risks while promoting the benefits.
The crucial difference is that many scientists are trying to prevent approval of the irradiation process until its safety has been tested to everyone's satisfaction, instead of letting it go on the market first.
The public, always squeamish when words connected with radioactivity are used, is not rushing to embrace irradiated foods.
Last winter, a store in North Miami Beach, Fla., received widespread publicity when it put irradiated strawberries on the market, but it is not clear how well they sold.


Why School Must Require Community Service; Still Volunteering
To the Editor:
Re "True 'Service' Can't Be Coerced" (editorial, Aug. 2):
At the Dalton School in the 1950's we were required to perform community service to graduate.
Most of us did not greet joyfully this encroachment on our after-school free time.
I volunteered first in a Congressional campaign office, then at the Lighthouse for the Blind and finally at Mount Sinai Hospital.
I am still volunteering, now at White Plains Hospital, and have been performing some type of voluntary community service for most of my adult life.


Personal Health
ATTITUDES about Lyme disease, a bacterial infection spread by ticks, range from a fatalistic "If I get it, I get it" to near hysteria whenever a suspicious speck is found on one's body.
Some people fail to take the antibiotics their physicians prescribe for a suspected case of Lyme disease, while others demand such treatment even when doctors tell them it is not needed.
Meanwhile, physicians are often in a quandary about how to treat patients who say they have been bitten by ticks.
Knowing that antibiotics can prevent the onset of Lyme disease in the relatively few people who become infected, should they take no chances and prescribe antibiotics for each patient who reports a tick bite, thus risking many unnecessary bad reactions to the medication?
Should they insist on proof that it was a kind oftick that carries Lyme disease?
Should they rely on the results of often inaccurate diagnostic tests?
Or, knowing that antibiotics not only prevent Lyme disease but also cure it in its early stages, should they wait to see if classic symptoms develop before prescribing treatment?


Nassau Clerk Agrees to Timetable for Clearing Backlog
The Nassau County Clerk's office, showing the first signs of overcoming long delays in recording documents, signed a consent decree today with the County Bar Association pledging to bring its work up to date within three months.
The agreement promises to remedy backlogs in granting index numbers and entering court judgments that lawyers complained were hindering their work in Nassau County.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  NEW PEACE PROPOSALS BY ISRAEL  Israel gave Palestinian negotiators detailed proposals for limited Palestinian autonomy in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip as Middle East peace talks continued at the State Department.
A1  Israel tells Syria it will now talk about the Golan Heights.
A10


Down to the Basics: Hunting For Food, Water and Shelter
Amid mounting public impatience, widespread confusion and rising estimates of the hurricane damage inflicted on South Florida, the authorities are struggling to restore water, electricity and other basic services.
Throughout today hundreds of thousands of people ignored warnings to stay off the streets.
Instead they roamed metropolitan Miami in cars or on foot to search for ice, canned foods, gasoline, batteries and charcoal for barbecue grills, the only method of cooking that many people have.


Mogadishu Journal; Amid Somalia's Frenzy, Family Fights to Survive
When his younger sister was killed by a mortar shell and the family's house was destroyed, Omar Sabrie Abdulle faced the most agonizing moment he has known in the Somali civil war.
He tried, but failed, to dissuade his vengeful brother from joining the ragtag group of gun-toting teen-agers that passed for a unit in the family's clan army.


CHRONICLE
After 59 years in public service, new honors are coming to Dr.
ROBERT C. WEAVER, who was the first black American to attain Cabinet rank, as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development under President Lyndon B. Johnson.
Dr.
Weaver, who is 84, will be honored at a joint reception in Washington on Sept. 24 given by Community Service Society of New York and the Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service at New York University.
The school is naming a fellowship for him.
Dr.
Weaver, an economist and educator, served in New York City and State governments and in Washington for Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt and John F. Kennedy as well as President Johnson.
He also directed foreign assistance to the Soviet Union for the United Nations Relief and Re


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.35
5.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.16
3.14
5.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.25
3.24
5.43
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.26
6.23
7.69
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.47
7.44
8.12
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.47
8.44
9.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.36
6.99
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Jordan Worries About King, and About War
In Government offices and corner cafes, the talk in recent days has turned from the specter of renewed warfare in neighboring Iraq to medical bulletins from faraway Minnesota.
It is there that King Hussein, Jordan's 57-year-old monarch, is recuperating after surgeons at the Mayo Clinic removed his left kidney and ureter when cancerous tissue was discovered in the ureter.


A 6-4 Defeat Puts a Dent In Jersey's Sweet Dream
Playing its second game in 18 hours, Nottingham, the unheralded team from tiny Hamilton Square, N.J., approached the midnight hour of its Cinderella season today after losing, 6-4, in the second round of the Little League World Series.
Buoyed by a 5-0 opening-round victory in the first night game in World Series history here on Monday and boosted by a large contingent of kazoo-blowing and can-clattering fans from their town outside Trenton, the Nottingham team darted to a 4-1 lead after three innings against its opponents from Long Beach, Calif.


Market Place; Despite Woes in Real Estate, Wells Fargo Rebuilds Profits
Wells Fargo &amp; Company, one of the nation's most successful banking companies in the late 1980's, has hit a rocky patch.
Problems with bad real estate loans wiped out all but $21 million of its 1991 earnings, and earnings of $201 million in the first half of this year were below par by Wells Fargo's standards.
At midyear, Wells Fargo, based in San Francisco, held $13.6 billion of commercial real estate loans -- the most of any bank in the country -- with about 11.5 percent badly delinquent or so troubled that full repayment is not expected.


Police Kill Protester at Berkeley In Break-In at Chancellor's Home
A notorious local protester was shot and killed by the police today after breaking into the great stone mansion of Chancellor Chang-Lin Tien on the University of California campus here about 6 A.M. .
The intruder, 20-year-old Rosebud Abigail Denovo, was shot three times by an Oakland police officer after she attacked him with a machete, university officials said,


Automobiles That Aren't Just Cars
Just about anything that can be done to an automobile to turn it into a garish art object is on display in "Wild Wheels," Harrod Blank's witty cinematic survey of American car art.
Depending on one's tastes, one could come away with a yen to possess any of the more than 40 vehicles that are proudly paraded through the movie, which opened today at Film Forum 1.
Hippie nostalgists might covet either of the film's two psychedelic buses: Lisa Law's Silver, or the original converted school bus, nicknamed Further, that toted the writer Ken Kesey and his Merry Pranksters around in the 1960's.
Christian fundamentalists could choose between W. C. Rice's Cross Car (a pickup truck that carries a giant cross) and H. L. Gandy's Jesus Truck (a pickup truck covered with pictures of Jesus).
Equestrians should be drawn to Ron Snow's Coltmobile, a Buick Skylark studded with miniature horses.


Israel Tells Arabs It Accepts U.N.'s Land-for-Peace Plan
For the first time in the Middle East peace negotiations, Israel has told Syria that United Nations land-for-peace resolutions apply to the Golan Heights, captured from the Syrians in the 1967 war and later annexed by Israel as its own.
But Israeli officials emphasized today that their willingness to discuss some territorial concessions did not mean that they were prepared to hand back the strategic heights, which they consider vital for their security, or to end Israel's presence there.


Franco Hopes to Stay, But the Trade Rumors Begin to Warm Up
The thought of being traded, said John Franco, has crossed the mind of every member of the Mets in 1992.
It is what happens when a club with a $44 million payroll goes bankrupt of hope in August.
And for Franco, the idea did more than cross his mind.
It stayed put for a while, forcing the high-quality closer to wonder if the intersection of organizational finances and strategy might result in his departure.


Allen and Farrow Meet With Judge in Chambers
In the eye of an extraordinary media storm, Woody Allen and Mia Farrow and their lawyers met last night for three hours in the chambers of the judge who is hearing their child-custody case, seeking an end to the virulent family squabble that has opened their private lives to the public.
The meeting in lower Manhattan was called by Judge Phyllis B. Gangel-Jacob, lawyers for Mr.
Allen said, in an apparent attempt to resolve the escalating dispute before it comes to court.
It followed an afternoon hearing at which lawyers for the two sides traded arguments -- and barbs -- regarding Mr.
Allen's request for the right to visit his three children before the case is decided.


Granger Is Back Pitching for Texas A&amp;M as No. 1 Quarterback
Jeff Granger had made his decision.
He knew that baseball would always be his first love.
He knew that his potential as a pitcher for Texas A&amp;M, and beyond, exceeded the possibilities the quarterback position would hold.
He knew the risk of a football injury was too great.
So nearly eight months ago, after the Cotton Bowl, Granger decided to leave.
He would concentrate on baseball, try out for the Olympic team, and see what happened.


A Sort of 'Super Serb' Defends Serbian Policy
For nearly all his life, Mihailo Markovic has been an outsider, working in the underground in World War II and losing his university position for criticizing the long Communist rule of Marshall Tito.
Today, 69 years old, he is a rebel of another kind -- fighting to persuade a skeptical world that his native Serbia is not the instigator of the current Balkan war, but one of its victims.


Corrections
An article and headline yesterday about the killing of a college athlete on Long Island misstated details of a court appearance by a man who is accused of the killing.
The suspect, Maximo Suriel, did not enter a plea at his arraignment on a charge of second-degree murder.


France Frets as Support for Europe's Union Fades
While the rest of the European Community awaits France's response with growing nervousness, three polls released today suggest that French voters are divided almost equally over whether to endorse a closer European union in a referendum on Sept. 20.
No less alarming to the Government, which supports closer union, the polls confirmed the continuing erosion of voter support.
The referendum seeks approval of the treaty signed in December in Maastricht, the Netherlands, that commits the community to build common foreign and security policies and to create a single currency by 1999.


Major Leagues May Find Their Credit in Jeopardy
A $260 million line of credit granted to major league baseball by 12 major banks in May could be in jeopardy because of the paralysis banks fear may grow out of the internecine warfare being waged between some major league owners and Commissioner Fay Vincent.
According to the loan agreement, which included $100 million from Citibank N.A. and $40 million from Chemical Bank, the deal can be called into question if certain material adverse conditions occur.
A baseball executive, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said included in those conditions are changes in the commissioner's authority over the central fund and the commissioner's role in television contract negotiations.


Payments Are Played Down
Three Michigan basketball players entered a gray area when they accepted money to attend a charity basketball tournament, university and National Collegiate Athletic Association officials said.
But coaches don't believe they broke any rules.
"I gave them the O.K. to do it," Coach STEVE FISHER told The Detroit Free Press.


Review/Pop; Jimmy Cliff Struts His Reggae As He Plays to the Balconies
International recognition and worldwide touring have transformed Jimmy Cliff, who headlined a quadruple bill of Jamaican and African reggae at the Ritz on Tuesday night.
He is no longer the slight, sweet-voiced young man who played a gun-toting rebel in "The Harder They Come" in 1972.
Instead, he has become an odd mixture of elder statesman and self-conscious third-world pop star.
In Jamaica, Mr.
Cliff's style of reggae has been nearly supplanted by the chants and speed-tongued rhymes of dancehall, Jamaica's answer to hip-hop.
But he has a worldwide audience now, and for it Mr.
Cliff has concocted what might be called arena reggae, often meshing reggae with styles from Brazil, Africa and the United States.
His new songs incorporate bits of rap, rock, dancehall and samba.
His band included Lazzo, from Bahia, Brazil, which sang one of his own songs ("Me Abraca e Me Beija") and added booming samba drums to the arrangements.


COMPANY NEWS
BETHLEHEM STEEL CORP., Bethlehem, Pa., agreed to sell part of its Steelton, Pa., track fabrications operations to Conley Frog and Switch Co., Memphis.
BRI HOLDING CORP., New York, an international retail insurance concern, and Underwriters Insurance Group, an Irish insurance concern and financial company, announced an agreement with Chippewa Resources Corp. to acquire a controlling interest in Chippewa.


Balkans Session Is Long on Talk, Short on Action
An international conference on the crisis in the former Yugoslav republics opened here today to rousing condemnation of the Serbs from nearly two dozen nations, but virtually no calls for action beyond tightening economic sanctions and sending observers.
Only the Foreign Ministers of Turkey, speaking for the Islamic Conference, and of besieged Bosnia and Herzegovina, suggested that the use of force might be the only effective response.


As Ukraine Loses Jews, the Jews Lose a Tradition
Even as official and public attitudes toward Jews are improving in Ukraine, a long and sometimes poignant Jewish cultural history is beginning to disappear, Jewish leaders say.
The culprit is not discrimination so much as freedom: the right of Jews to emigrate, which is leaving behind an older, assimilated community.


Bonds Rally as Dollar Stabilizes
The bond market put together a decent rally yesterday after the dollar stabilized, a key economic barometer confirmed that the economy was barely growing and the Treasury's five-year note auction went fairly well.
The rise in prices and drop in yields was across the board, from three-month bills to the 30-year bond.
The move started slowly in the morning, gained as the report on durable goods was released and then moved on as it seemed clear that the dollar would hold its own for a day.


Ayer and C. B. Fleet End Relationship
Ayer Inc. and the C. B. Fleet Company mutually ended their relationship on the Summer's Eve line of feminine products, the agency said yesterday, citing "a difference of opinion on both strategic and creative direction."
The account came to Ayer in 1986 via a merger with Cunningham &amp; Walsh, which had handled it since 1973.
According to figures from Leading National Advertisers in New York, which tracks ad spending, Fleet spent almost $10 million last year on the Summer's Eve line.


U.S. Aide Who Quit Calls Yugoslav Policy Ineffective
The State Department official who managed the United States' day-to-day policy toward the Balkans said today that he resigned in protest over what he called the Bush Administration's "ineffective" and "counterproductive" response to the fighting in the former Yugoslavia.
"What's going on in Bosnia is genocide, and the U.S. had a moral obligation to stop it," the former official, George D. Kenney, said in a telephone interview.
"The Administration is not dealing seriously with the Yugoslav crisis. The things we've tried up to now haven't worked and we need to try some different approaches."


Suppliers Shipping Extra Goods to Storm Areas
Retailers and building-supply companies today scrambled to meet surging demand for their goods after Hurricane Andrew battered South Florida and the Louisiana coast.
Some economists predicted that a rebuilding boom in those areas could last as much as a year, giving a modest spurt to employment and personal incomes once billions of dollars from private insurers and the Federal Government begin arriving.


U.S. AND ALLIES SAY FLIGHT BAN IN IRAQ WILL START TODAY
The United States and its allies demanded today that Iraq cease all aircraft flights over southern Iraq within 24 hours, saying the ban was required to prevent Iraqi armed repression of the region's large and dissident Shiite Muslim population.
President Bush, who announced the move in Washington, warned that the United States, Britain, France and other coalition members would "respond decisively" if Iraq ignored the order, and Administration officials later said allied planes would shoot down any military aircraft, including helicopters, that they detect aloft south of the 32d parallel.


Sandblasting Is Halted On Williamsburg Bridge
After suspending maintenance on the Williamsburg Bridge amid complaints that sandblasting was spewing dust and paint chips with elevated levels of lead into Brooklyn, New York City's Transportation Department allowed the work to resume this month -- on the Manhattan side of the bridge.
A spokesman for the Transportation Department said a painting crew began work on a section of the bridge above East River Park in Manhattan on Aug. 15.
He said that the department had notified residents and other city agencies and taken precautions to insure that dust and chips tainted with lead did not escape into the air.


Injured Connors Drops Out of Hamlet
The command performance that will probably be Jimmy Connors's last United States Open performance was left in jeopardy tonight after the player's abrupt withdrawal from the Hamlet Cup because of a thigh injury.
"I've not withdrawn from the Open," Connors said tonight after receiving three hours of treatment at the Manhasset office of his longtime physician, Dr.
Gary Wadler.
"This is totally what I don't stand for. I try to play any time, no matter how I'm feeling. But I don't want to destroy my health. I don't heal as well as I used to."


Critic's Notebook; Has Mostly Mozart Festival Worn Out Its Welcome?
The Mostly Mozart Festival came to the end of its 26th year last Saturday, and by now Lincoln Center's programming department is undoubtedly penciling in works and performers for next summer.
But before the programmers write their schedule in ink, they should ask themselves one question: What's the point?
The question is not rhetorical.
When Lincoln Center started Mostly Mozart in 1966 (originally as Midsummer Serenades), it was a great idea for a handful of reasons.
At a time when it was not clear that there was an audience for summer concerts, Mostly Mozart proved that there was, and also made a pitch for young listeners who were not committed to classical music.
The lures were informality and affordability: Tickets were $3 for any seat in the house that first year, $2 if you bought a book of 10, prices comparable at that time to the cost of a movie or an LP.
And there was a come-as-you-are atmosphere in the early years that gave the series a lively spirit.


The Last of Frankfurt-on-the-Hudson; A Staunch, Aging Few Stay On as Their World Evaporates
After the light knock, Bella Goldschmidt opened her apartment door cautiously to an elderly man with a kind, round face and bewildered eyes.
"I wanted to see Julie," the man said softly, the words almost buried by his German accent.


Corrections
An editorial on Monday incorrectly reported the number of public housing residents in New York City.
Approximately 600,000 people live in 179,000 Housing Authority apartments.


Tips on B.C.C.I. Flowed Freely for Years
For more than 10 years, Federal agencies received hundreds of tips that the Bank of Credit and Commerce International was spending billions of dollars to finance a broad range of illegal international activities, from fomenting political unrest in Pakistan to smuggling arms to Syria, Iran and Libya, a Congressional analysis shows.
Government agencies are also said to have had leads that the Arab bank, which had a strong presence in the United States, moved money to Middle Eastern terrorist groups, and was a valuable tool for organized crime in the United States and Italy.


Books of The Times; Abstract Expressionists Get an Admiring Look
The Turning Point The Abstract Expressionists and the Transformation of American Art  By April Kingsley  414 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.


Saving Few Dollars Doesn't Make Sense
Just when the Yankees are learning that their minor league system is capable of producing players talented enough to play in the major leagues, they are cutting back on the operation that has led to that discovery.
Just when rookies like Sam Militello, Andy Stankiewicz and Bob Wickman have provided a fresh look for a stale old team, the Yankees have decided not to have a team in the fall instructional league this year.
This was an economic decision, one that should save them about $125,000, maybe a few thousand more.
That sum will go a long way this winter toward signing Barry Bonds or Ruben Sierra or Greg Maddux or David Cone.


Review/Theater; Tolstoy, Revised and Musicalized
Every unhappy musical is unhappy in its own way, but no musical is more unfortunate than "Anna Karenina," the travesty of Tolstoy's novel that opened last night at Circle in the Square Theater.
This show, the handiwork of Peter Kellogg and Daniel Levine, represents a series of misperceptions and errors in judgment, all of which are compounded in Theodore Mann's production.
The novel is, of course, one of the greatest of tragic love stories and also the most lucid presentation of Tolstoy's ideas on morality and the future of his society.
The least to be expected from an adaptation would be for it to capture the passion of Anna, who abandons her marriage and her code of ethics for the sake of her romance with Count Vronsky.
The musical "Anna Karenina" reduces the story to the proportions of a historical romance: Barbara Cartland meets Leo Tolstoy, and the band plays on.


Legal Sabers Rattle Over N.H.L. TV Plan
In a few days, the National Hockey League is expected to announce a five-year, $80 million TV deal with ESPN and ABC that will bring a game of the week and playoff contests to ESPN and a smattering of games to ABC.
For Gil Stein, the league's acting president, it is a coup: At $16 million a year, he can present to his owners TV money nearly three times the $5.5 million SportsChannel America paid in 1991-92.


Essay; God Bless Us
Remember when politicians concluded their speeches with "Thank you and good night"?
Gone are those secular days.
At the Republican Convention, Pat Buchanan ended with "God bless you, and God bless America." Ronald Reagan followed with greater specificity: "God bless each and every one of you, and God bless this country we love."


Historic Place For Paper Clips
REMEMBER Old Pennsylvania Station?
Well, Harold Gilstein has rebuilt the 1910 landmark, which was demolished in 1963.
The catch is that his is only six inches high.
Instead of trains, it houses things like jewelry, paper clips and coins.
"It's always been one of my favorite buildings," said Mr.
Gilstein, who makes architectural boxes, mantelpieces, ornaments and shadow boxes with his partner at Hut Studios, Richard Hopper.


Topics of The Times; Got It
Applied to oneself, the phrase "I don't get it" admits ignorance and risks ridicule.
Applied to others, the phrase is fast degenerating into the simplistic slur of the year.
There was consistency and logic in the way it was used last fall in the Clarence Thomas confirmation drama.
"They" -- as in "they don't get it" -- referred plainly to callous males and "it" to sexual harassment.
That context and anger then faded but the usage spread.
"They" were whites who didn't understand blacks; "they" were the people who say America can't afford to explore space.
And then, at the Republican Convention, "they" became the opposition.


Harper's Bazaar's First Man Into Space
ALEXEY BRODOVITCH, the legendary art director of Harper's Bazaar from 1934 to 1958, was "our first man in white space," said Frank Zachary, former editor in chief of Town &amp; Country.
"He added the element of white space to the two dominating elements of the magazine page, which heretofore were pictures and text," said Mr.
Zachary, who will discuss their collaboration on the defunct design magazine Portfolio as part of a retrospective on Mr.
Brodovitch, who died in 1971.


How to Help the Storm Victims
Following is a list of organizations seeking donations for the hurricane relief effort:
The American Red Cross Checks may be sent to American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 9140, Church Street Station, New York, N.Y. 10256.
For credit-card donations, call (800) 842-2200 or, for Spanish speakers, (800) 257-7575.
Church World Service Checks may be sent to Church World Service, P.O.
Box 968, Elkhart, Ind. 46515.


Benson &amp; Hedges Shrinks In a Bid to Regain Growth
PHILIP MORRIS U.S.A. is seeking to reverse the flagging fortunes of Benson &amp; Hedges, its second-largest-selling cigarette behind Marlboro, with an ambitious, even audacious, effort to switch smokers to a shorter version of the 100-millimeter brand.
The company is introducing Benson &amp; Hedges Special Kings, a cigarette that like about 75 percent of those sold in America, will come in the standard 85-millimeter length.
An extensive and expensive advertising and promotion campaign is about to begin in New York and will then proceed nationwide.


CHRONICLE
ESTEE LAUDER, the cosmetics empire founder, picked up another Neiman-Marcus award yesterday for distinguished service in the field of fashion.
Her first was in 1962.
She is the only recipient to be honored twice.
Neiman-Marcus Company executives flew from Dallas to New York for the presentation of a bronze sculpture at a luncheon at Le Cirque.


Bridge
It was a Black Wednesday for the American teams in the World Bridge Federation's Team Olympiad here today.
The open team lost two matches, 6-24 to New Zealand and 14-16 to Pakistan, falling from 1st to 4th in qualifying Group B.
The standings with 11 rounds of play completed were: first, Netherlands, 220 victory points; second, Sweden and Iceland, 206; fourth, United States, 204; fifth, Norway, 202.
In Group A the leaders were: first, Israel, 211; second, Belgium, 209; third, Austria, 206; fourth, Denmark, 204; fifth, Hong Kong, 197.


4 Die as Police Battle Gunmen in West Bank
The commanding officer of an Israeli undercover unit, two Palestinian gunmen and an Arab woman were killed early today in an hourlong battle in the northern West Bank town of Jenin.
The firefight, in which the woman's two daughters and a neighbor were wounded, was one of the most serious armed clashes between Palestinian militants and Israeli soldiers in the four-and-a-half-year uprising in the occupied territories.


Robbery Ends in Shooting
Three men were wounded, one of them critically, as they tried to rob a man on a Brooklyn street at gunpoint last night and he surprised them by firing a gun at them, the police said.
A stray bullet fired during the shooting also grazed an off-duty police officer who lives in the neighborhood and who was sitting nearby.
The unidentified gunman fled the scene of the 9:10 P.M. shooting outside a bodgeda at Willoughby Street and Nostrand Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant, said Sgt.
Paul Caltabiano of the 79th Precinct.
One of the men, who had been shot in the back, was in critical condition at Kings County Hospital.
The sergeant said he would be arrested and charged with criminal possession of a weapon.


Howard Earns Respect With 2-Year Pact Worth $1.9 Million
Erik Howard wanted the respect that a million-dollar-a-year contract means to a nose tackle.
That is why, he said, he had refused the Giants' offers until today, when he signed just below that lofty plateau, a two-year deal worth $1.9 million.


Switching Drugs Is Found to Help in AIDS Cases
Patients who take a commonly prescribed drug to battle the virus that causes AIDS could benefit significantly by switching after several months to another medication called didanosine, a large clinical trial has found.
The results suggest that people in the early stages of infection with the human immunodeficiency virus should not remain indefinitely on the most widely used drug, zidovudine, or AZT, but instead should be placed on low doses of didanosine, or DDI, after about 16 weeks of AZT treatment.


King Hussein, on TV, Says He Will Need Weeks of Rest
King Hussein of Jordan appeared on television today for the first time since American doctors removed his left kidney and said he would need several weeks to recover from the operation.
"The results are very good and reassuring, thank God," the 57-year-old King, smiling but visibly tired, said in an interview.


Mets' Hillman On Fast Track
He sprints to the mound.
He works fast.
He wins games with efficiency.
And so with all that speed and all those strikes, Eric Hillman has for the moment outrun and outmaneuvered all that is depressing about the 1992 Mets.
Hillman, the left-hander who has got a chance with the Mets because there are no more bad gambles in an already shot season, today overwhelmed the Giants.
And he did it in a hurry, force-feeding San Francisco an unending, unbroken supply of strikes that produced a harmless array of groundballs.
The final score was 5-3, and the current record for Hillman, who came within two outs of a complete game, is 2-0.


What Will Crawl Out of B.C.C.I. Rocks?
To the Editor:
"B.C.C.I.'s Remorseless Web" (editorial, July 30) fails to cover the complete Bank of Credit and Commerce International spectrum, a fault common in news media reports.
Yes, B.C.C.I. was founded by expatriate Pakistanis, most of whom were already experienced bankers operating out of the United Arab Emirates.
However only 51 percent of the initial capital came from the Middle East.
Bank of America was the founding joint venture partner.
Despite this bank's strong support, many international financial institutions declined to make loans or place funds with B.C.C.I. because of doubts on the soundness of B.C.C.I.'s deposit base.


Market Place; Retailer's Stock In a Fast Start
WHEN an institutional investor in Goody's Family Clothing Inc. called Robert Goodfriend, the chief executive, at his office on two consecutive evenings at 6 o'clock and found the 42-year-old executive not in, he got worried.
After Goody's, which owns 116 stores throughout the South that sell moderate-priced clothing, went public in October, Mr.
Goodfriend was $30 million richer, and the investor worried that he was already living the good life.


Ex-Im Bank Guarantees
The Export-Import Bank of the United States, a Federal agency, plans to announce today that it will provide loan guarantees for $102 million of American exports to Russia, two people involved in preparing the announcement said.
The bank will guarantee payment for contracts signed by six American companies.
The contracts represents the first time the Ex-Im Bank has guaranteed exports to Russia.


Supplies Flow In for Stricken Areas, But Delivery Is Slowed by Wreckage
Relief supplies and emergency service personnel began to pour into this hard-pressed city today, but government officials said efforts to deliver food, water and medicine to the areas most affected by Hurricane Andrew were being slowed by organizational problems, blocked roads and downed power lines.
They also asserted that their early estimates of the number of people left homeless by the storm had been far too low and that the true number might be a quarter of a million.


Japan Faces Problem In Ailing 'Nonbanks'
A year ago, in a little-noticed report, the Bank of Japan described how Japanese banks were lending tens of billions of dollars to mortgage, finance and leasing companies, but paying little attention to whether these companies were observing normal precautions in lending the money to their own clients.
In hindsight, that obscure paper was prophetic: These specialized lending companies -- often called "nonbank banks," or just "nonbanks" -- had been pouring huge sums into ill-considered real estate loans just before property prices began to plunge.


Tennis Rallies Round Ashe
Already united by next week's United States Open, the 356 players scheduled to contest the year's final Grand Slam are taking another step toward unity unprecedented in their sport or any other: inspired by former tennis great Arthur Ashe's battle with AIDS, the athletes who share Ashe's profession have joined his fight against the disease.
On Sunday nine top-ranked stars, including the world's premier players, Jim Courier and Monica Seles, will appear in an exhibition to benefit Ashe's new Foundation for the Defeat of AIDS.
That will begin a 15-month campaign that is expected to raise $5 million.


Cholesterol Study Puts Spotlight on Alcohol
To the Editor:
As a physician who has treated many patients for alcoholism and alcohol abuse, I commend you for "Cholesterol: Still a Villain" (editorial, Aug. 12), reviewing the findings that very low serum cholesterol levels, like high ones, have a dark side.
You astutely make the connection that alcohol abuse may be involved in producing low cholesterol.
Those of us who deal with alcoholic patients every day are familiar with the fact that a large number of these patients are "far more likely to commit suicide or homicide, or to die from strokes, certain cancers, liver and lung disease," along with having low cholesterol levels.
It would be interesting to ask the authors of the study what the average daily consumption of alcohol was among those who participated.


Review/Theater; He Made His Two Beds; Now, Where Should He Sleep?
The big question in "The Elephant's Tricycle," a new play by Elizabeth Cashour, is: Will Kate hang onto P. H. after a 10-year affair with him, or lose him to his new boyfriend, Angel, who is in the button business on Seventh Avenue when he is not pursuing P. H.?
If that were the whole plot, the play might well be a post-modern romp of the kind the National Endowment for the Arts would probably not want to underwrite.
But Ms.
Cashour is in a whimsical, experimental mood; her title comes from a murky Sanskrit tale told by Kate (a puppeteer when she's not pursuing P. H.) as she dons an elephant mask that makes her look like the Hindu god Ganesh in the Peter Brook "Mahabharata" and rides a tricycle around her room.
That little visual joke is apt; "The Elephant's Tricycle" is almost as disorderly as the vast Sanskrit epic, if not quite as episodic.


Sports of The Times; A Courtroom Dress Rehearsal
NO matter who one thinks is the good guy or the bad guy, the odds-on winner or the sure-to-be loser in the great baseball battle of 1992, one thing is certain.
What is at once the mythological and real position of commissioner of major league baseball is bound to be exposed, exploded or empowered by the time the final shots have been fired.
There will be no escaping the inevitable change if a number of major league owners and Fay Vincent, the commissioner they are now bound and determined to relieve of duties, remain on their present collision course.


Review/Film; A Hunt for the Rio Hustler Who Gave a Steward AIDS
Jochen Hick's "Via Appia," the German movie that opened yesterday at the Eighth Street Playhouse, is a fiction film in the form of a documentary, supposedly being the record of one man's search for the Rio de Janeiro hustler who gave him AIDS.
It is melancholy and dour and not always easy to follow.
It is also uncompromising in the way it refuses to moralize about the obsessions of its doomed protagonist.
He is Frank (Peter Senner), a former Lufthansa steward who goes back to Rio from Germany with a film crew to look for Mario (Luiz Kleber), a young man with whom he had a one-night stand.
Before Mario departed the morning after, he left a message scrawled in soap on the bathroom mirror: "Welcome to the AIDS Club."


Franco May Be Done for '92
John Franco has experienced a flare-up of the trouble in his left elbow that sidelined him for a month earlier this season and could be finished for 1992.
"That's a possibility," said Manager Jeff Torborg of the Mets.
Franco, who had said after pitching late Monday night that his elbow felt fine, said the trouble struck near the end of his appearance against the Giants here Tuesday night.


Rabin Finds It Hard to Calm Fears About Iraq
Although their Prime Minister has told them not to worry, Israelis wrestled today with the possibility that they will once again become targets of Iraqi Scud missiles if the United States and its allies take military action against Iraq.
This time, Israeli officials and military experts say, they are likely to retaliate if attacked and not sit on their hands, as they did last year at the urging of the Bush Administration.
Thirty-nine Scuds fell on Israel during the gulf war.
While the level of concern today was generally low after President Bush announced that allied warplanes would ban Iraqi planes from southern Iraq, some Israelis checked their gas masks just to make sure they were working.
Many are not, and the Government has long-announced plans to repair and replace defective masks.
This is a sensitive subject in a country whose people spent many nights huddled in special "sealed rooms" -- unnecessarily, as it turned out -- out of fear the Scuds were armed with chemical warheads.
And today officials confirmed that American and Israeli forces had conducted a joint test last week of United States Patriot missiles, brought in last year to knock out the Scuds, even though military specialists here question how effective the system was.
The Cabinet discussed the situation in Iraq earlier this week, and afterwards Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said the military believed the risk to Israel was "much less than in the gulf war." In a further attempt to reassure the public, Housing Minister Binyamin Ben-Eliezer, a former army general, said Israel had to "take a few steps of caution" against a possible missile attack, "but nothing beyond that, since the probability is very, very low."
That did not comfort as many people as he had hoped, however, for newspaper commentators recalled that the words "low probability" were used by Israeli generals in 1973 to describe the likelihood of an Arab attack.
Soon after, Israel found itself swept up in what is often called the Yom Kippur War.
Among those urging the country to brace for the worst was Moshe Arens, who was Defense Minister until mid-July and who wrote on Tuesday in the newspaper Yediot Aharonot that Israel should assume that the Iraq leader, Saddam Hussein, still had a stockpile of Scud missiles and launchers.
He fired at Israel last year, Mr.
Arens said, and "it is not out of the question that he will do so again."
Mr.
Arens and others note that Israel is not bound, as it was last year, to help Washington keep intact a delicate coalition of Arab countries that might have fallen apart had Israeli planes attacked an Arab state.
Besides, even if the United States were to oppose a reprisal raid, Israel may not care.
The decision to do nothing in 1991, while supported by the public at the time, has since been criticized by many military officers, who feel it weakened Israel's deterrence against aggression by violating what had been a cardinal rule here: If hit, Israel punches right back, and hard.


Pakistan Pleads for Cease-Fire in Afghanistan
Pakistan appealed today for a 72-hour cease-fire in the capital of Afghanistan, where fighting between a renegade fundamentalist faction and the new Muslim Government has killed more than 1,800 people in recent weeks.
Hundreds of people streamed out of Kabul today during a lull in the bombardments.
Exchanges of artillery and rocket fire have reduced the capital to a rubble-strewn ghost town.


'Western' Is 2-5 For Cane Pace
Western Hanover, with eight victories and only one finish out of the money in 13 starts this season, was made the 2-5 favorite at yesterday's post-position draw for Saturday's Cane Pace at Yonkers Raceway, the first leg of the triple crown for pacers.
Western Hanover has a marvelous chance to become the first pacer to win the triple crown since Ralph Hanover in 1983.
The other legs are the Messenger Stakes, Sept. 12 at Rosecroft Raceway in Oxon Hill, Md., and the Little Brown Jug, Sept. 24 at Delaware, Ohio.


Protectors and Victims Both: Police Officers Lose Homes
Before dawn Monday as a hurricane howled around her, Sgt.
Kathy Sours of the Coral Gables police department lifted the dining room wall that had fallen onto her husband, Randy, dragged him into the bathroom, prayed, and wondered how their two young children, gone on vacation, would live without them.
Tuesday night, staying with a fellow detective, Kathy Williams, Sergeant Sours spent the long hours till dawn brandishing her gun at looters who terrorized elderly neighbors and tried to break into what was left of Ms.
Williams's house.


Con Ed Is Offering $150 Million Debt
The Consolidated Edison Company of New York is offering $150 million of debentures through two sales equally divided into seven-year and 13-year maturities.
Underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs priced $75 million of 6.5 percent debentures due 1999 at 99.391 to yield 6.61 percent, or about 34 basis points more than a seven-year Treasury note.
Noncallable by the utility, the debentures are rated Aa-2 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P.


TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Disaster Relief
As the final weekend of the exhibition season gets under way tonight, the National Football League's preseason schedulers were beginning to look like soothsayers.
How else to explain the selection of teams to play on neutral territory in Baltimore tonight?
They are, of course, the Miami Dolphins and the New Orleans Saints, the N.F.L. teams most affected by the hurricane that swept through southern Florida and Louisiana this week, disrupting the lives of millions of their local fans.


Los Angeles Museum Names Director
Michael Shapiro, the chief curator of the St.
Louis Art Museum, has been named director of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
Mr.
Shapiro, who is 42 years old, will become the fourth director in the museum's 27-year history.
He succeeds Earl A. Powell 3d, who was named director of the National Gallery of Art in Washington in April.
The selection of Mr.
Shapiro, who is to assume his new post in October, was expected.
Two weeks ago he emerged as the frontrunner among candidates said to have included Robert A. Buck, director of the Brooklyn Museum of Art; Peter C. Marzio, director of the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston, and Richard R. Bretell, director of the Dallas Museum of Art.
But the choice was still somewhat unusual, if only because Mr.
Shapiro has never held an administrative post.


United Way President


Durables Orders Fell 3.4% in July
Orders for cars, aircraft, industrial equipment and other durable goods suffered the year's sharpest decline last month, the Commerce Department reported yesterday.
The report removed any lingering hope among economists that the economy could grow fast enough to reduce unemployment by the end of the year.


If the Armoire Needs a Nip and a Tuck
IT'S easy to find the perfect carved wood armoire at an antiques shop or flea market.
And it's a pleasure to know that there's an ideal place for it in the dining room or the den.
But getting it past the front door can be another matter.
"The average doorway in New York is seven feet high," said Mario DiRe, a cabinetmaker for more than 30 years.
Furniture wider than 48 inches and deeper than 24 inches should be built to come apart in sections, he added.


Open Tests Electronic 'Eyes'
Another innovation if afoot, and underfoot, at this year's United States.
The United States Tennis Association confirmed yesterday that it would conduct tests of the TEL systems, an electronic line-calling device, on four courts during the Open, making this the first Grand Slam to test an automated system during actual competition.
Comparisons with calls made by lines officials will not be made.
TEL operates similarly to a metal detector: cables buried beneath each line monitor the bounce of specially designed tennis balls that contain a magnetic powder detectable by the cable sensors.
Wilson, which produces the official ball of the Open, has designed a ball compatible with the system.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:


Tough Times Are Changing French Wine Industry
Almost as powerful as the love of the vine in Burgundy is the rivalry with, and mistrust of, France's other great wine region, Bordeaux.
So when a large delegation of Bordeaux chateau owners was recently greeted here in the heart of Burgundy wine country for the first time, it indicated that a fundamental shift had taken place in the French wine business.
"Before this visit, we had been much closer to New York than to Bordeaux," said Bertrand DeVillard, the director of Antonin Rodet, a producer and distributor of Burgundy wines.
"But now that times are tough, we have to start learning things from each other. When a threat exists, unity is sacred."


Doubts on Europe's Pact Interrupt Business Plans
Growing doubts that the economic-unification treaty will be approved in its present form roiled financial markets in Europe again today.
The increasing concerns about the treaty negotiated last year at the Dutch town of Maastricht also left businesses uncertain about how to plan for the future.
The erosion in public support for the plan added to already heightened fears in the markets that interest rates would have to rise in Britain, Italy and perhaps France.
The Bank of England intervened in foreign currency markets today for the first time since the value of the German mark began surging last week.


Connecticut Prices Special Tax Issue
Connecticut has tentatively priced $275 million of special tax obligation bonds for sale to the public through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns.
The maximum yield offered is 6.35 percent for a 6 1/4 percent noncallable bond due 2012 that was priced at about 97.47.
Yields on the shorter- maturity serial bonds ranged from 3 percent in 1993 to 4.8 percent in 1997, 5.7 percent in 2002 and 6 1/4 percent in 2008.


Norman in Hot Water
GREG NORMAN of Australia found himself at the center of a dispute yesterday after accepting an invitation to play in the Skins Game on Nov. 28-29 in Palm Desert, Calif.
The Australian Golf Union said it was considering taking action against Norman, who pulled out of the Nov. 26-29 Australian Open last week, saying he wanted to spend the Thanksgiving holiday with his family.
Norman had previously signed a contract to play in the Australian Open. (AP)


Review/Jazz; Dedicated to the Art of Relaxation
After playing "My Old Flame" with a combination of tenderness and a bit of a swagger at Fat Tuesday's on Tuesday night, the tenor saxophonist Scott Hamilton wandered through a few chords a capella.
Then he threw himself into the opening melody of "Fascinating Rhythm," and he and the band were off, with Mr.
Hamilton coursing through the tune, drawing on all sorts of rhythms and ideas, from the brusque and four-square swing players he admires to the more fluid post-swing saxophonists, from Art Pepper and Zoot Sims to Stan Getz.
In the 1970's, when he started his career, Mr.
Hamilton was branded a revivalist.
He was without recent precedent: a young musician dedicated to older and perhaps dead jazz forms.
But if the whole school of younger musicians who have been learning jazz's older styles have proved anything, it is that older genres don't die, but bad players can make them seem dead.
Through his improvisations, Mr.
Hamilton not only invigorates the choices he has made, but he has also come to an original amalgam of styles that places him in the stylistic nether world of musicians like Pepper, Sims and Getz.


John L. Evans, 48, Nassau District Judge
Judge John L. Evans of the Nassau County First District Court died on Monday at his home in Malverne, L.I.
He was 48 years old.
Judge Evans died of cancer, said James J. Tini, a family friend.


Accounts
*
"The Women In Black," a play scheduled to come to Broadway in October, to Charron, Schwartz &amp; Partners, New York, to handle advertising.
Billings were not disclosed.


Retraining Won't Undo 'Free Trade' Disaster; Beyond Dogmatism
To the Editor:
"A Test of Mr. Clinton's Backbone," your Aug. 9 editorial on the proposed North American free trade agreement, goes beyond the usual free trade dogmatism to attack the integrity of anyone who might question the position that "free trade" is always good.
You demand that Gov.
Bill Clinton stand up to "traditional Democratic constituents, like organized labor" and endorse the agreement to demonstrate his backbone.


New Problems for Paterno
On the eve of Penn State's final season as an independent, the head football coach, Joe Paterno, wants you to know it won't be all that easy to get the minimum six victories it needs to claim its reserved Blockbuster Bowl berth.
In New York yesterday to reassure local fans that Penn State will not be abandoning them when it joins the Big Ten next year, Paterno found himself addressing his immediate problems.


Witnesses in 'Ivan' Case
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 9 report from Jerusalem on reopening the "Ivan the Terrible" case never mentions that three witnesses at the trial of John Demjanjuk as the operator of the gas chamber at the World War II Treblinka extermination camp in Poland testified that he was not Ivan, and a fourth apparently testified that Ivan was killed in Treblinka in 1943.
You write of the five witnesses who identified him.
What of the four who didn't?


New Jersey and New York Want to Monitor Doctors' Past Problems
If a doctor has had a problem with drugs, alcohol or mental illness in the past, who has the right to know?
Regulators in New Jersey and New York say they do because they cannot count on medical societies to monitor their own members.
But medical societies say that doctors who have overcome such problems will be unfairly stigmatized and that the process will discourage others from seeking help.


Gas Kills Officer and Hurts Dozens in Resort City
Deadly gas produced by decaying vegetation, buried under sand years ago in the New Jersey resort community of Sea Isle City, was released by a construction crew yesterday morning, killing one police officer, injuring two other officers and sending a total of 38 people, including five workers and more than a score of residents, to a nearby hospital.
Several of the workers and the offi-cers were felled by hydrogen sulfide and methane gas as they clambered, one after another, into a 27-foot-deep pit, each in an effort to save the others, according to the Mayor of Sea Isle City, Michael J. McHale.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues: Abortion; F.C.C. Decision Opens Airwaves for Vivid Anti-Abortion Ads
The Federal Communications Commission has ruled that anti-abortion political advertisements featuring a dead fetus are not "indecent" and are not subject to restrictions that would prevent them from being broadcast between 6 A.M. and 10 P.M.
The ruling, issued in a letter last Friday by the agency's mass-media bureau, is likely to clear the way for other graphic anti-abortion television advertisements at a time when abortion is a major political issue.


Holtzman Draws Criticism From Feminists Over Ads
The political Year of the Woman took a decidedly unsisterly turn yesterday.
Rallying to the side of Geraldine A. Ferraro in the increasingly bitter race for New York's Democratic Senate nomination, two prominent New York feminists attacked the feminist credentials of the other woman in the race, accusing City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman of betraying the hope of the feminist movement that women in politics would behave differently, and with more principle, than men.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Durable goods orders plunged 3.4 percent in July, the sharpest drop of the year, eradicating economists' hopes that the economy could grow vigorously enough to spawn new jobs by year's end.
Aircraft orders were weak.
The report was viewed as most unwelcome for President Bush's re-election campaign.  [ Page D1. ]
The Government waited far too long to investigate B.C.C.I., a report by a House subcommittee indicates.
A number of Federal agencies received hundreds of tips over a decade, it says, that the bank was spending billions in financing illegal activities including fomenting unrest in Pakistan, smuggling arms in the Middle East and working with organized crime in the United States.  [ D1. ]


Larz F. Anderson 2d, Financial Analyst, 33
Larz F. Anderson 2d, a vice president with Baron Capital Inc. and Baron Asset Management, a publicly traded mutual fund, died on Tuesday at his home in New York City.
He was 33 years old.
Mr.
Anderson died of complications related to AIDS, said William Megevick, his companion of 10 years.


Beirut Government Seems Near to Collapse
The Syrian-backed Lebanese Government, only 100 days old, was shaken today when two prominent Christians left the Cabinet to protest the timing of general elections.
This plunged Lebanon into its worst political crisis since the civil war ended two years ago.
The officials, Foreign Minister Faris Buwaya and Telecommunications Minister Georges Saadah, had submitted their resignations on Tuesday after the Cabinet decided to hold the second and third rounds of the elections on Aug. 30 and Sept. 6.
In the first round, last Sunday, the Fundamentalist Party of God had the strongest showing.


The Shiites Are Iraqis First, Not Separatists, Experts Say
The Shiites of southern Iraq, soon to come under allied military protection, are looking for a greater role in governing Iraq rather than a separate Islamic state, exiled Shiite leaders and many experts on the region say.
While critics in the Arab world have complained that the Administration's decision to ban Iraqi flights south of the 32nd parallel may lead to the partition of Iraq, Shiite leaders insist that they are not interested in establishing a separate Islamic state.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League  DETROIT LIONS -- Agreed to terms with Dennis Gibson, linebacker, and Bennie Blades, safety.
Activated Eric Sanders, tackle-guard, and Kevin Glover, center.
Waived Reggie McGill, running back, and Phillip Kent, linebacker.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Waived Reggie Singletary, offensive tackle; Gene Cullinane, guard; Shazzon Bradley, nose tackle; and Jeff Bridewell, quarterback.
Claimed Harvey Salem, offensive tackle, on waivers from the Denver Broncos.
Claimed Frank Kmet, nose tackle, on waivers from the Buffalo Bills.


Head of Peace Corps Named United Way President
United Way of America named Elaine L. Chao, the director of the Peace Corps, as its new president today, just in time for the organization's first fund-raising campaign since a financial scandal forced the resignation of the former president, William G. Aramony.
The announcement caps several months of efforts to restore confidence in the charity, an umbrella group financed by the 2,100 local United Way agencies across the country.
United Way of America has been reorganized, with new bylaws and a board expanded to include local representatives.
It has been financially pressed because many of the local agencies withheld dues after the allegations of financial mismanagement were disclosed this summer.


CHRONICLE
The National Association of Corporate Directors, a Washington-based organization of 1,500 top executives, has picked EDMUND T. PRATT JR., the chairman emeritus of Pfizer Inc., as its director of the year.
Mr.
Pratt was selected in part for his record at Pfizer, where he began as the controller in 1964 and became the president in 1971.
He retired as chairman earlier this year when he turned 65.


Guard Shot to Death And Partner Is Hurt
A private security guard was shot to death last night and his partner was wounded as they investigated an alarm that went off inside a pharmaceutical company in Brooklyn, the police said.
After hearing the alarm at 8:15 P.M., the two unarmed Wells Fargo guards, who were not immediately identified, went to a restricted area at the Halsey Drug Company, at 1827 Pacific Street in Crown Heights, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.


Topics of The Times; War Chest Wars
Challengers for seats in the House of Representatives are raising more money than they did two years ago -- a clear measure of the nation's anti-incumbent mood.
But incumbents still have a big financial edge -- suggesting, again, the need for campaign finance reform.
Challengers raised $35.9 million through June 30, up $15 million from the same point in the 1990 election cycle.Incumbents, however, are doing just fine, raising $122 million.
The money came mainly from lobbyists and other favor-seekers with a heavy stake in legislation.
The incumbents' war chest also includes more than $60 million in leftover campaign funds from the last election.


Who Says Backpacks Need 2 Straps?
WASTE not, want not is the idea behind Philip Straughan's Topaq backpack.
Since so many people use only one strap, he did not bother to add a second one.
The strap, which is about four inches wide and a quarter-inch thick at the shoulder, can be worn on either the right or left side, or across the chest, like a shoulder harness in a car.
Mr.
Straughan, the president of Topaq, says this "city proof" feature is ideal for bikers and sneakered women, who want a handy place to store their pumps, papers and purses.


Foreign Affairs; The Awlful Choice on Bosnia
The Bosnian "peace" conference under way in London has the earmarks of deadly farce.
Western leaders make tough noises about standing up for principle -- the principle of not legitimizing Serb conquests in Bosnia -- and prepare to set up a long-term negotiating process.
Meanwhile they know that their efforts will not work, or work in time, to stop Bosnian Muslims from being slaughtered or driven into refugee camps.
Their game at the conference is to evade the real and alarming choice: Either do what they can militarily and economically to back up their principles and save lives that way; or accept Serbian demands for partitioning Bosnia along ethnic lines, strike the best bargain they can, and save lives that way.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
MOST floor and table lamps eventually need repair.
The good news is that fixing a lamp is usually not too difficult.
Replacing the Plug
If the plug on a lamp cord is cracked, or if the prongs wiggle or do not fit tightly into the wall socket, replace the plug.
Polarized plugs, which have one wide prong and a narrow one, offer the most protection from accidental electrical shock.
But they can be used only if the slots in the wall socket will accept them, and they are ineffective if the cord and internal wiring are not also polarized.


Parole System Needs to Take Rehabilitation Into Account
To the Editor:
As director of a 10-year-old program that allows Sing Sing inmates to earn a graduate degree from New York Theological Seminary, I read with interest "Don't Blame Parole for Murders" (editorial, Aug. 8), which advocates abolishing parole in favor of fixed sentences.
This sounds good, but remember, despite the problems of our prison system, people are rehabilitated in prison.
In the last 10 years, I have worked with well over 100 men who have changed their values and lives.
Our program's 134 graduates work as chaplains' assistants or counselors until release.
About 60 percent of our released graduates work in social services, including pastors, chaplains, substance-abuse counselors and health professionals.
Our recidivism rate is far lower than the 50 percent for all released inmates.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Parker Beats the Heat  For Al Parker, a four-time all-American from the University of Georgia, the weather during yesterday's first round of qualifying for the United States Open was more of an obstacle than Roberto Jaboli of Brazil.
The sky was hazy, the air thick -- a hard day's wages for all those who, like Parker, were competing at the U.S.T.A.
National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows in the 128-man qualifying tournament for 16 spots in the big show, which is scheduled to start Monday.
During the course of his overpowering, 6-4, 6-1 victory over Jaboli, the 23-year-old Parker was obliged to change shirts and take repeated towel breaks.
On changeovers, he would remove his white cap and mop himself with iced towels.


Abraham Brodsky, 87, Defense Lawyer, Dies
Abraham H. Brodsky, a criminal defense lawyer whose career spanned 60 years, died on Monday at the Hospice of Palm Beach County in Florida.
He was 87 years old and had moved from Brooklyn to West Palm Beach in 1989.
Mr. Brodsky died of pneumonia after suffering a fall recently, said his wife, Anne.


Altered Riverside South Plan Wins Messinger Over
To win approval for his Riverside South development project from Borough President Ruth W. Messinger, Donald J. Trump agreed yesterday to contribute $5 million to the renovation of the 72d Street IRT subway station, set aside at least 10 percent of the apartments for subsidized housing and insure there would be no net increase of sewage to the North River treatment plant in Harlem.
He also agreed to pay half the annual maintenance for a public park that is to be built along the Hudson River as part of the project.


Retraining Won't Undo 'Free Trade' Disaster; No to Transaction Tax
To the Editor:
Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri has proposed a tax on trade between Mexico and the United States to finance retraining and adjustment for United States workers harmed by the transition to free trade and environmental infrastructure costs.
Don Newquist, chairman of the International Trade Commission, states that while he does not prefer such a tax, it may be the only way to obtain the needed funds (Op-Ed, Aug. 12).
The transaction tax is a bad idea.
I will give three reasons why and suggest an alternative.
(1) Import tariffs are highly regressive.
They are used as a revenue measure almost exclusively by countries unable to collect taxes through other more sophisticated techniques.
Surely, we can do better.


Renewing a Rivalry in Whitney
Saratoga's booming season entered its final week today with Strike the Gold, Fly So Free, England Expects and other marquee horses booked into major races that could propel them toward Breeders' Cup championships two months later.
The last three days of the five-week season here will open on Saturday with the $250,000 Whitney Handicap for senior stars, then will close with the traditional blockbusters: the $200,000 Hopeful Stakes for 2-year-old colts on Sunday and the $200,000 Spinaway Stakes for 2-year-old fillies on Monday, the closing day of the meeting.
All three are Grade I stakes, all three can enhance careers.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY 12 PEOPLE WOUNDED AS GUNMEN OPEN FIRE
In what the police called one of the most violent shootouts in recent years, gunmen drove up to a Bronx apartment building and opened fire, wounding 12 people, many of whom crawled frantically for cover because they feared being shot again.
The gunfire, which apparently stemmed from a dispute between drug dealers, touched off minutes of terror as residents poured from their buildings to look for friends and relatives among a tangle of bodies, victims and witnesses said.
A1.
SANDBLASTING HALTED AGAIN ON BRIDGE
After suspending maintenance on the Williamsburg Bridge amid complaints that sandblasting was spewing dust and paint chips with elevated levels of lead into Brooklyn, New York City's Transportation Department has allowed the work to resume this month -- on the Manhattan side of the bridge.
The new work was halted after residents and elected officials on both sides of the East River expressed outrage that the department had allowed sandblasting on five occasions in Manhattan this month.
B3.
QUEENS MAN SURRENDERS IN SHOOTING
After nearly six weeks on the run, a 25-year-old Queens man surrendered himself to face charges that he shot and killed an off-duty Housing Authority police officer and another man after a brawl on a Bayside street.
B3.
DINKINS GETS HIGH PRAISE
Felix G. Rohatyn, the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation who endorsed Mayor David N. Dinkins in the 1989 mayoral race and who has frequently criticized the Mayor's handling of New York City's severe budget problems since then, lavishly praised Mr.
Dinkins for engineering a fiscal turnaround.
B3.
PROJECT GAINS AN APPROVAL
To win approval for his Riverside South development project from Borough President Ruth W. Messinger, Donald J. Trump agreed to contribute $5 million to renovate the 72d Street subway station, set aside at least 10 percent of the apartments for subsidized housing and insure there would be no net increase of sewage to the North River treatment plant in Harlem.
B2.
A sign on Maiden Lane raises a furor.
Lower Manhattan Journal, B3.
REGION  AN AGREEMENT IN NASSAU
The Nassau County Board of Supervisors unanimously approved enough borrowing today to pay county salaries through the end of October, but not without an acrimonious debate over who was more fiscally responsible, Democrats or Republicans.
B4.
IN A SEASIDE TOWN, DEADLY GAS
Deadly gas produced by decaying vegetation, buried under sand years ago in the New Jersey resort community of Sea Isle City, was released by a construction crew, killing one police officer, leaving another officer in critical condition and sending 38 people to the hospital.
B5.
YEAR OF THE WOMAN TURNS NASTY
The political Year of the Woman took a decidedly unsisterly turn as two prominent New York feminists who support Geraldine A. Ferraro for Senate attacked the feminist credentials of the other woman in the race.
They accused City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman of betraying the hope of the feminist movement that women in politics would behave differently, and with more principle, than men.
B4.
Chronicle B7


Officer Shoots Newark Man In Stolen Car
In an attempted arrest that went wildly awry last night, a Newark police officer was dragged several yards by a stolen car and its 21-year-old driver was shot as he tried to elude arrest, the police said.
The officer freed himself after a few moments and was not seriously hurt.
The driver of the car, who was shot by another officer and hospitalized in guarded condition, was in custody last night.
An 18-year-old passenger in the car was also in custody.
The police said they would be charged with aggravated assault and receiving stolen property.


Ilitch Wants Harwell Back
MIKE ILITCH took over the Detroit Tigers yesterday and said his goals include signing CECIL FIELDER to a long-term contract, retaining Manager SPARKY ANDERSON and bringing back broadcaster ERNIE HARWELL.
Ilitch, who yesterday completed his purchase of the Tigers from TOM MONGAHAN, said he would take at least a year to study whether the team should rebuild Tiger Stadium or move to a new park.
He also said he hoped to bring back a former general manager, BILL LAJOIE, who quit in January 1991 and is now a scout for the Atlanta Braves.


News Corp. Posts Profit In Contrast to '91 Loss
The News Corporation reported yesterday that its financial turnaround was continuing, as it posted fourth-quarter net income of $47.9 million, or 18 cents per American depository receipt, in contrast to a loss of $348.9 million a year earlier.
Revenues for the Australian-based media giant dropped to $1.86 billion, from $2.03 billion a year earlier, primarily as a result of asset sales.


Iraq Says It Is Ready to Fight Allies Over Air Zone
Baghdad vowed today that it was ready to go to war again with the United States and its allies as they prepared to enforce a plan Thursday to take control of the skies over southern Iraq.
But at the United Nations, Iraq's diplomats began a last-ditch effort to avoid a confrontation.
After the allies gave Iraq 24 hours' warning before they shoot down any Iraqi airplanes or helicopters flying south of the 32d parallel, Abdul Amir al-Anbari, Iraq's representative, said he had asked the United Nations to send a multinational team of observers to the area. 'Wise Man's Committee'
Mr.
Anbari said Iraq had rejected outright the American-led plan for a what is called a "no fly" zone, delivered to him at the United Nations today by the United States, France, Britain and Russia.
But he asked the United Nations to establish what he called a "wise man's committee" composed of Arab representatives and members of the Security Council, to help "defuse the crisis as well as establish the truth as Iraq has been saying it."
The allies, who say the exclusion zone is necessary to protect Shiite Muslims in the south from Iraqi air assaults, are unlikely to accept the Iraqi suggestion since they had rejected earlier Iraqi proposals over the last week for legislators and others to visit Iraq and see that the Shiites are not being persecuted, as the allies argue.
Threat to Expel Aid Workers
Earlier today, Iraq's public response to the exclusion zone was carried on the front page of Al Thawra, the newspaper of the ruling Baath Party.
"Our great people and our valiant armed forces are fully prepared to confront the enemies," the newspaper said, calling the conflict with the United States-led alliance as a "holy war."
But the Iraqi response, the most recent in a stream of angry denunciations aimed at the United States and Britain in the last week, stopped short of saying that Baghdad would send its planes into action against allied forces.
United Nations officials said they feared that Iraq might also make good on a threat to expel United Nations guards protecting the organization's aid workers inside the country, if the United States and its Western partners attack Iraq.
About 120 guards and 75 aid workers remain in the country.
Aid workers and guards have already been withdrawn from southern Iraq.
A United Nations Children's Fund worker and eight guards returned to Baghdad from Basra on Monday after Iraqi officials warned they might become the target of demonstrations.
Even before it was officially announced, the allied plan has evoked a less-than-enthusiastic reaction in most Arab capitals.
Only Kuwait has said it backs the plan.
Others, including major partners in last year's alliance that pushed Iraq out of Kuwait, have expressed either outright opposition or refused to take a stand.
Syria, which contributed troops to the coalition 18 months ago, declared itself flatly opposed to the plan, and officials in Egypt worried aloud that the no-fly zone would lead inevitably to the dismemberment of Iraq.
But in London, Dr.
Laith Kubba, who is a Shiite and a member of the Iraqi National Congress, an opposition group based in London, described the announcement of the zone as "a courageous step."
But Dr.
Kubba said the allies must be prepared to go beyond enforcing the ban on air operations in the zone, and be willing to take on Iraqi ground operations mounted against the Shiites.
"That, after all, is the essence of U.N. Resolution 668 -- to stop indiscriminate attacks against the population, and halting the repression of minorities by the Iraqi Government," he said.
With the American warplanes ready to take to the air over southern Iraq on Thursday, the military situation facing Shiite Muslims remains unclear.
Iraqi Aircraft Go North
The Pentagon reported on Tuesday that Iraq had removed its airplanes and most of its helicopters from the areas below the 32d parallel.
But Iraqi opposition groups based in London and Damascus said President Saddam Hussein was moving additional forces into the region, including two large Army units intended to reinforce what they called an "economic and military blockade" of the south.


Calendar: Gardening And Crafts
Foundation Celebration  Longhouse Foundation, Hands Creek Road off Steven Hands Path Road, East Hampton, N.Y.; (516) 329-3568.
A reception to celebrate the formation of the nonprofit arts center and botanical garden will be held on Sunday from 4 to 7 P.M.
The textile designer Jack Lenor Larsen founded the center at his home, which was built by Charles Forberg.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Republicans Re-Think 'Family Values' Focus
Having loosed some of the more ferocious dogs of political war to attack Bill Clinton and the Democrats on such intimate matters as God, family and the sort of woman Mr.
Clinton married, officials of President Bush's campaign are now trying to change the subject -- or at least the tone of the discussion.
After the national convention's acidic assaults on the Democratic nominee, his wife and his party failed to restore Mr.
Bush to parity with Mr.
Clinton in public-opinion polls, Republican strategists are saying the economy, not "family values," is the central issue, and they are trying to distance Mr.
Bush from some of the harsh words spoken on his behalf.


Federal Marshal Remembered in Massachusetts


Police Keeping Close Watch on Tompkins Square Park
The New York City Police Department promised yesterday to continue to show a high profile at the newly reopened Tompkins Square Park after a tense night in which 16 people were arrested for failing to observe a midnight curfew and other offenses.
Several hundred people had gathered in the Lower East Side park Tuesday night, many to protest the curfew and to denounce the Dinkins administration's policy of keeping people from making the park their home.
Before its closing in June 1991 for a $2.1 million renovation, the 10 1/2-acre park had been a source of contention.
Many neighborhood residents complained that the littered park had been taken over by drug addicts and homeless people.


George Kenney's Message
The United States Government's policy toward the dismemberment of Bosnia stands exposed as a sham, thanks to a courageous Foreign Service officer so disgusted that he has resigned in protest.
Penetrating the diplomatic pieties that often becloud public understanding, George Kenney calls the peace parley that ends in London today "a charade" that will fail unless military muscle is employed against Serbia.
Mr.
Kenney is in a position to know.
For the past seven months he has served as deputy chief of the Yugoslav desk in the State Department, most recently as acting chief.
Resignations in principle are rare; this one sends a reverberating message.
America, the West and all civilized societies have to give up their windy flailing and put real pressure on Serbia's strongman, Slobodan Milosevic, to stop his aggression.


The Word For 'Grand' In Finnish
THE Grand Canyon.
That's what the architects Mikko Heikkinen and Markku Komonen call the three-story skylit atrium for the Embassy of Finland in Washington.
The building, which will consolidate three office sites and provide indoor parking, is to open in November 1993.
A foundation-laying ceremony is set for next month.


Clair George's Trial, and Retrial
After a monthlong trial that bared bitter differences and clashing loyalties at the Central Intelligence Agency, a jury has deadlocked over whether Clair George, the former spymaster, lied to and obstructed Congress.
However wrenching, another trial is needed to determine the guilt or innocence of the highest C.I.A. official accused in the Iran-contra affair.
The case has already established important principles.
The Federal trial judge in Washington, Royce Lamberth, made clear in his jury instruction that anyone who lies to Congress cannot offer, as a defense, that lying was of no consequence because some members of Congress already knew the truth.


A Table Just Made To Stretch
WHENEVER Richard Bennett visits Manhattan, he falls more deeply in love with the design studio that he built in his backyard in Detroit.
After all, he has more space for working than some New Yorkers have for living.
So the sculptor and furniture designer came up with the New York Table, a collapsible table that does not need to be hidden when not in use.
"Flip it open, and you're ready to seat guests," Mr.
Bennett said.
"Then, you can stick it in a corner, and it still looks good."


CHRONICLE
RICHARD MOE, a Civil War scholar and Washington lawyer who was chief of staff to Vice President WALTER F. MONDALE, has been elected as the seventh president of the National Trust for Historic Preservation, an organization devoted to preserving buildings and sites considered important to America's past.
Mr.
Moe was selected from among 700 candidates by the trust's board, headed by ROBERT M. BASS, the Texas businessman and philanthropist.
He said in a statement that Mr.
Moe's accomplishments "from the grass roots to the White House" qualified him to be a leader in the preservation field.


Corrections
A headline in some copies yesterday about the arrest of Walker Railey, a former Dallas minister, on a charge of trying to murder his wife misstated the year she was attacked.
It was 1987.


Executive Changes
A.&amp; S./JORDAN MARSH, Brooklyn, a unit of Federated Department Stores Inc., named Ronald Sykes senior vice president of human resources.
CARRIAGE INDUSTRIES, Calhoun, Ga., a carpet manufacturer, appointed Stephen R. Dickinson, president and chief operating officer, to the additional position of chief executive.


Critic's Notebook; John Cage's Music: Room for Nearly Anything
This is about the late John Cage and here is how to read it:
First cut it out of the newspaper.
Then, working from inside the border, clip away all the words.
What should be left is a frame.
Take it by the upper edges using two fingers of each hand.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Monday showing the declining value of the dollar and the British pound was labeled incompletely.
The scale represented the ratio of each currency's value in German marks to its value on Jan. 1, with 100 as a starting point, and the lines showed how those ratios had changed.


Lender Sees Little More Money for Moscow in '92
An official of the International Monetary Fund had some encouraging words for Russia's economic reforms today, but suggested that there was unlikely to be any more fund money for Moscow until the end of the year.
The deputy managing director of the fund, Richard Erb, said he was encouraged by a seasonal drop in inflation and the "self-confidence" he found among Russian policy makers.


Beyond the Legend: Stanford White's New York
TO some people, the architect Stanford White was more famous for his death than for his life.
In 1906, he was shot to death by Harry K. Thaw, the wildly jealous husband of Mr.
White's lover, the model and actress Evelyn Nesbit.
The architect died in a building of his own design: Madison Square Garden.
To David Garrard Lowe, the author of "Stanford White's New York" (Doubleday, $45), it is Mr.
White's architecture that endures.


Nassau Agrees on Borrowing For Salaries Through October
Meeting in emergency session, the Nassau County Board of Supervisors unanimously approved enough borrowing today to pay county salaries through the end of October, but not without a heated debate over who was more fiscally responsible, Democrats or Republicans.
The meeting was called by County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta, a Republican, who had expected the board to authorize the borrowing of $4.6 million in budget notes to meet the county's immediate payroll needs.
Among those affected were 150 road workers whose paychecks would end on Thursday.


Study Finds Babies At 5 Months Grasp Simple Mathematics
Even in the cradle, babies as young as 5 months have a rudimentary ability to add and subtract, according to a study being published today.
The study seems to show that infants know when simple calculations like one plus one or two minus one are done correctly or incorrectly.
The infants in the study indicated awareness that a wrong answer was given by staring longer at the unexpected results.


Toronto Journal; New Planet Swims Into Canada's Ken: It's Mexico
Taco Loco opened a month ago in Kensington Market in Toronto, with Maria Molinaro from Guadalajara offering her homemade cornmeal tortillas along with "autenticos" tacos, burritos, quesadillas, tostadas and tamales.
"We're doing great," said her husband, Sam Molinaro, at a table below the Mexican flag.
"A lot of Canadians are getting to know Mexico through travel and business, and they really go for the Mexican food."


Art and History Prove a Volatile Mix
AT first Ceil Gasior was confused by a white metal sign atop a lamppost on Maiden Lane near Wall Street in Manhattan.
After taking a closer look, she was angry.


IRAN-CONTRA TRIAL OF AN EX-C.I.A. MAN ENDS IN A DEADLOCK
The Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George, once a top official at the Central Intelligence Agency, ended in a mistrial today after the jurors said they were deadlocked on all nine counts.
Judge Royce C. Lamberth of Federal District Court immediately granted a motion for a mistrial made by Mr.
George's lawyer, and prosecutors just as quickly vowed to retry the case.


Man Sought In Slayings In Queens Surrenders
After nearly six weeks on the run, a 25-year-old Queens man surrendered yesterday to face charges that he shot and killed an off-duty Housing Authority police officer and another man after a brawl on a Bayside street.
Police officials publicly said after the surrender of the man, Patrick Bannon, that they were seeking to determine who might have helped him elude an intensive manhunt.
But one official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the police had information that Mr.
Bannon had been aided by people associated with at least two organized-crime families, the Gambino and Colombo groups.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Comdisco Inc., Rosemont, Ill., which buys, sells and leases new and used I.B.M. computer equipment, is offering $100 million of 7 3/4 percent notes due 1999 at 99.569 to yield 7.83 percent through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-2 by Moody's and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Iowa Southern Utilities Co., a unit of Iowa Southern Inc., is offering $30 million of 7.25 percent first-mortgage bonds due 2007 at 98.18 to yield 7.454 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
Noncallable for 10 years, the bonds are rated Aa-3 by Moody's and AA by S.&amp; P.


Fighters Trade Compliments
To a point, they sounded like a mutual admiration society.
RIDDICK BOWE, the undefeated challenger, called EVANDER HOLYFIELD, the man he fights for the heavyweight title Nov. 13 in Las Vegas, Nev., "a great guy." Holyfield, the champion, said that way back when Bowe was his sparring partner Bowe was a talented fighter.
But at a news conference yesterday announcing the 12-round bout, both men asserted they would not let friendship stand in the way of their objectives.


Texas A&amp;M Wins a Game of Scramble
The longest gain was a scramble.
It figured.
But the 33-yard run by Texas A&amp;M quarterback Jeff Granger, after he had been hit in the backfield near the end of a miserable evening, preserved a chance for the Aggies to pursue college football's unofficial national championship.
Granger's run led to a 39-yard field goal by Aggie kicker Terry Venetoulias with 4 minutes, 27 seconds to play to give A&amp;M a 10-7 victory over Stanford.
The Aggie victory in the third Disneyland Pigskin Classic spoiled the return of Bill Walsh as the coach of the Cardinal.


How the BBC Learns to Say It Right
During the Republican National Convention, an advisory was circulated in the newsrooms of the British Broadcasting Corporation.
Among other things, it pointed out that Houston should be pronounced "HEW-ston," not "HOO-ston," as many Britons call it.
The BBC Pronunciation Research Unit was on the job.


No Headline
"It looked bad, man. I don't have words for it. It looked like everyone was dead. There was blood everywhere. Everyone was screaming 'Help!' and 'We need an ambulance!"' -- HERNAN SUAREZ, describing a shootout in the Bronx.  [ B6:5. ]


At Makeshift Site, Miami Adjusts After the Storm
Jermaine Chambers, a University of Miami freshman wide receiver, felt particularly lucky today as he bounded off one of three buses carrying Hurricane players to their emergency practice site here at Dodgertown.
Describing his ordeal of facing Hurricane Andrew at a friend's home in Homestead, Fla., the hardest hit area during the storm earlier this week, Chambers said:


Music Notes
Black Composers Series
In the early 1970's CBS Masterworks announced an ambitious Black Composers Series, a set of recordings that would include 20 albums of symphonic, choral and chamber works.
The repertory was to be devoted largely to 20th-century works, but would include music composed in the 18th and 19th centuries.
From 1974 to 1979, the company issued 9 of the planned 20 disks.
But in 1979 the record industry went into a tailspin, and CBS entered a period of turmoil during which many Masterworks projects were canceled.
The Black Composers Series was among them, as were several of the label's composer-supervised contemporary-music projects.
The series was left unfinished, and CBS -- which is now Sony Classical -- did not regard the recordings as a priority for compact-disk reissue.


California Debt of $2 Billion Is Put Under S.&amp; P. Review
Because California has been without a state budget since July 1, the rating on about $2 billion of various California agency and public works board debt obligations secured by state appropriations is being reviewed for a possible downgrade by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
The credit-rating concern conditioned the review on the state's appropriating about $110 million to make debt-service payments, due around Sept. 1.
"Under the term of most of the underlying lease agreements, the state is obligated to budget and appropriate for the use of leased assets, which consist primarily of state prisons, state buildings and higher education facilities," S.&amp; P. said.


Better Schools: the President's Choice
President Bush, who pronounces himself relentlessly against choice when it comes to abortion, declares himself strongly pro-choice on education.
But he's gotten nowhere in Congress, and now both houses, capitalizing on restlessness for reform, have passed their own bills to help improve schools.
The House bill would finance local school reform.
The Senate has passed a similar bill, giving parents more flexibility to choose among public schools.
Both bills fall short of what Mr.
Bush says he wants.
But neither his partisan interest nor disagreement over the means of reform should distract him from the merits of the legislation.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THEY are like tiny Stan Laurels in a schoolyard filled with Oliver Hardys.
So-called crybabies -- children who routinely respond with tears to the slightest provocation or challenge -- are often viewed with disdain by other children and embarrassment by their parents.
Even the word suggests disappointment that they are not as mature as their friends and families would hope.
Extreme emotional sensitivity appears to be at least partially genetic and can sometimes be spotted soon after birth.
It may also be associated with other sensitivities.
As newborns, these children may startle easily, have difficulty adjusting to bright lights or seem uncomfortable in certain types of diapers or clothes.
But there is another side to this temperament.


Gunman Wounds 26-Year-Old in Bronx
An unidentified gunman wounded a 26-year-old man yesterday in the Bronx and fled after trading shots with an off-duty police officer who heard the gunfire and went to investigate, the police said.
The officer was not injured.
A police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch, said the suspect escaped as Officer Ruben Castro chased him along East 179th Street in University Heights.
Officer Castro is assigned to the Bronx Task Force and lives in an apartment building around the corner from where the shooting began.


Divided Government Is the Best Revenge
Last Saturday, after the Republican convention, President Bush traveled to Woodstock in Georgia, home state of Democratic Senator Wyche Fowler.
The President told the crowd assembled on Main Street: "I stand for the balanced budget amendment.  Wyche Fowler is against it. I stand for the line-item veto. Wyche Fowler is against it. I stand for those who stood at Desert Storm, and he opposed me. . . . It's fine to talk one way in downtown Woodstock and vote differently in Washington, but we cannot have that anymore."
Mr.
Bush claims he's following Harry Truman's example, campaigning across America against Congress, but a more recent Presidential model might prove more instructive.


Growing
I HAVE flirted with my family's farm in Maryland all summer.
And now, as the nights fall earlier and the lightning bugs no longer flash in the velvety air between the house and barn, it sits there like a person asking quietly: "Well? What now?"
When I went down to garden there this past spring -- grabbing weekends and scraps of weeks when I could -- I had a lot of romantic ideas of how I would carry on the farm that has been in our family for four generations.
Maybe an herb farm, organic vegetables, perennials for the suburbanites, an artists' colony, a summer camp, a gardening school, a nature preserve.
I was full of nostalgia, too, for those summer childhood days of wading in the stream and building little dams with rocks, of crawling through tunnels of hay, of digging up potatoes in the hot dusty field behind the barn.


Test Scores Are Up Slightly For College-Bound Students
College-bound high school seniors scored slightly higher on the Scholastic Aptitude Test this year than last, the first annual improvement for combined verbal and mathematics scores since 1985.
The average S.A.T. score this year was 423 on the verbal test and 476 on the math test, a total of 899 out of a possible 1,600 -- still far below the historic highs of the 1960's but 3 points higher than last year's combined total.


Desks a Writer Can Lean On
A WRITER'S desk has to "feel right" in ways other than its relationship to spine, neck, elbows, knees and thighs.
Henri Cole, a poet, has planted his desk in an aerie that he created in his studio apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
It reminds him of a treehouse in rural Virginia, where he spent much of his childhood.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Supports Ban on Iraqi Air Force Flights Over Southern Iraq
Gov.
Bill Clinton joined President Bush today in supporting the Persian Gulf coalition's decision to bar Saddam Hussein's aircraft from flying over southern Iraq.
Mr.
Clinton, the Democratic Presidential nominee who has asserted that Mr.
Bush stopped the 1991 gulf war too soon, said at a campaign appearance here that election politics should be kept out of the decision-making involving the region.


Boddicker to Retire After '93
Kansas City Royals pitcher MIKE BODDICKER said 1993 would be his last as a player.
"I definitely will retire after next season," Boddicker said.
"No matter what." Boddicker, 35, signed a three-year, $9.25 million deal in 1990 with Kansas City.
He began this season as a possibility for the Royals' opening-day pitcher and wound up in the bullpen. (AP)


Ex-Pastor to Return for Dallas Choking Trial
A day after a Dallas County grand jury indicted him on a charge of attempted murder, a former Dallas minister agreed today not to fight his extradition from California to Texas to stand trial for the near-fatal strangling of his wife in 1987.
It was not clear why the highly publicized case against the minister, Walker L. Railey, had been revived after five years.


4 Who Stayed On at Key Biscayne Now Have a Stormy Tale to Tell
This exclusive little island has always been separated from nearby Miami by more than just a few miles of gorgeous emerald waters.
But for nearly two days after Hurricane Andrew ripped through, it was totally isolated.
On Monday morning, a handful of residents who had ignored the evacuation orders clung to their towering glass and steel condominiums and Spanish-tile roofed houses as the hurricane winds howled around them.


Ukrainian Leader Threatens To Expel All Foreign Critics
Angered by criticism from visiting Ukrainian emigres, President Leonid M. Kravchuk said today that he was ordering the expulsion of any foreigner who made "open attacks" on him or his Government, news reports said.
It is unclear whether Mr.
Kravchuk will make good on his threat.
The move, announced during a meeting with Ukrainians from Canada and the United States, apparently was in response to recent calls for the Government's resignation.


Storm Poses Test for a Much-Blamed Relief Agency
Hurricane Andrew poses a daunting test for the agency that coordinates Federal disaster relief programs, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which was criticized for its lack of preparation in responding to Hurricane Hugo and the earthquake in Northern California three years ago.
Acknowledging that the agency had been overwhelmed by the back-to-back disasters in 1989, officials of the agency today outlined a broad effort to ship in food, electrical generators, medical teams and hundreds of relief workers to Florida and Louisiana.


Taxable Fund Yields Are Off, While Tax-Exempts Rise
Yields offered by money market funds were mixed in the latest week as the supply of municipal debt increased and the weak dollar made an impact in short-term rates, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
While yields on taxable funds slipped, the seven-day averages for the compounded yield and simple yield for tax-exempt funds both rose by 4 basis points, to 2.21 percent and 2.19 percent, respectively.
For the 30-day average, the compound and simple yields are 2.19 percent and 2.17 percent.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.


Retraining Won't Undo 'Free Trade' Disaster
To the Editor:
"A Test of Mr. Clinton's Backbone" (editorial, Aug. 9) criticizes Representative Richard A. Gephardt's objection to the trade agreement with Mexico and Canada.
You cavalierly dismiss the valid concerns of labor and many manufacturers, although you don't mention them, over the agreement.
Sure, people will lose jobs, you agree, but we can overcome the problem by retraining them.
Retrain them for what?
Selling hamburgers and fried chicken?
To enter the automobile, electronics, computer and other distressed industries?
Retraining is no panacea for unemployment.
It worked somewhat after World War II, but it has been a useless alternative ever since.
It's an idea unsuitable to our troubled times.
When you have a sick economy and a depressed and shrinking manufacturing base, it won't work.
And even when the economy is humming, it's a questionable expedient.
Even in welfare, retraining has been a wasteful effort; with all the retraining programs attempted in that area, what progress have we made in reducing welfare rolls?


Moore Is Back, Ready for 'Bombs'
Coming off a near-1,000 yard receiving season, Rob Moore entered camp ready to give the Jets the kind of big-play threat that could help make them a contender.
Unfortunately, he's been grounded for most of the preseason with a severly sprained left ankle.
Moore sprained his ankle after getting tangled with safety Marcus Turner in practice right before the Jets' first game, on Aug. 1 against the Eagles.
He reinjured the ankle against the Eagles and missed the next four weeks of practice and three preseason games.


Parole System Needs to Take Rehabilitation Into Account; 'Give Us a Chance'
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 6 article asking if the New York State parole system failed in the Nathaniel White case paints a gloomy picture of the parole process and the inmates who pass through it.
The parolee charged in the Hudson Valley murders does not represent a cross-section of incarcerated individuals.
There are thousands in the system who work hard to pay their debt to society.


N.H.L. Meeting Instigated Little
This just in from the Gulf Coast, where National Hockey League owners have concluded their summer meetings: Helmets are now optional, and so is common sense . . . ice barons survive brainstorms in tropical hurricane zone . . . they came, they argued, they compromised . . . it's not the heat, it's the stupidity.
They could have done so much more.
For the first time, owners seriously considered a rule that would have mandated the ejection of fistfighters.
This would have eliminated the jobs of three dozen full-time goons whose only major league skill is to punch people's noses while standing on ice skates.


Emanuel P. Popolizio, 74, Dies; Former Housing Authority Chief
Emanuel P. Popolizio, former chairman of the New York City Housing Authority and a lifetime champion for the betterment of Greenwich Village, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 74 years old and lived in the West Village, where he was born.
His family said he was stricken in his office a month ago and died of heart failure.


Hurricane Rips Louisiana Coast Before Dying Out
Taking its second shot at the United States mainland after a five-day journey of destruction, Hurricane Andrew ripped through the oil towns and Cajun country of South Louisiana today, tearing roofs off homes, overturning trailer homes and leaving at least 230,000 people without power.
The hurricane, striking with wind speeds greater than 140 miles an hour, also produced tornadoes, caused severe flooding and left at least one person dead, bringing the hurricane's death toll to 20 in the Bahamas and the United States.


Tartabull and Yankees Slam Door on Brewers
With their frustrating season reduced to the tedious task of trying to remain a safe distance from last place, the Yankees could only ponder what might have been after games like last night's.
How different would the season have been if Danny Tartabull had not missed so many games with injuries?
How much better would the pitching staff have been if Scott Kamieniecki was steady, instead of producing one victory in 16 starts during one stretch?
Where would the Yankees be in the standings if they played all the powerful teams the same way they do the Milwaukee Brewers?


Frederick O'Neal, 86, Actor and Equity President
Frederick O'Neal, an award-winning actor who was the first black president of the Actors' Equity Association, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old.
He died after a long illness, said Dick Moore, a spokesman for the union.


Economic Scene; Bonn Punches, The Dollar Rolls
THOSE looking to put the best face on the falling dollar need not look far: Cheaper greenbacks mean more exports, which in turn means more jobs for an economy in need of same.
And in this case, the best face is not a bad face at all.
For one thing, the theory is on target.
While the kick will not come soon -- certainly not before the election -- bargain dollars should eventually make everything from Boeing's jets to Frank Perdue's chickens more competitive abroad.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.29
5.52
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.16
5.30
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.25
5.31
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.18
6.26
7.62
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.41
7.47
8.05
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.43
8.47
9.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.40
6.98
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


New Athletic Director at M.I.T.
RICHARD A. HILL, a former track coach who has been senior associate athetic director at the University of Louisville since 1986, has been named athletic director at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
He replaces ROYCE FLIPPIN, who resigned after 12 years to raise funds for M.I.T. in New York.
Although hardly known as an athletic powerhouse, M.I.T. fields teams in 19 men's and women's varsity sports.
Hill, a native of Yonkers, attended Southern University in Louisiana, received a master's degree in education from the University of Buffalo and a doctorate in exercise physiology from the State University of New York at Buffalo.


Stottlemyre Flirts With a No-Hitter
Blue Jays 9, White Sox 0
CHICAGO, Aug. 26 (AP) -- Todd Stottlemyre, struggling through a poor season, pitched seven and one-third no-hit innings and wound up with a one-hitter as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Chicago White Sox, 9-0, tonight.
Dan Pasqua, who made two errors in right field during Toronto's four-run eighth inning, doubled cleanly to the gap in right-center to end Stottlemyre's bid for the second no-hitter in Blue Jays history.


Review/Comedy; A Cutting Edge So Sharp It Hurts
One rarely encounters live comedy that makes people queasy.
But Todd Robbins, of the 10 featured performers in "Club X," a new comedy revue on Monday evenings at Stand-Up New York (236 West 78th Street, Upper West Side), has found a way.
Mr.
Robbins is the comedy-club answer to a circus geek.
At Monday evening's show, he gleefully chomped on the fragments of a broken light bulb, then washed them down with a bottle of water.
Next he drove a four-inch nail into one nostril.
For his final trick, he donned goggles and used his considerable lung power to blow up and burst a hot-water bottle.
Few audience members seemed amused.


Fierce Shootout Wounds 12 On Drug-Filled Bronx Street
In what the police called one of the most ferocious shootouts in New York City in recent years, gunmen drove up to a Bronx apartment building early yesterday morning and opened fire, wounding 12 people, many of whom then crawled frantically for cover because they feared being shot again.
The gunfire, which apparently stemmed from a dispute between drug dealers, touched off minutes of terror as residents poured from their buildings to look for their friends and relatives among a tangle of victims on the sidewalk, witnesses said.
A father discovered his daughter screaming hysterically because of a head wound.
A mother cradled her daughter as she lay in a pool of blood, shot in the back.


Rohatyn, a Dinkins Critic on Budgets, Praises the Mayor
Felix G. Rohatyn, the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, who has frequently criticized Mayor David N. Dinkins over his handling of New York City's severe budget problems, lavishly praised Mr.
Dinkins yesterday for engineering a fiscal turnaround.
"The city has made a lot of progress," Mr.
Rohatyn, who endorsed Mr.
Dinkins in the 1989 mayoral race, said at a meeting of the assistance corporation in Manhattan yesterday.
"We haven't hesitated to criticize the administration when we thought it was appropriate, and we shouldn't hesitate to praise the administration when it is appropiate."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  ULTIMATUM TO IRAQ
The United States and its allies demanded that Iraq end all aircraft and helicopter flights over southern Iraq within 24 hours.
They said the ban was needed to halt Iraqi repression of the region's large and dissident Shiite population.
A1  SHIITES DENY SEEKING SPLIT
Exiled Shiites and several experts say the Shiites of southern Iraq are looking for a greater role in governing Iraq, not a separate state.
A14  Baghdad says it's ready to go to war but leaves room for a solution.
A14  Israelis wrestle with the possibility of Iraqi Scud attacks.
A15  UKRAINIAN JEWS REMEMBER
A long and poignant Jewish cultural history is beginning to disappear in Ukraine, leaders of Jewish groups say.
The reason is not discrimination but freedom and assimilation.
A3  RIGHTIST GERMANS RIOT AGAIN
Neo-Nazi violence erupted again in the German port of Rostock, where police officers battled stone-throwing youths at a hostel for foreign refugees.
A6  NATIONS MEET AND CONDEMN SERBS
A conference on the crisis in former Yugoslav republics opened in London to rousing condemnation of the Serbs by nearly two dozen nations.
But there were virtually no calls for action beyond tightening sanctions and sending observers.
A1  CITING BOSNIA, U.S.
AIDE QUITS
A State Department official says he resigned in protest over the Bush Administration's "ineffective" response to the fighting in the former Yugoslavia.
He said the United States had a moral obligation to end the "genocide" in Bosnia.
A10  SERIOUS TONE AT MIDEAST TALKS
Amid signs of a willingness to compromise, Israelis and Palestinians dickered in Washington over the powers of a proposed council or assembly through which the Palestinians would rule themselves.
A8  EXPLOSION AT ALGIERS AIRPORT
A powerful bomb exploded in a packed Algiers airport terminal, killing 9 people and wounding more than 100.
It was the first terrorist attack in a wave of violence that began with a crackdown on Muslim fundamentalists in January.
A5  Pakistan appeals for a cease-fire in the battered Afghan capital.
A16  Toronto Journal: Canadians are suddenly fascinated by Mexico.
A4  The I.M.F. has encouraging words for Russia's economic reforms.A11  National A18-21, B7-9  ANDREW PUMMELS LOUISIANA
Taking its second shot at the American mainland, Hurricane Andrew brought widespread destruction to southern Louisiana's oil towns and Cajun country.
A1  Efforts to deliver relief supplies to Miami were slowed.
B9  Only now are residents returning to Key Biscayne.
B9  A Federal relief agency is faced with an enormous task.
B8  OFF-DUTY VICTIMS
Many of the officers in the 29 police departments that serve Dade County are squeezed by a wrenching psychological bind.
Professionally they are symbols of order at a chaotic time.
Personally they are victims of that same chaos.
A1  MISTRIAL IN IRAN-CONTRA CASE
The trial of Clair E. George, the former C.I.A. official charged with lying about the Iran-contra affair, ended in a hung jury.
The prosecution said he would be retried.
A1  MATHEMATICS IN THE CRADLE
A researcher reported that babies as young as 5 months have a rudimentary ability to add numbers and subtract them.
A1  NEW CHIEF FOR UNITED WAY
The nation's most besieged charity chose as its new president Elaine L. Chao, Peace Corps director.
A18  S.A.T.
SCORES EDGE UPWARD
College-bound high school seniors scored slightly higher on the Scholastic Aptitude Test this year than last, the first annual improvement for combined verbal and mathematics scores since 1985.
A18  G.O.P.
BACKS OFF HARSH WORDS
The Bush campaign is now trying to shift the subject away from family values, or at least soften the tone of the discussion.
A20  Clinton backed Bush's decision on a no-fly zone in Iraq.
A20  Edwards, eight-term Congressman, was beaten at the polls.
A20  NEW FINDING ON AIDS
A large clinical test found that AIDS patients who take AZT could benefit significantly by switching after several months to another medication, didanosine.
B7  EX-PREACHER WAIVES EXTRADITION
A former Dallas minister agreed not to fight extradition from California to Texas, where he has been charged with trying to murder his wife five years ago.
A21  A judge and a prosecutor clashed over a Los Angeles riot case.
A18  Metro Digest B1  FIERCE BRONX SHOOTOUT
In what the police called one of the most ferocious shootouts in New York City in recent years, gunmen drove up to a Bronx apartment building and opened fire, wounding 12 people, many of whom then crawled frantically for cover because they feared being shot again.
A1  Home Section C1-12  The sport of yard-saling, scored by hits or misses.
C1  In the 1950's with Dan Wakefield.
C1  Feeling at home at the office.
C1  Growing C2  Garden Q. &amp; A.  C5  Desks a writer can lean on.
C8  Beyond the legend: Stanford White's New York.
C11  Parent &amp; Child C12  Arts/Entertainment C14-24  John Cage's music of questions.
C17  Jimmy Cliff's reggae for the arena.
C17  Has Mostly Mozart worn out its welcome?
C17  How the BBC learns to say it right.
C20  Theater: "Anna Karenina." C17  Word and Image: Home Video C22  "The Turning Point," on abstract artists.
C22  Obituaries D20  Emanuel P. Popolizio, former Housing Authority chief.
Frederick O'Neal, actor and former Equity president.
Sports B10-16  Baseball: Yanks sweep Brewers.
B11  Hillman makes fast work of Giants.
B13  Column: Smith on baseball's legal wrangling.
B11  Football: Howard signs with Giants.
B11  Jets' Moore is back.
B14  Tennis: Players rally around Ashe.
B11  Business Digest D1  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  George Kenney's message.
Clair George's trial, and retrial.
Better schools: Mr.
Bush's choice.
Topics: Got it.
Letters  William Safire: God bless us.
Leslie H. Gelb: The awful choice on Bosnia.
Cokie Roberts: Divided government is the best revenge.
Grace Mirabella: Cookies and code words.


INSIDE
Rightists Riot in Germany
As politicians argued over who was to blame, police officers in a German port battled Neo-Nazi youths for the fifth consecutive night.
Page A6.
Many Warnings on B.C.C.I.
For 10 years, Federal agencies received tips on B.C.C.I.'s backing of illegal international activities, a Congressional study shows.
Page D1.
Bad Tidings on the Economy


The Last Fleeting Days of Summer Vacation


IN THE 1950'S WITH: Dan Wakefield; Strolling Among 'the Wise and Honest'
FOR Dan Wakefield, the great days, the days to look back on wistfully as the best of times, are the 1950's.
Now, there are a lot of different 1950's: the Eisenhower years, the years of Milton Berle's Tuesday night television show, the years of Elvis, the years of Hula-Hoops and the years of Levittowns.
None of these are the Wakefield 1950's.
Dan Wakefield's 1950's, recalled in his new book, "New York in the 50's," (Houghton Mifflin/Seymour Lawrence, $24.95) are a slice of time in Greenwich Village.
At 60 years old, the writer of the best-selling novels "Going All the Way" and "Starting Over" as well as "Island in the City: The World of Spanish Harlem," the pioneering survey of Puerto Rican settlement in New York, has become a Boswell of the heady days when art and literature had a singular flowering in the Village, which means in American culture, which, in those golden days of American influence, means in the world.


A Spirit of Compromise Informs the Mideast Talks
Middle East peace talks continued today amid signs that Israelis, Syrians and Palestinians were willing to discuss compromises on some issues.
The discussions, like those of the last two days, dealt with general concepts and procedural questions.
But Arab and Israeli negotiators reported that the atmosphere of the talks was still much better than in any of the five previous rounds.


Mellon Sues Former Official Who Quit to Form a Rival
The Mellon Bank filed a lawsuit yesterday against Bipin C. Shah, a former executive vice president, who left the bank in late July to form a new company that will compete with many of Mellon's businesses.
Mr.
Shah joined Mellon in March after a long career at the Corestates Financial Corporation of Philadelphia, a company from which he abruptly resigned despite his success as a founder and chief executive of Corestates' profitable and rapidly growing Money Access Service unit.


Florio Urged to Address Problem of Car Theft in Newark
A community advocate and a state senator disagree sharply over whether get-tough policies are the best way to deal with young car thieves who have become the city's most visible problem.
But they both say that Gov.
Jim Florio has to get involved.
Senator Ronald L. Rice, who is also a Newark councilman, said in a statement today that he wanted Mr.
Florio to come to the city "to see at first hand" the impact of the problem, which makes Newark and surrounding towns the car-theft capital of the country.
There have been a series of shootings involving police officers and teen-agers riding in stolen cars, the latest a confrontation last weekend that left two young men dead.


Home Video
This is a good time for children's videos, with a number of new titles and guides released in stores and offered by mail.
Last week the Coalition for Quality Children's Videos, a nonprofit organization based in Santa Fe, N.M., placed the first 15 titles of its Kids First Collection in book stores in Minneapolis, Boston and Carle Place, L.I.
The tapes, which include stories by the illustrators Maurice Sendak, William Steig and James Stevenson, are also offered by mail in the Kids First Catalogue, a listing of 40 prize-winning children's tapes. (Information: 800-331-6197.)


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about R. H. Macy's financial performance described some of its past results incorrectly.
The company said it had a positive cash flow in its third quarter.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Seeking Glory Bower
Q.
Can you help me find clerodendrum (glory bower)?
I saw this beautiful climber and want to give it a try. -- Hannelies Guggenheim, New Rochelle.
A.
The flowers of the clerodendrum, sometimes bizarre looking, make it a compelling candidate for windowsills.
This genus includes 400 evergreen and deciduous vines, shrubs and trees, most of them natives of tropical and subtropical Asia and Africa.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about Judge George Bundy Smith, whom Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo plans to nominate for an associate judgeship on the New York State Court of Appeals, misstated the date of the judge's appointment to the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
It was January 1987.


Archeologists Spin a Tale With Gold Found in Jordan
A thousand years ago, a traveler from far away arrived in Ayla, a bustling Red Sea port at the site of present-day Aqaba in Jordan.
He seems to have come from Morocco, on the western frontier of Islam, and was a pilgrim on the way to Mecca.
He was carrying a purse with 32 gold coins.
Those coins have now been found.
Archeologists from the University of Chicago, excavating remains of the ancient city, uncovered the rare coins in May and have begun to reconstruct the tale they tell about the pilgrim and his fate and about international travel and trade in the 10th and 11th centuries.


When a Child-Client Disagrees With the Lawyer
When a client gives marching orders to a lawyer about the course the client wants to pursue, the lawyer generally has to obey or risk getting dismissed.
But if that client is a child, and the marching orders strike the lawyer as dangerous, does the lawyer still have to obey the client?
Just such a question has been posed in a Chicago juvenile court.
It goes to the heart of a lawyer's responsibility to a client who is a child, and it would probably stump King Solomon.
The case involves a 13-year-old girl in foster care who is eager to return home and who is being fought over by two lawyers who want to represent her.


James S. Rathschmidt; Former Rowing Coach, 79
James S. (Jim) Rathschmidt, a man from Princeton who coached a Yale crew to an Olympic gold medal in 1956, died on Tuesday at his home in Boynton Beach, Fla.
He was 79 years old, and the cause of death was a heart attack, said Kay Rathschmidt, his wife.
Genial Jim, as he was known to his oarsmen, was born and brought up in Princeton, N.J., and though he never attended Princeton University, he became lightweight coach there in 1935.
He was appointed head coach at Yale in 1951, and in 19 years there his crews won three Eastern sprint championships.
He returned to Princeton and was the first coach of women's crew there until his retirement in 1973.


Next Stop, Relief From the Heat


CHRONICLE
She is a heroine of the Holocaust, and so when DR.
HADASSAH ROSENSAFT turned 80 the other day, there were many birthday greetings, among them messages from two Presidents and two Mayors.
All recalled that as a prisoner in Nazi concentration camps, she saved hundreds of fellow Jewish inmates and that after the liberation, she continued to help others in refugee camps.
From the White House, PRESIDENT BUSH sent a letter saying Dr.
Rosensaft's actions were an inspiration.
PRESIDENT CHAIM HERZOG of Israel sent a more personal message, recalling that as a young officer with the British forces he took part in the liberation of the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp, where he first met Dr.
Rosensaft, in April 1945.


Miami Player Learns His Family Is O.K.
Defensive end MARVIN DAVIS, the Miami freshman who had not been able to find his mother and two sisters since Hurricane Andrew, was all smiles yesterday.
WPLG-TV found his family doing just fine in its Homestead, Fla., home.
"I feel great now, like I'm on top of the world," Davis said.


Scandal Rising, Brazil Chief Is Expected to Quit Soon
With the waters of a corruption scandal rising around his ears, President Fernando Collor de Mello is expected to resign within days, politicians and journalists said today.
"All the signs we are receiving is that he will resign over the weekend," a newspaper editor here said today.
Others estimated that Mr.
Collor would not last in office beyond two weeks.


Insurers Facing Obstacles in Reaching Customers
Battalions of insurance claims specialists from around the country moved out across the vanquished neighborhoods of South Florida today trying to make contact with the tens of thousands of homeowners who need cash for emergency supplies, food and shelter.
But so overwhelming is the damage here from Hurricane Andrew that even the giant insurance companies with extensive emergency plans are facing great obstacles in reaching their customers.


Review/Pop; K. D. Lang: A Torch Singer for Modern Times
"Let's focus on the subject of desire," K. D. Lang said on Wednesday night, drawing cheers and whistles and whoops from the full house at Radio City Music Hall, the first of two sold-out nights.
Desire -- languid and overwhelming, anticipated and remembered, thwarted and fulfilled -- was at the center of Ms.
Lang's songs.
It was conveyed in gliding long notes, in unhurried but dramatic crescendos, in phrases that caught in the throat or broke with perfect timing.
Her voice sounds at once sincere and utterly controlled; compared with the frantic display of most current singers, Ms.
Lang can seem to be singing in a surreal slow motion.
In some ways, she is an old-fashioned pop singer, taking her time on every note and using graininess or rasp only sparingly.
But though Ms.
Lang has made herself the heir of torch singers from Patsy Cline to Peggy Lee, she is no throwback.
She works not within genres, but at their edges.
Her first albums were more or less country music (though hardly the current three-chord Nashville formula), but her latest one, "Ingenue" (Sire/Warner Brothers), turns to dreamy, leisurely songs that float somewhere between the prerock 1950's and the knowing 1990's.


Corrections
The weather report yesterday, and the front page summary of it, misstated the New York City temperatures for Wednesday in some copies.
The high temperature was 90, and the low was 72.
The report also misstated several other statistics about the day.
The mean temperature was 81, the number of degrees below normal for August was 75, the number of degrees below normal for the year was 85, the precipitation was 0.13 inches, the precipitation total for August was 3.46 and the precipitation total for the year was 26.13.


Juan Suarez Botas; Illustrator, 34
Juan Suarez Botas, an illustrator, graphic designer and film maker, died on Monday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 34 years old.
He died of AIDS, said his doctor, Paul Belman.


Corrections
An article on the Consumer's World page on Saturday about airline discounts for older people misstated the prices for the American Airlines coupon books that older passengers can use on the carrier's flights in the contiguous 48 states.
A four-coupon book costs $568, not $620; an eight-coupon book costs $984, not $1,080.


Sounds Around Town
The Jesus Lizard


Calling Dr. Gillespie
To the Editor:
By no means do I wish to detract from Harold Russell's achievements as an actor and a person, but I don't think he was the first visibly disabled actor to appear in a major motion picture (news article, Aug. 7).
Lionel Barrymore appeared on crutches in "You Can't Take It With You" (1938), the result of the severe arthritis he battled much of his life.
Dialogue written for the screenplay to explain the crutches gave Barrymore's character, Grandpa Vanderhof, a broken leg.
By the end of World War II, Barrymore was using a wheelchair.
In 1946, the year "The Best Years of Our Lives" was released, Barrymore occupied a wheelchair to grand, villainous effect in "It's a Wonderful Life."


Reviews/Theater; It's Goodbye, Dolly, and Hello, Tom Stoppard
In typical Stoppard fashion, "On the Razzle" is layered with puns and word plays.
Wit vies for center stage with burlesque jokes and running gags.
Sometimes the linguistic trickery seems at cross purposes with the demands of farce, but the play is funny, as was clear from the 1981 production at the National Theater in London.
In the New York premiere at the Lightning Strikes Theater Company, the razzle fizzles.


Steelers Are Happy to Hand Offense Off to Erhardt
Football coaches take funny bounces.
How about Ron Erhardt?
He was perhaps the most surprised man at Giants Stadium a year ago when he found himself forgotten on the sideline just months after he had helped the Giants win Super Bowl XXV as the team's offensive coordinator.


U.S. and Allied Jets Patrol Iraq, Unchallenged by Hussein's Forces
American warplanes streaked north Thursday on their first mission to enforce a ban on Iraqi warplanes in southern Iraq, then returned safely, reporting no initial signs of resistance.
Pentagon and Bush Administration officials said Iraqi aircraft did not stray south of the 32d parallel, the northern boundary of the "security zone" established by the United States and its allies to shield the Shiites of southern Iraq from air attacks.


In Victory, O'Brien Gives Concession Speech
On a night just right for fighting, the Jets got a scrap from the Eagles and from veteran quarterback Ken O'Brien, whom everyone had counted out two weeks ago, in a 22-13 victory over Philadelphia in the muggy heat at Veterans Stadium.
The victory capped a perfect preseason for the Jets (5-0), who last accomplished the feat with a 4-0 exhibition season record in 1966.
On the first front, five skirmishes broke out between the two teams.
One of the encounters, in the first quarter, erupted into a brawl in front of the Eagles' bench, forcing Jets Coach Bruce Coslet to run onto the field and call a timeout to settle down his players.


Movie Exploits and Distorts Trauma of Multiple Personality
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 7 review of "Raising Cain," the new Brian De Palma movie, appears smitten with the director's ambiguities and unrealities, and lauds his "spellbinding, beautifully executed images." You direct the public to expect a "fanciful," "playful," "mischievous," "startlingly photographed," indecipherable thriller.
You don't prepare the filmgoer for psychological terrors that can frighten the unsuspecting more than offscreen murders.
The worst horrors are the child abuse and kidnappings, and more graphically, the depiction of the murderous psychopathic husband-father who has a multiple personality disorder.
Anxieties also may be aroused by the film's ubiquitous betrayals: by physician of patient, spouses of each other, of friendships, of the young by adults and the disastrous parental betrayal of two generations of children by their fathers.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon.
Closing This Weekend
"TWO TRAINS RUNNING," Walter Kerr Theater, 219 West 48th Street, mid-Manhattan.
August Wilson's play about black culture in the 1960's; directed by Lloyd Richards, and starring Larry Fishburne and Roscoe Lee Browne.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $45.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"THE MOST HAPPY FELLA," Booth Theater, 222 West 45th Street, mid-Manhattan.
Frank Loesser's musical, directed by Gerald Gutierrez.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $45 to $60.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Abroad at Home; Nodding to Bullies
The Serbian onslaught in what was Yugoslavia differs in many ways from the Iraqi occupation two years ago.
But the two murderous aggressions have at least one element in common.
Both were encouraged by the diplomacy of the Bush Administration.
Everyone remembers what Saddam Hussein took as a green light for his attack.
A week before he moved, the U.S.
Ambassador to Baghdad, April Glaspie, told him that the United States had "no opinion on the Arab-Arab conflicts like your border disagreement with Kuwait."


Going Into Jockeys' Homestretch, It's Smith by a Nose
With one long weekend to go, the days and the races are down to a precious few.
And in the race within the race, Mike Smith was leading Chris Antley today for the riding title at Saratoga Race Course.
It was won last year by Smith; the year before, by Antley; for most of the last generation before that, by Angel Cordero Jr., who is now trying to make it as a trainer.


In a Vote at Sunrise, a New Dawn for New York Politics
The vote shortly after sunrise yesterday by the New York City Council to approve the Dinkins administration's long-range garbage plan marked a milestone for the Council that transcended questions of trash disposal.
The Council, eager to establish itself as a major player in city government, had taken on a divisive issue -- one it could easily have avoided -- and seen it through.
The City Charter did not require the Council to consider Mayor David N. Dinkins's plan, which calls for a vast increase in recycling and includes a highly disputed new incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
But the Council's leaders decided in March that they wanted a say in the controversial proposal, and they passed a bill that required the Mayor to submit his plan to them before he could send it off to state regulators for a final review.


And If the Stars Squabble? Go For a Wider Distribution
WHEN Tri-Star Pictures announced earlier this week that it would advance the opening and broaden the release of "Husbands and Wives," Woody Allen's latest movie, critics complained that the studio had opted to "Take the Money and Run," to borrow the title of one of Mr.
Allen's earlier, funnier films.
Yet executives involved in advertising, marketing and promoting movies and other entertainment properties say they agree with Tri-Star's decision to alter its plans -- opportunistic as that may appear in the wake of the firestorm of publicity generated by Mr.
Allen's rancorous squabbling with the actress Mia Farrow over their personal lives.


Tokyo Sets Fiscal Package To Revive Ailing Economy
The Japanese Government prepared to announce a huge financial rescue package today aimed at stimulating growth in the nation's staggering economy and shoring up a banking system that has been endangered by the rapid fall in stocks and real estate prices.
One part of the double-barreled plan is expected to include roughly 10 trillion yen, or about $80 billion, in measures to stimulate growth through extra spending on public works and tax incentives to encourage businesses to invest in new equipment.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Beck Leads Couples by Two Strokes  A little extra effort by Chip Beck paid off in a 65 that gave him a two-stroke lead over Fred Couples after yesterday's storm-interrupted first round of the World Series of Golf in Akron, Ohio.
Beck's effort was five under par at the Firestone Country Club course.
He one-putted 11 times, including par-savers on four of the last five holes. (AP) Rain Halts Amateur: Heavy rains and lightning in Dublin, Ohio, caused officials at the 92d United States Amateur to call off first-round play yesterday, making it nearly certain that the championship would be concluded Monday rather than Sunday.
Only 10 of the 32 first-round matches were completed when play was halted at 2:47 P.M.
Play was called for the day at 5:12 P.M.
Among the first-round winners were the 1991 Public Links champion, David Berganio, who defeated Alan Bratton, 4 and 2, and a former Walker Cup team member, Allen Doyle, who defeated Jerome Kyle, 5 and 4.
L.P.G.A.
Challenge Now 54 Holes: The L.P.G.A.
Challenge will start a day late after torrential rain left the White Eagle Golf Club in Naperville, Ill., a sopping mess.
The event's director, Ron Koewler, said yesterday that the tournament would be reduced from 72 holes to 54 holes. (AP) TENNIS  Sabatini Is Routed by Meskhi  Leila Meskhi, a clay-court specialist, surprised top-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, 6-0, 6-3, last night in the quarterfinals of the Mazda Classic in Carlsbad, Calif.
Fifth-seeded Jana Novotna also lost in the hard-court tournament, retiring because of leg cramps.
Ann Grossman prevailed over Novotna, 4-6, 6-4, 4-2. (AP) FOOTBALL  Finally, a Touchdown Pass for the Saints  Bobby Hebert threw the Saints' first touchdown pass of the preseason as New Orleans beat the Miami Dolphins, 17-3, last night in the first pro football game in Baltimore since 1983.
Hebert played the first half, completing 10 of 14 passes for 100 yards to help New Orleans take a 14-3 lead.
Entering the game, the Saints (3-1) had thrown 97 passes without a touchdown.
Dolphins fell to 3-2.
The game was played before a sellout crowd of 60,021 at Memorial Stadium. (AP)


Perot Drive Files Petitions for Ballot in New York
Carrying 65 cardboard boxes into the offices of the New York State Board of Elections in Albany, supporters of Ross Perot submitted more than 90,000 signatures yesterday in an effort to place the Texas billionaire, who had announced his withdrawl from the Presidential race, on the ballot in November.
Their efforts had garnered six times the number of signatures required by law.
"They came in about 10:15 this morning -- 65 boxes containing 90,965 pages with a total of 91,085 signatures," a Board of Elections spokesman, David C. Flanagan, said.
"They needed 15,000 to get on the ballot," Mr.
Flanagan added.


Charity Game Gets Big Names
Lou Carnesecca, the longtime St.
John's basketball coach who retired last spring, will make a one-game comeback in the New York All-Star Basketball Classic on Sept. 9 at Madison Square Garden.
Proceeds from the game will benefit Wheelchair Charities Inc., an organization that provides medical and recreational equipment for quadriplegic and paraplegic patients at Goldwater Memorial Hospital on Roosevelt Island.


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The assets of the nation's 604 retail money market mutual funds increased $383.4 million, to $389.99 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The institute changed its reporting form to include a further breakdown for taxable and tax-exempt funds, including total assets, changes in assets and the number of funds.


Tough Draw For Connors At the Open
Next week's opening round of the United States Open shaped up as a yawn yesterday as the big names of tennis drew generally easy first-round opponents, but don't nod off too soon.
The fireworks could begin as early as the second round.
That's when last year's sentimental sensations and this year's battlers of the sexes -- Jimmy Connors and Martina Navratilova -- could face their first serious opposition.


On the Air With Weicker and Elvis
IT'S a quiet change, this influx of outsiders into the once-isolated still-rural northwest corner of the nation's most affluent state.
More Statue of Liberty license plates on more city-clean cars ritually locked for 30-second errands at convenience stores.
More antique stores, more cute Kountry Kraft shops and more grandiose, perfectly porched country inns than seem necessary for an ancient agrarian society that has somehow survived, until now, blessedly brunch-free.
In addition to the meticulously manicured mailboxes sprouting by the carefully graveled driveways in this unusually green part of an unusually green county, many of the older homes now seem to require names.


INSURERS TO SHARE SHIPWRECK'S GOLD
A Federal Appeals Court ruled today that several insurance companies deserve part of a gold treasure worth as much as $1 billion that is being salvaged from a gold rush-era shipwreck.
One hundred thirty five years ago, the companies insured the cargo of the steamship Central America, which was laden with three tons of gold coins and bricks.
The sidewheeler sank in a hurricane 160 miles off Charleston, S.C., on Sept. 12, 1857, and the companies paid the insurance claim.


Spectator Sport: Spotting Celebrities
ONE night last summer, not too long after the raucous parade in the city for the soldiers who had served in the Persian Gulf, Gen.
Colin Powell ate dinner at the American Hotel in Sag Harbor, L.I., and I happened to be there, standing on the porch having a drink, as he left.
An experienced spotter of celebrities, I count this among the finest sightings in my portfolio, on a par with Boy George, in a bookstore on Second Avenue in Manhattan; Johnny Bench, when he was still playing and the Reds were at Shea, in the back of a country-western bar in Greenwich Village, and Katarina Witt, who sat next to me -- in coach! -- on a flight into Kennedy from, of all places, Salt Lake City.
O.K., O.K., it's a shallow thing, nosing out the famous.
So what?
That doesn't mean you can't be good at it.


Pretoria Forces Retirement Of Many Officials in Police
The South African Government announced sweeping reforms of its discredited police force today, including the forced retirement of one third of the whites-only top command, clearing the way for promotion of the country's first black generals.
Other measures announced here by Hernus Kriel, Minister of Law and Order, include creation of a permanent board of inquiry headed by a judge to investigate charges of police misconduct.


Mets Decide That Their Ace Isn't in the Cards
The Mets, citing hopelessness over the current season and pessimism over the expensive nature of the coming free-agent market, executed yesterday what the organization termed "a terribly difficult deal" and traded David Cone to the Toronto Blue Jays.
In return for Cone, the multitalented right-hander who will be eligible for free agency at the season's end, the Mets received infielder Jeff Kent and another prospect, who is widely believed to be minor league outfielder Ryan Thompson.


Not Exactly Montana's Offense
The last time Bill Walsh had directed a team from a sideline, in Super Bowl XXIII more than three years ago, his San Francisco 49ers built an unforgettable last-minute drive that won a championship.
And as Walsh stood in Anaheim Stadium Wednesday night in his return to coaching, leading the Stanford Cardinal, it appeared at first that little had changed.
Stanford was a touchdown ahead of Texas A&amp;M, a team considered capable of winning a national championship.


PLAN ON GARBAGE BACKED BY COUNCIL IN NEW YORK CITY
The New York City Council yesterday approved a long-range plan for disposing of the city's garbage that calls for building a new incinerator in the Brooklyn Navy Yard and significantly increasing recycling.
The 51-member Council voted 36 to 15 to approve a revised version of Mayor David N. Dinkins's plan at 7:35 A.M., after a night of red-eyed debate punctuated by shrill speeches and yelling matches between lawmakers.
Toward morning, the police were called to quiet hecklers from environmental groups.


Sounds Around Town
The Jesus Lizard


BUSH SENDING ARMY TO FLORIDA AMID CRITICISM OF RELIEF EFFORT
Amid angry local criticism of the Federal relief effort in South Florida, President Bush said today that he would send troops to help feed residents and rebuild the area after a hurricane that he said might be the worst natural disaster in the nation's history.
Pentagon officials said 2,000 to 5,000 troops were being flown from Fort Bragg in Fayetteville, N.C., along with portable kitchens, medical supplies, helicopters and bulldozers.
A professional disaster-relief specialist characterized the move as welcome, though modest and tardy.


Dream Ends For New Jersey Little Leaguers
Seconds after Matt Slaiciunas struck out today, ending the game and giving Long Beach, Calif., the United States championship and a shot at the Little League World Series title, Adam Fomoso began to sob.
Who could blame him?


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A GARBAGE PLAN FOR THE FUTURE
The City Council approved a long-range plan for disposing of the city's garbage that calls for building a new incinerator in the Brooklyn Navy Yard and significantly increasing recycling.
The 51-member Council voted 36 to 15 to approve a revised version of Mayor Dinkins's plan at 7:35 A.M., after a night of red-eyed debate punctuated by shrill speeches and yelling matches between lawmakers.
A1.


The Art Market
Being in the Bronx
In the last decade, multi-culturalism has become a buzz word in the art world.
That concept has affected art institutions in different ways.
Manhattan's major museums, like the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Museum of Modern Art, have tried to diversify their programs and collections, but at their own pace.
The Bronx Museum of the Arts -- situated in an area where minorities are now in the majority -- doesn't have this option.
Multi-culturalism isn't theoretical; it's right outside the door.
The museum was conceived in the 1960's by a group of Riverdale residents, in part to bring mainstream art to the Bronx.
It was officially founded in 1971 with a show of Impressionist paintings on loan from the Met and displayed in the rotunda of the Bronx County Courthouse.
Since then, it has moved to its own building and grown as a community-based, grass-roots institution, with all the liabilities that status implies.
It doesn't have a reliable financial base in the form of a powerful board of trustees or wealthy patrons. ("Simply put, we can't throw a party and clear $100,000," says the museum's president, Elizabeth Cooke.) And it doesn't have a long-established permanent collection like the Brooklyn Museum's to give it an academic pedigree.


Palestinians Fault Israeli Offer but Do Not Reject It
Palestinian negotiators said today that Israeli proposals for Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip were unacceptable, but would not be summarily rejected.
"We have now on the table two proposals, the Palestinian proposal and the Israeli proposal, and they happen to be incompatible," said Hanan Ashrawi, spokeswoman for the Palestinian delegation to the sixth round of Middle East peace talks, which continued today at the State Department.
But she said, "It doesn't mean that we're not going to negotiate or that we have reached an impasse."


Apple to Sell Computers Priced for Home Market
Apple Computer is poised for aggressive entry into the market for inexpensive home computers, hoping to tempt first-time computer buyers before they commit themselves to cheap I.B.M. clones, which now sell for well below $1,000.
Apple said today that it was planning a Sept. 14 news conference in New York, where it would announce a new line of Macintosh computers aimed at a "family" audience.


Clean, Courageous Politics
Common sense won a grand victory in the small hours yesterday morning, when New York's City Council approved a sound waste-disposal plan that includes citywide recycling and a new incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
The incinerator could have been built without Council approval.
But the Council insisted on a role.
It thus proved itself a responsible player in city government and set a brave example for municipal officials everywhere who face the same hard choices.


Air Canada In Bid for Continental
Air Canada and two powerful Texas financiers made a bid of $400 million yesterday to buy Continental Airlines, and the offer may touch off another bidding war for the bankrupt carrier.
The offer was made by Air Canada and Air Partners L.P., a Texas limited partnership led by David Bonderman and James Coulter, who are associated with the billionaire financier Robert M. Bass.
But although both men have made major acquisitions with him in the past -- including the purchase of Bell &amp; Howell for $900 million -- a spokesman for Air Partners said Mr.
Bass was not taking part in the current bid.


Mishap Delays Mission to Mars
An American spacecraft being prepared for launching to Mars is seriously contaminated with metal filings, paint chips and other trash and will not be able to begin its journey on schedule, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration announced yesterday.
The contamination may have been introduced when technicians were trying to protect the spacecraft from Hurricane Andrew.


CHRONICLE
BARBARA GARSON, the author of the Vietnam-era play "MacBird" and a longtime member of the Socialist Party, got a message on her answering machine early in August: "We're sorry to tell you that the Socialist Vice-Presidential candidate, Bill Edwards, has died. We would like your help in writing a press release for the newspapers. And also, would you like to run for Vice President?"
Ms.
Garson at first thought the idea about being a candidate was a joke, but she called back and learned that it wasn't.
And so a week later, she agreed to be the running mate of J. QUINN BRISBEN, the party's Presidential candidate.


In Shooting That Hurt 12, The Witnesses Are Scarce
Investigators yesterday questioned a score of witnesses and a dozen victims who were gunned down indiscriminately in a Capone-like fusillade of rifles, pistols and shotguns outside a Bronx apartment building early Wednesday.
But on a street where drugs are relatively common, they found more fear than fact and no hard leads in one of the city's most ferocious shootings in recent years.
Detectives said the barrage outside 871 Longwood Avenue -- in which, astonishingly, no one was killed -- appeared to be a show of force by one of the loosely organized drug gangs that sell crack cocaine or heroin in the Hunts Point area, perhaps an effort to drive out a rival gang.


Father's Painful, Futile Plea: Give Up Thefts and Get a Job
Alfred Reeves knows that his 21-year-old son Steve roams with a gang that steals cars.
But he has despaired of trying to convince him to stop.
Mr.
Reeves recalled today that Steve and several friends stopped by his home on Peshine Avenue one day last week.
"I told all the kids, 'Cut the bull and get a job. All you're doing is worrying your parents to death.' I talked to him and I told him, 'Man, you're going to kill somebody.' He said he'd stop. That's all I can do."


So Cone Goes to Canada; Here's a Star From Russia
When the Islanders unveiled their first Russian player today, it was a little like many of their games last season: A nice, modest event that went unwitnessed by too many no-shows.
Coach Al Arbour was planning to attend today, but he canceled because of an illness in the family.
The team's new president, Jerome Grossman, was scheduled to appear, but he sent regrets because of a sudden business commitment.
Several television crews were supposed to be there, too, but most were detoured at the last minute by the Mets' trade of David Cone.
Even the traditional Russian folk dancers failed to perform, as scheduled, as defenseman Vladimir Malakhov was introduced at Fyodoroff, a Russian restaurant.


Bank Deal Seen as Near
The BankAmerica Corporation is near an agreement to buy the First Gibraltar Corporation, a Dallas-based savings institution, according to an investment banker familar with the sale.
The purchase of First Gibraltar, which has 131 branches in Texas and $7.3 billion in deposits, would at least partly satisfy BankAmerica's longstanding desire to expand in Texas.


Diner's Journal
Trois Jean
Trois Jean is a stylized, bustling new spot on East 79th Street in Manhattan named for its principals: Jean-Louis Dumonet, Jean-Marc Burillier and Jean-Luc Andriot.
It is already enormously popular, partly because of its alluring two-story space with its striking art, flattering lighting and welcoming staff.
At this early date, though, les trois partners seem to have as many ideas about what the place should be.
Prices are moderate, befitting a bistro, but the menu suggests something more ambitious.
The clientele is well dressed and very Upper East Side, yet there is butcher paper on the tables.
Moreover, some of the dishes are simply boring.
For starters, a ball of crab meat inside a layer of ratatouille ($12) was ice cold and lacked seasonings.
The Frenchified gazpacho ($7), thickened with a panade (a paste of flour, butter and milk) and garnished with shrimp, was agreeable, but not what one expects from the name.
Perhaps the best appetizer was a cumin-flavored salad of sweetbreads and artichokes with lacy fried leeks ($9).


Market Place; Bond Funds Attracting Surge of Cash
With interest rates down and the dollar falling, Americans are pouring money at a near record pace into mutual funds that invest in bonds, and much of that money is going into funds that buy foreign bonds, fund managers said yesterday.
But stock fund sales, which have been strong for all of 1992, weakened this month as some investors grew more cautious.


For Children
'Joseph Cornell: Revisited'  Henry DeFord 3d Gallery Citicorp Tower 1 Court Square Long Island City, Queens (718) 248-0691 Recommended ages: 4 and up Through Sept. 4
The artist Joseph Cornell, who lived most of his life on Utopia Parkway in Flushing, Queens, was the first modern artist to devote his creative abilities to what he called shadow boxes.
Children will not only find something childlike in these encapsulated miniature worlds, but they may also discover that all the objects they've sequestered amid dust balls under their beds can be gathered and organized into micro-universes.
It's not that Cornell's work is simple enough to be copied by a child, but these boxes could give children ideas for their own artworks made of everyday objects.


A Long, Rough Race. But Against Whom?; D'Amato Gears Up to Battle Ratings as Opponents Attack Each Other
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato doesn't have a Republican primary to worry about.
He doesn't know who his Democratic opponent will be in November.
But he is already campaigning, trying to position himself for the political fight of his life.
He has been on a tear around the state, spreading news of some Federal largesse, and his role in procuring it -- $2 million to renovate the pediatric wing of a Buffalo hospital, $440,000 to expand the Women's Rights National Park in Seneca Falls, $11.2 million from the Aquatic Nuisance Prevention and Control Act for the Great Lakes.
Reacting to Sag in Polls


Sports of The Times; Cone Deal: Too Much, Too Soon
EXCUSE me, Al Harazin, but the recent trade agreement among the United States, Canada and Mexico did not necessarily mean you had to ship David Cone north of Lake Ontario.
What's next?
Is Bobby Bonilla going to Veracruz?
Is this the good-neighbor policy gone amok?
Let's go over that again, doctor.
Tell me how the rich clubs from the big cities are going to spend all their television money to amass the best players.
If that is true, why are the Dodgers currently skulking around at the bottom of their division?
And whatever became of the White Sox and the Cubs?
Oh, and yes, how does that explain the present reduced circumstances of the Yankees and the Mets?


After Two-Month Standoff, California Appears on Verge of Passing a Budget
It has taken nearly two months, two agonizing months, during which California has been forced to pay it bills with i.o.u.'s, seen its once-enviable credit rating ruined, its old and poor threatened with loss of health care and its college classes shut.
But it appears now that the Government of California, paralyzed by recession, is finally close to passing a budget.
Weariness, lack of pay, panic over getting re-elected, public ridicule and political realities are combining to force members of the Legislature to end a protracted stalemate with Gov.
Pete Wilson in erasing a $10.7 billion budget gap.
The likely winner in this standoff, at least in the short run, is the Republican Governor, but it remains to be seen how the public responds to the painful cuts in public services he would impose.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Says Clinton Is Playing To Voters' Economic Worry
President Bush hammered away at Gov.
Bill Clinton's political positions today, charging on a Midwestern campaign trek that his rival's foreign-trade policies would destroy jobs and investment and trigger a "worldwide contraction" in economic growth.
Speaking to workers at a factory in St.
Louis and at a new industrial park in Findlay, the President likened Mr.
Clinton to a "fear monger" who is playing to voters' economic anxieties by proposing to hamstring foreign competitors.


Mob Aid Was Sought in Search
The New York City police turned to an unlikely source in seeking the surrender of Patrick Bannon, the suspect in the killing of an off-duty Housing Authority police officer.
Police investigators said that in looking for Mr.
Bannon, they tried to persuade the son of John Gotti to help in their search.
Although the effort to enlist the son of the imprisoned organized-crime leader was made Monday night and the suspect surrendered Wednesday, the police investigators said they did not know if pressure from the younger Mr.
Gotti caused Mr.
Bannon to surrender.


Louis C. Sudler, 89, Savior of a Symphony
Louis C. Sudler, a Chicago businessman who helped to bring about the Chicago Symphony Orchestra's return to international renown in the late 1960's and 70's, died on Tuesday at his home in Chicago.
He was 89 years old.
Mr. Sudler had Alzheimer's disease, said his son, Louis C. Sudler Jr.


Project Foes Are Critical Of Messinger
A day after she endorsed Donald J. Trump's huge Riverside South development, the Manhattan Borough President, Ruth W. Messinger, found herself the target of criticism from some of the groups in her political base -- the Upper West Side.
Ms.
Messinger, who has been one of the city's most consistent critics of development and who has long opposed the Trump project, came out in favor of the plan Wednesday, saying concessions made by the developer had met her objections.


D'Amato: Helping the Little Guy
The Radio Script
Narrator: Senator Al D'Amato. Gettin' done. Makin' waves. Takin' 'em on.


Between Four Rocks and a Hard Place
A dispute over four islands, lingering legacies of the cold war, threatens Japanese-Russian relations and an infusion of much-needed Japanese capital to the Russian economy.
Both proud nations need to reach some accommodation and begin to close the books on their past when Boris Yeltsin, Russia's President, visits Tokyo in two weeks.
Japan says the islands belonged to it until Stalin seized them after the World War II surrender in 1945, and wants them back.
But rising assertiveness among Russian nationalists, and a restive Russian military, could threaten any government in Moscow bold enough to commit itself to return all four islands.


Manhattan Samples Suburbia
WHO is the audience?
Who are things made for?
Who buys the room fresheners, eats the new breakfast foods, reads the revamped magazines?
We do.
We say, we'll try it.
We'll pick up a trial size.
Maybe we'll like it.
Or maybe we'll end up feeling that we're the ones on trial.
Do we belong in this target group?
Do we want in or out?
If we use enough of this stuff, will we get normal?


If Only Perez Pitched For Twins
At some point very soon, possibly even this weekend, the monthlong struggle of the world champion Minnesota Twins might be considered a bungee jump rather than a mere slide.
This was clearly not the time the Twins needed to encounter Melido Perez on the most confident and dominant night of his Yankee season.
"I think today is my first day to feel comfortable, to have a five-run lead," Perez said.
"I never feel like that before."


The Framers Weren't Stingy About Rights
To the Editor:
James Madison must be turning over in his grave when David Meredith claims in "As for Rights, Bork Follows Madison" (letter, Aug. 7) that Robert H. Bork follows Madison's principles in arguing in a July 8 Op-Ed article that a woman's right to choose abortion should be left up to "democratic majorities" and that the Constitution does not recognize a right to privacy.
It's no wonder that in 1987 when the Senate Judiciary Committee rejected the nomination of Judge Bork to the Supreme Court, it concluded that his "narrow definition of liberty" sets him apart "from every Justice who ever sat on the Supreme Court" and that his "rejection of the concept of unenumerated rights and liberties" was "fundamentally at odds with the express understanding of the Framers and with the history of the Supreme Court in building our tradition of constitutionalism."


An Exotic East That's Not Far
ONE of the glories of New York City is that you can come close to creating trips to exotic places, at least for an hour or two.
That is to say, you can pretend you are somewhere else.
Is that a good thing or a bad thing to say about a city?
Oh, I think it's good.
My wife and I stroll up and down 74th Street in the Jackson Heights section of Queens because of the good times we had in India.
We seek out a Vietnamese restaurant in TriBeCa to honor the sensational noodle soup in Nha Trang last year.
These outings require imagination, and food is always one of the major stimuli.


The Spoken Word
LECTURES AND WALKS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
"Peddler's Pack," a walking tour of the Lower East Side led by a costumed actor, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "House of Heritage," a slide show documenting the history of the museum building, and at 2 P.M. by "How We Lived: Life in a New York City Tenement," a discussion of the lives of the many immigrant groups in the area at the turn of the century, based on a scale model of a tenement building.
Separate admission is required for each event.
Lecture tickets: $4.
Walking tours: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street, Upper East Side.
All free with museum admission: $6; $3 for children.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


Dzevad Mujezinovic, Diplomat And Ex-Belgrade Envoy to U.S.
Dzevad Mujezinovic, a member of the Yugoslav Government and a former Ambassador to the United States, died Tuesday after a long illness, in the Vojno-Medicinska-Akademija Hospital in Belgrade.
He was 57 years old.
Mr.
Mujezinovic died of cancer of the colon, Nebojsa Vujovic, First Secretary at the Yugoslav Embassy in Washington said.


Gallo Winery Hire Thompson Official
Stephen A. Darland, executive vice president and general manager at J. Walter Thompson West, who supervises the agency's San Francisco and Los Angeles offices, said yesterday that he would leave Thompson, effective at the end of next month, for a senior marketing position at the E.&amp; J. Gallo Winery in Modesto, Calif.
In a telephone interview, Ron Burns, chief executive at J. Walter Thompson North America, said the agency was looking both internally and externally for a successor to Mr.
Darland, adding that a decision was expected shortly.


Review/Art; Getting Personal and Cultural in the Abstract
In the right hands, mainstream abstract painting can yield exciting results, as the small, well-selected show of William T. Williams's paintings, drawings and prints at the Studio Museum in Harlem demonstrates.
Mr.
Williams not only forges a transformative blend from the diverse styles encountered over a 30-year career but also contributes to a phenomenon that has so far eluded clear definition: a black sensibility within painterly abstraction.
The earliest work in the show, "Nu Nile" (1973), finds the artist subtly altering a Minimalist model.
The grid format has been broken up into a patchwork of odd geometric shapes tilted on a diagonal.
The forms are separated by impasto ridges, making the painting look welded together.
A pearlescent medium mixed into the monochromatic gray acrylic lends the surface a metallic sheen.
As if to jazz up a simulated high-tech formalism, Mr.
Williams marks the surface with a pattern of feathered brush strokes that have a mechanical regularity but catch the light like the ripples in watered silk.


New Ball Game for Mexican Toys
"Nobody likes this Free Trade Agreement," said Eduardo Iga Saade.
He was speaking as a Mexican toy maker.
"I was very happy making my lousy products. People bought them, I took my vacations, and everything was fine."
Yet five years after a first reduction of trade barriers turned the manufacture of tea sets, plastic trucks and the like into one of Mexico's more perilous industrial ventures, Mr.
Iga and the family-run company he heads are just the sort of survivors that the Government hopes will emerge from the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and the United States that was announced on Aug. 12.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; The Clinton Bus Goes to Texas, A Tossup State
No Democrat has made it to the White House in this century without winning Texas, and today Gov.
Bill Clinton went after Texas.
Sweeping from San Antonio to Austin and then heading for Waco in a caravan of buses, accompanied by his running mate, Senator Al Gore, the Democratic nominee relentlessly criticized President Bush's economic policies in an effort to lock up the state's 32 electoral votes.


Orange Journal; As French Get Older, Social Security Gets Wobbly
The quiet world of France's elderly saw a quick skirmish at midmorning when Marcel Roche announced that he liked his old age, his retirement, a bit of gardening and his sister-in-law's cooking and wine, which had so evidently rounded him.
"I've worked since I was 12," said Mr.
Roche, now a 78-year-old man of leisure who once laid bricks, bound brooms and tilled the land.
"Enough is enough. I just want to be spending my pension. I don't want to do another stitch of work."


Executive Changes
ANNE KLEIN &amp; ASSOCIATES, Mount Laurel, N.J., a public relations firm, named Nancy L. Farwell senior vice president.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORP.,Dallas, a manufacturer of a wide range of paper products, as well as household and health-care products, named Richard F. Auchter executive vice president.


Group Cuts Offer for London Development
One of the top investor groups bidding for the Canary Wharf development in London said yesterday that it had reduced its offer by $:115 million, or $227.7 million, because the scope of the project had changed.
Some people involved in the negotiations also saw the reduced offering as an indication that Canary Wharf is less attractive to potential investors.
They said the project seemed to be losing its potential to become a glitzy colony of corporate headquarters and might end up housing less glamorous back office operations instead, thus commanding lower rents.


Official Storm Death Count Does Not Tell Whole Story
Although the official death count for Hurricane Andrew in Florida now stands at 13, the deaths of at least 30 other people may be attributable to the storm, medical examiners performing autopsies in its aftermath said today.
Some of the 30 deaths occurred because high winds kept emergency workers from reaching victims, the medical examiner said, and others were due to anxiety and stress brought on by the storm and its aftermath.


Ferraro: Answering Mob Charges
The Television Script
Doak, Shrum, Harris, Sherman, Donilon of Washington.  ON THE SCREEN


Gunfight Steals Dreams for Rebirth in Bronx
Lydia Suarez cried yesterday as she stared at the storefront pocked by bullets, the sidewalk stained with blood, the Spanish-language newspapers recounting the wild shootout outside her apartment building in the Bronx early Wednesday morning that left two of her daughters wounded, with one of them paralyzed.
Three months ago, she had only heard the shots that wounded her son, Angel, in a robbery, but this time, she had watched from a fire escape.
For Mrs.
Suarez, life at 871 Longwood Avenue in Hunts Point had finally become unbearable.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.37
3.31
5.49
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.14
5.30
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.21
3.23
5.31
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.13
6.18
7.57
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.41
8.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.45
8.43
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.39
6.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Can the West Afford Flood of Bosnia Refugees?
To the Editor:
Margaret Thatcher ("Stop the Excuses. Help Bosnia Now," Op-Ed, Aug. 6) rightly demands a Western military presence in Bosnia.
"False Humanitarianism," Leslie H. Gelb's column the same day, calls our substitution of food parcels "a scam."
Since the West, save only President Francois Mitterrand, has been dilatory and cowardly in the face of moral appeals, perhaps it will listen to a more cynical, economic, argument: easy military victories are cheaper than hundreds of thousands of refugees, who, if not rapidly returned to their homes, will never go back.
Indira Gandhi showed the world this economic truth in Bangladesh in 1971, when her military intervention saved not only lives, but also money.





Accounts
*
C.
B.
Fleet Co., Lynchburg, Va., to Campbell-Mithun-Esty, New York and Toronto, to handle advertising for the Summer's Eve line of feminine care products, previously at Ayer Inc., New York.
Campbell was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $10 million to $15 million, one day after Ayer announced that it and Fleet would terminate their relationship.


TV Weekend; Tom Brokaw's Pop Quiz for America's Schools
In "America's Schools: Pass or Fail?," Tom Brokaw visits three innovative schools that are working to reverse the downward course of American education.
In Leadville, Colo., a school known as the Center is open from early morning till after dark, offering educational, health and social services to students and their families.
A Philadelphia high school is managing to get more inner-city youths interested in learning.
Magnet schools in Los Angeles seem to be giving off sparks.
Mr.
Brokaw maintains a respectful yet skeptical attitude as he questions teachers, principals and other educators.
The big problem for all the schools, most agree, begins at home, where parents are too busy or ignorant or troubled to give children the sort of start that most had a generation or two ago.
Can programs that engage these youngsters also teach them the facts and skills they will need to hold good jobs?
Mr.
Brokaw predicts change but sensibly resists making any grand promises.
Egypt Beyond the Pyramids  TBS Sunday at 9 P.M.
"National Geographic Explorer" starts its new season with a visit to the Great Pyramids on the Giza Plateau to investigate, with the help of archeologists, the mystery of who built the pyramids.
The main news here is that the workers are now believed by some to have been not slaves, but conscripted laborers.
After this dose of scholarship, the host, Robert Urich, relaxes with a report on Lucy, who is described as the world's premier belly dancer.
An ancient art, it says here, but Lucy looks thoroughly modern.
And the final segment of this undemanding two-hours reports on Thor Heyerdahl's theory that Egyptian merchants crossed the Atlantic to the Americas 2,000 years before Columbus.
Then how come the West had to wait so long for belly dancing?
The Sunday Talkies
In recognition of the fact that the next two months of Sunday talk shows will be largely devoted to Presidential politics, here are a few tips on how to listen to the language of the partisan guests:
"Let's move on." This is a signal that the guest would rather talk about something other than the question asked.
Democrats like to move on from the Congressional bank and post-office embarrassments.
Republicans prefer to move on from the Administration's policy toward Iraq before the invasion of Kuwait and, in general, from questions about the economy.
They will often get away with it by turning abruptly to the next questioner.
"Frankly." This word, as used by politicians, invariably precedes a statement that comes right out of their prepared package.
From a Republican: "Frankly, George Bush has an economic program." From a Democrat: "Frankly, Bill Clinton is a family man."
"The American people." This phrase is waved each week by representatives of both parties like warriors who have run out of ammunition.
Frankly, it signals the moment to hit the remote and move on.
The Brokaw Report America's Schools: Pass or Fail?
NBC, tomorrow at 10 P.M. (Channel 4 in New York.)  An NBC News report, directed by Kyle Good; written by Tom Brokaw, Martha Caskey, Paul W. Greenberg, Kyle Good and Sylvie Oberlander; Ms.
Oberlander ("The Center"), Mr.
Good ("Crossroads") and Ms.
Caskey ("Magnet"), segment producers; Ms.
Carruthers, show producer; Janet Pearce, senior producer; produced by Debbie Schooley and Ruth Oxenberg for NBC News; Paul W. Greenberg, executive producer; Mr.
Brokaw, anchor.


Editorial Notebook; Why T.N.T. Fizzled
New York City was horrified when Police Officer Edward Byrne was murdered in February 1988 as he sat in his patrol car guarding the house of a witness in a drug case.
Mayor Edward Koch and Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward responded swiftly by forming a "Tactical Narcotics Team" of more than 100 police officers.
This "T.N.T." invaded the drug-dominated neighborhood where Officer Byrne had been shot.
The team was supposed to arrest dealers on the streets and mobilize city agencies to hound other drug dealers.
It also was to encourage neighbors to provide information about drug deals.
The offensive, in South Jamaica, Queens, lasted for 90 days and brought favorable headlines and public support.
As a result, the department dispatched similar teams to other neighborhoods beset by drugs.


Review/Art; When the Medium Doesn't Agree With the Message
The "Art in the Anchorage" exhibition, now in its ninth summer, has lately tended to operate firmly in the gap between art and politics, and its 1992 incarnation is no exception.
The endangered environment, homelessness, nuclear weapons and women's rights are among the prominent themes in this year's exhibition, which as usual is in the Brooklyn Bridge Anchorage and has been organized by Creative Time, a nonprofit arts group in Manhattan.
To their credit, the five artists and the members of one collaborative group in the show -- all of them women -- have taken full advantage of the implicit theatricality of the anchorage's cavernous brick vaults, which are in many ways the closest thing in New York City to ancient Rome. (With their high-domed ceilings and musty, subterranean darkness, these enormous spaces seem part Baths of Caracalla, part catacombs.)


Iraq Fires Words, but No Missiles, at Allied Planes
Iraq said today that it would not challenge United States and allied aircraft in the skies over its southern region but would choose its own time and method to reply to what it called colonialist aggression.
In a defiant message on the Baghdad radio, the ruling Revolutionary Command Council and Baath Party said, "We will choose the appropriate methods and timing to confront this unjust, hostile decision," without specifying what action Saddam Hussein's Government was contemplating.


Gavaldon Is Paying the Price For Breaking From the Game
Two years ago, Angelica Gavaldon made it into the United States Open on her ranking and won her first-round match before losing to fourth-seeded Zina Garrison.
Although Gavaldon's United States Open debut at age 16 was overshadowed by the coming out party of 14-year-old Jennifer Capriati, the teen-ager from Mexico appeared to have a bright future.
Instead Gavaldon, now 18 and living in Coronado, Calif., grew tired of tennis and took time off from the tour.
It was a surprising decision because 1991, her opening season on the pro tour, had been full of promise -- she began the year with a stunning quarterfinal finish at the Australian Open and finished it ranked No. 51.


Can the West Afford Flood of Bosnia Refugees?; Double Standard
To the Editor:
In "Stop the Excuses. Help Bosnia Now." (Op-Ed, Aug. 6), Margaret Thatcher refers to "Bosnia." Yet the full name of this former republic of the former Yugoslavia is "Bosnia and Herzegovina." It consists of two provinces with largely separate historical identities.
When it was created by Yugoslav Communists at the end of the Second World War, it was always mentioned in the plural, as "these Bosnia and Herzegovina."
The more important reason Mrs.
Thatcher is wrong to demand that the "West's ultimate aim should be the restoration of the Bosnian state" is that the majority of the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina does not identify with it.
Muslims and Croats (43 percent and 17 percent of its population, respectively) voted in a referendum last March for separation of Bosnia and Herzegovina from Yugoslavia (from which Slovenia, Croatia and Macedonia had seceded).


SERBIAN OFFICIALS BACK WIDE ACCORD
An international conference on the former Yugoslavia adjourned tonight with an agreement by Serbian leaders to lift the siege of Sarajevo and other Bosnian cities, dismantle detention camps and turn over heavy weapons to United Nations forces.
But doubts were immediately raised on whether they would actually carry out the commitments.
The meeting also converted itself into a full-time conference that will resume next week in Geneva under the leadership of Cyrus R. Vance, the former Secretary of State who is representing the United Nations Secretary General, and Lord Owen, who today was named the European Community's chief negotiator on the Balkans, after the resignation of Lord Carrington on Tuesday.


Cone's Parting Shot: Mets Want Yes Boys
David Cone said goodbye to the Mets yesterday, and he suggested that with his departure, the Mets had formally and finally said goodbye to the 1980's.
"And end to an era, I think," said Cone, the right-hander who was traded to the Toronto Blue Jays yesterday.
"The era of the arrogant Mets is gone."


Educators Fight New York Panel On AIDS Pledge
The groups that run programs in the New York City schools on how to avoid AIDS were in open rebellion yesterday against the Board of Education's insistence that they pledge to emphasize abstinence over safe sex in classroom presentations.
More than 40 of the 200 AIDS education groups have refused to sign the pledge and most of the others are expected to do the same, a spokeswoman for the groups, Terry Lewis, said.


Restaurants
Steak Frites
Four-month-old Steak Frites, a clamorous, no-frills bistro near Union Square that produces better than average food, often has the appearance of a place that is nearly out of control.
The impression begins with your arrival.
On two of four visits, no one was at the reception desk.
We lingered.
A short time later, a woman lunged back to her post and looked up at the growing backlog of patrons with a startled expression befitting a tax delinquent confronted by a team of Internal Revenue Service agents.
On a preliminary visit to Steak Frites three weeks after it opened, I must have been served by the best waiter in the place, for more recent experiences bordered on the chaotic.
The staff mixed up drink orders or never brought them at all, served dishes to the wrong parties and allowed meals to drag on, especially at lunch, when the pace should be prompt.
At lunch one day, to my amazement, a table of three was served two wrong appetizers.
One of our orders, we learned almost 30 minutes after ordering, was not even available that day.


Canadians Work Out Details of Charter Pact
Canada's political leaders met here today to thrash out the final details of the proposals for constitutional changes that they worked out last week to try to preserve the country's unity.
They also deliberated over the desirability of holding a national vote on the changes in an effort to accelerate ratification.
"There are very important questions on which people ought to be consulted, and this is one of them," said Prime Minister Brian Mulroney.
He and most of the 10 provincial Premiers who worked out the unity package in Ottawa said they were convinced that the changes would be supported by most Canadians, including the Quebecers.


Blue Jays Are True To Their Tradition Of Late-Season Deals
David Cone is the latest in a series of pitchers the Toronto Blue Jays have acquired in mid or late season in recent years to fortify their chances for the American League East championship.
Based on the team's history with these acquisitions, Cone will be a member of the Blue Jays only until they finish playing this year, either Oct. 4 or at the end of the playoffs or the World Series.
Cone, the Mets' best pitcher in 1992, can be a free agent after this season, which is why the Mets traded him yesterday.
They indicated they felt they had, at best, a 50-50 chance to re-sign him.
Historically, the odds of a club's re-signing a premier player are slightly less than 50-50.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  U.S. PLANES FLY OVER IRAQ
American warplanes streaked north on their first mission to enforce a ban on Iraqi warplanes in southern Iraq and returned safely, reporting no signs of resistance.
A1
Iraq says it will not challenge allied aircraft.  A8
Arabs do not like Israel's offer but will not reject it out right.  A8
Thousand-year-old gold coins are found in ruins in Jordan.
A8  BRAZILIAN EXPECTED TO RESIGN
With the waters of a corruption scandal rising around his ears, President Fernando Collor de Mello is expected to resign within days, politicians and journalists predicted.
A3  SOMALIA AIRLIFT IS AGREED
After 10 days of negotiations, the Pentagon and the International Committee of the Red Cross agreed to work together on an airlift of food for famine-stricken Somalia.
A3  SERBS AGREE TO HALT BOSNIA SIEGE
A conference in London on the former Yugoslavia adjourned with an agreement by Serbian leaders to lift the siege of Sarajevo and other Bosnian cities, dismantle detention camps and turn over heavy weapons to United Nations forces.
But doubts were immediately raised on if they would actually carry this out.
A6  SCANDAL CREATES CRISIS IN JAPAN
A long-smoldering scandal claimed Japan's most powerful politician and created a crisis for the Government of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.
Shin Kanemaru, the shadowy kingmaker of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, admitted he had accepted an improper $4 million contribution from a trucking company and resigned his party positions.
A7  SOUTH AFRICA TO REFORM POLICE
The South African Government announced sweeping reforms of its discredited police force, including the forced retirement of one-third of the white-run top command, clearing the way for promotion of the country's first black generals.
A10  Canada's politicians meet on plans to preserve country's unity.
A5  Germans fear spread of rightist attacks on asylum seekers.
A9  Orange Journal: Worry in France about caring for the elderly.
A4  National A12-17  BUSH SENDING TROOPS TO FLORIDA
Amid mounting criticism of Federal relief efforts, the President said military forces would head to the Miami area to help it recover from Hurricane Andrew, which he said "might be the worst natural disaster in the nation's history." A1  IN THE WAKE OF THE STORM
At least 10 percent of the Miami area's residents were made homeless by Hurricane Andrew.
Now they are searching for places to live, largely without help.
A1
Insurance-policy holders face huge hurdles.  A15
Andrew's real death toll is higher than the official count.  A14
The storm destroyed a major narcotics interdiction center.  A15
Thousands of Louisianians began cleaning up.  A15  CALIFORNIA NEARS A SOLUTION
It has taken two extraordinarily painful months, but it appears that California is finally close to enacting a budget.
A12  A TURN IN SUNKEN-TREASURE FIGHT
Rejecting the principle of finders-keepers, a Federal appeals court ruled that several insurance companies deserved part of a $1 billion treasure from a shipwreck more than a century old.
A12  BUSH CALLS FOE A 'FEAR MONGER'
The President said Governor Clinton was playing to voters' economic anxieties by proposing to hamstring foreign competitors.
A16
Quayle said Clinton was "in the pocket of trial lawyers." A16
Clinton embarked on a bus tour of Texas.  A16
On the Trail: Barbara Bush went on the attack.  A16  A NEW HINT ON IMPLANTS
Researchers said they had found antibodies against silicone.
The finding supports speculation that silicone breast implants can lead to severe illnesses.
A17  HOMELESS CONFRONT SAN DIEGO
A tent city that had been erected in a public park as a way to force San Diego officials to deal with a lack of emergency shelter was pulled down by the police.
But there was no violence, and many of the homeless simply moved into a parking lot across the street.
A12  MOST BACK CONDOMS IN SCHOOLS
A Gallup poll found that 68 percent of Americans supported the idea of distributing condoms in the public schools.
A12  Detroit's former Police Chief was sentenced for theft.
A17  Law Page B6  A case for Solomon: Who knows what's best for a troubled girl?
A solution was proposed in a Los Angeles racial dispute.
At the Bar Metro Digest B1  GARBAGE PLAN APPROVED
The New York City Council approved a long-range plan for disposing of the city's garbage that calls for building a new incinerator in the Brooklyn Navy Yard and significantly increasing recycling.
A1  SHAKING A BLOCK'S HOPE
A day after a handful of assailants unleashed a ferocious barrage of bullets at a crowd gathered on the sidewalk, wounding 12 people, the shootout has shaken the area's hope for rebirth.
A1  AIDS POLICY REVOLT
The groups that run programs in the New York City's schools on how to avoid AIDS were in open rebellion yesterday against the Board of Education's insistence that they pledge to emphasize abstinence over safe sex in classroom presentations.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-26  New park on the Hudson.
C1  Spotting celebrities.
C1  A Mideast crossroads in Brooklyn.
C1  For Children C13  Theater: "On the Razzle." C2  Film: "Honeymoon in Vegas." C8  Music: Betty Carter's jazz.
C3  Word and Image: "Bay of Arrows," a novel of Columbus.
C26  Obituaries D16  Dzevad Mujezinovic, diplomat and ex-Belgrade envoy to U.S.
Daniel Gorenstein; charted math's densest fields.
Sports B8-15  Baseball: Mets trade Cone to Toronto.
B9  Yanks' Perez shuts out Twins.
B11  Vincent admits mistake in Yankee case.
B9  Blue Jays true to late-season form.
B9  Dream ends for Jersey Little Leaguers.
B11  Column: Vecsey on David Cone.
B9  Football: Steelers' Ehrhardt opposes former players.
B15  Jets remain perfect in preseason.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  No-fly in Iraq.
Why?
Clean, courageous politics.
Between 4 rocks and a hard place.
David C. Anderson: T.N.T.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: Nodding to bullies.
Douglas Davis: Presidential debates, my way.
Warren Getler: Watching the dollar sink.
Richard M. Walden: The disaster after the disaster.


Review/Film; Mom, Marriage, the Mob And a Swarm of Elvises
Andrew Bergman has been getting his act together for some time, beginning, in the minds of most of us, when he wrote the story for "Blazing Saddles" and was a member of the platoon of comic talents who collaborated on its screenplay.
He also wrote "The In-Laws," and wrote and directed "So Fine" and "The Freshman."
Now, with "Honeymoon in Vegas," which he wrote and directed, Mr.
Bergman arrives in the very big time.
"Honeymoon in Vegas" is a virtually nonstop scream of benign delirium, pop entertainment as revivifying as anything you're likely to see this year.
It's a romantic farce in which the explosion of the epically earnest and funny central situation creates shock waves that leave no person or thing untouched.
Even the film's bit players and extras are funny.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in Business Day on Monday about fare cuts by Northwest Airlines misstated one fare.
The promotionalround-trip fare between Minneapolis and Chicago will remain $140.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Vice President; Quayle Says Letter Shows Lawyers 'Own' Clinton
Trying to make the case that Gov.
Bill Clinton is "totally in the pocket of trial lawyers," Vice President Dan Quayle distributed a letter today in which the president of the Arkansas Trial Lawyers Association praised Mr.
Clinton for opposing efforts to limit damages in lawsuits.
In the letter to his counterpart in Houston, the Arkansas lawyer, David H. Williams, wrote: "I can never remember an occasion when he failed to do the right thing where we trial lawyers were concerned. So can I recommend that your folks put their money behind Bill Clinton for President? Not just yes, but hell yes." Clinton Is Defended
Mr.
Quayle, who has led the Bush Administration's campaign to overhaul the civil justice system, called a news conference in his office to pass out the letter, dated last July 10.
Aides to Mr.
Quayle said the letter fell into the hands of a Bush supporter who forwarded it to the campaign.


Destroyed: Front Line in Fight Against Cocaine Traffickers
One of the nation's most important Federal drug interdiction centers was destroyed by Hurricane Andrew, and the Customs Commissioner said today that she expected narcotics traffickers to try to take advantage of the crisis in the next several days and flood South Florida with cocaine and other illegal drugs.
But the Commissioner, Carol Hallett, said Customs operation centers in Jacksonville, Tampa and San Juan, P.R., had assumed radar and aircraft surveillance from the damaged installation at Homestead Air Force Base near Miami.


Daniel Gorenstein, Who Charted Math's Densest Fields, Dies at 69
Prof.
Daniel Gorenstein of Rutgers University, one of the world's foremost theoreticians in what may be the supreme example of abstract mathematics, died Wednesday at his summer home in Chilmark on Martha's Vineyard.
He was 69 years old and lived in Rocky Hill, N.J.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Treasury Bond Yield Falls Slightly
The Treasury market did not go far yesterday as it got a dose of perplexing economic news and a small rally in the dollar faded by the end of the day.
But the market got a last-minute lift, just as many traders were heading home, when the Federal Reserve reported that two key measures of the nation's money supply grew much less than expected in the week ending Aug. 17.


CHEMICAL TO SELL 31 MANUFACTURERS BRANCHES TO FLEET
The Chemical Banking Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to sell 31 Manufacturers Hanover Trust branches in upstate New York with $1 billion of consumer deposits to the Fleet Bank of New York, a subsidiary of the Fleet Financial Group, Providence, R.I.
The branch network, concentrated in Albany, Buffalo, Rochester, and Syracuse, was not large enough to be highly profitable for Chemical but was attractive to Fleet, which already has a network of 244 branches with $8 billion in deposits in upstate New York.
Manufacturers had been planning to sell the branches before it merged with Chemical at the end of last year.
The sale does not include any of Chemical's 8 lending offices and 10 branches in upstate New York, which specialize in lending to small and medium-sized companies.
Terms were not disclosed.
The banks expect to close the deal in January.


Poll Shows 68% Support Distribution of Condoms at Schools
In an election year when improving education has become an important political issue, a new poll shows that the public is ready to embrace some bold new ideas but gives politicians failing grades for their educational reform efforts.
One of the most surprising findings in the 24th annual Gallup poll of attitudes toward public schools was that 68 percent of those surveyed supported the distribution of condoms in schools, an idea that was unthinkable a decade ago.
Majorities also supported a longer school year and the provision of social services at schools.


COMPANY NEWS
H.J.
HEINZ CO.  and Hillsdown Holdings P.L.C., a leading British food company, are buying Kecskemeti Konzervgyar R.T., a state-owned canning company 50 miles south of Budapest.
PHAR-MOR INC., the drugstore chain forced into Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings by reported fraud by top executives, plans to call 170 laid-off employees back to work at its Tamco Distributors division.


No-Fly in Iraq. Why?
American and allied warplanes yesterday started roaring across southern Iraq to enforce a "no-fly zone." It's a dramatic new step against Saddam Hussein but the purpose is unclear, probably unwise and maybe even illegal.
Americans do not shrink from using force against the Iraqi dictator, but this time something is missing: a plausible explanation.
President Bush describes the mission as human rights surveillance, based on a strained interpretation of a 16-month-old U.N. resolution.
He's emphatic about what he does not have in mind -- scoring political points, promoting partition of Iraq or deflecting attention from Bosnia.
He's wholly unclear about what he does have in mind.


More Adventures In Pay-Per-View
Pay-per-view has not gone into shamed seclusion simply because the Olympics Triplecast became the very financial folly predicted of it.
Not a chance.
Promoters don't sound like they are suffering from Post-Triplecast Stress Syndrome.
They say the Triplecast did not matter, that it was an aberration or that it has no relation to what they are hawking.


Newark Stuck For Solution On Car Thefts
On the heels of yet another violent confrontation between car thieves and the police, Newark and Essex County officials said today that it would take a major reordering of the juvenile justice system to solve the city's chronic car-theft problem.
And that, they said, will take money they do not have.
The officials say auto theft is now given a low priority compared with other crimes committed by young people like armed robberies, rapes and homicides.
If nothing is changed, they say, there will be another generation of young car thieves, ready to graduate to other forms of crime as adults.


Widmann to Merge With Taylor-Gordon
Two small New York agencies, Taylor-Gordon, Aarons &amp; Company and Widmann &amp; Company, said yesterday that they would merge following the closing of the Taylor-Gordon office, effective on Monday.
The new shop, which will be called Taylor-Gordon/Widmann &amp; Company, will have combined billings estimated at $30 million.


Critic's Choice/Dance; A Preview of the Season, Reviewers Not Invited
Now in its fourth year, the Feld Ballets/NY preview season has become a summer tradition.
For two weeks dance lovers can get a jump on the dance year at Feld performances for them alone, with critics not invited to review.
It is a time to explore the new -- both dancers and ballets -- and enjoy the familiar.
This weekend the Feld will dance one of two new works that will have official premieres during the company's regular season at the Joyce Theater in March and April.
"Frets and Women," commissioned in part by Tag-Heuer, the Swiss manufacturer of sports watches, will be performed tonight and tomorrow afternoon and evening.
The official description of the ballet -- as a series of ensemble and solo dances that differ in shape and rhythm but are unified by their emotional shadings -- could be used as well for anything from "Giselle" to the latest eruption from south of 14th Street.
The dance is set, however, to music by Lou Harrison, whose new popularity among choreographers these days is much deserved.
And it stars Geralyn DelCorso, Mucuy Bolles and Buffy Miller, three of Eliot Feld's most engaging ballerinas.


INSIDE
Political Crisis in Japan
A long-smoldering scandal claimed Japan's most powerful politician and created a crisis for the Government.
The politician said he had accepted a $4 million contribution and resigned his ruling party positions.
Page A7.
Pretoria to Reform Police
The South African Government announced sweeping reforms of its police force, clearing the way for the first black generals.
Page A10.
California Nears a Solution
It has taken two extraordinarily painful months, but it appears that California is now on the verge of enacting a state budget.
Page A12.
Mets Deal Their Ace
The New York Mets averted a multi-million-dollar, free-agent showdownwith David Cone, their best pitcher, by trading him to the Toronto Blue Jays.
Page B9.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Alcan AluminumLtd., Montreal, is offering $100 million of 6 3/8 percent five-year senior unsecured notes at a price of 99.54 to yield 6.484 percent through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Digital Equipment Corp., Maynard, Mass., filed a shelf registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission covering up to $1 billion of debt securities.


Can the West Afford Flood of Bosnia Refugees?; A Right to Asylum
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 12 front-page account of requests by 20,000 Muslims to the United Nations for assistance in leaving Bosnia and Herzegovina presents circumstances requiring immediate action by the international community.
The requests for safe passage were made to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which has provided humanitarian assistance in the former Yugoslavia.
The refugees agency is in the forefront of a trend to ameliorate situations in countries where the displaced might otherwise flee to the borders.
The extraordinary arrangements last year for displaced Kurds in northern Iraq is a recent example.
But providing internal humanitarian assistance, while laudable, is not a substitute for temporary refuge abroad.


Sounds Around Town
Nigerian Juju
Sir Shina Peters, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Sir Shina Peters represents a younger generation of Nigerian juju performers just beginning to reach a worldwide touring circuit that has embraced King Sunny Ade and Ebenezer Obey.
Mr.
Peters's band mixes Yoruba lyrics with occasional messages in English -- "shake your body" among them -- as it plays a kinetic, percussion-centered juju.
Its drums are part of a 22-piece band with choral vocals, bell-toned synthesizers, chiming guitars and dancers.
His music will stretch out, as it does at home in Nigeria, into sets more than two hours long.
Tonight at 8:30 and 11:30; tickets are $15.
The Bhundu Boys
The Bhundu Boys, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at West Houston Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
In the Bhundu Boys' exuberant jit music, a Zimbabwean style of rock, intertwined triple-time riffs that were once plinked out on thumb pianos have been transferred to guitars, where they become patterns that are both transparent and irresistibly propulsive.
The group performs tonight at 12:30 A.M., sharing a bill with Zimbabwe Legit, a rap group, at 10:30 P.M., and Zulu Spear, a South African reggae band, at 11:30.
Tickets are $16.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The gross domestic product grew at a puny 1.4 percent annual rate in the second quarter, the Government said, citing consumers' reluctance to spend.
But a record drop in applications for unemployment insurance in mid-August and better corporate profits offered glimmers of hope for improved growth later.  [ Page D1. ]
Battalions of insurance adjusters visited South Florida, trying to reach the tens of thousands of home owners who need cash for emergency supplies, food and shelter.
But so overwhelming is the devastation from Hurricane Andrew that they are having great difficulty getting together with policyholders.  [ A15. ]


G.M. Parts Plant Struck; Saturn Halt Is Seen
Hourly workers struck a General Motors Corporation metal fabricating plant in Lordstown, Ohio, today, sending a tremor through G.M. assembly operations.
G.M.'s Saturn plant in Spring Hill, Tenn., anticipating a shortage of parts made in Lordstown, was scheduled to stop making cars early Friday.
More G.M. assembly plants could shut within days, but the auto maker declined to say which would be affected.


T. Girard Wharton, A Lawyer, Dies at 88
T.
Girard Wharton, a prominent lawyer in New Jersey and a former president of the New Jersey Bar Association, died Saturday at his home in Somerville, N.J.
He was 88.
Mr.
Wharton died of heart failure, said Miles S. Whinder 3d, a partner in the Somerville, N.J., law firm of Ozzard Wharton.
Ozzard Wharton is the successor to the law firm Mr.
Wharton co-founded in 1930.


Bridgeport Agrees to Expand 2 Waste Businesses
Officials today announced an agreement that could bring hundreds of construction jobs and millions in revenue to this perpetually cash-starved city: a plan to expand the regional garbage incinerator here and build a sewage-sludge processing plant next to it.
"This is an industrial town, and this is industry," Mayor Joseph Ganim said, putting the best face on the city's efforts to build up its battered revenue base.
"This is a benefit to the taxpayers."


T.W.A. to Shut New York Site
Trans World Airlines said yesterday that it would close its Manhattan reservation office at 2 Penn Plaza and lay off the 450 union members employed there.
The move, part of a major consolidation, will reduce the airline's presence in Manhattan to a small sales office at the same location.
The reservations operation, one of four nationwide, will shut on Oct. 25, the same day a new operating plan for the bankrupt airline is scheduled to take effect.


Ferraro Counterattacks in War of Ads
Wrapping herself in the flag of feminism to answer attacks by another woman, Geraldine A. Ferraro yesterday released a new commercial in her campaign for the Democratic Senate nomination from New York, likening herself to Anita F. Hill as a woman bravely battling "lies, innuendo and smears."
In the 30-second advertisement, a somber narrator says, "Geraldine Ferraro is being attacked by Al D'Amato, Bob Abrams and even Liz Holtzman." It slaps back at an unusually tough ad already broadcast by Ms.
Holtzman, the City Comptroller, which uses a picture of the cover story of last week's Village Voice headlined "What You Don't Know About Ferraro and the Mob."


Review/Theater; 'Distant Fires,' Pushing the Limits of the World of Work
"Distant Fires," first presented in New York by the Atlantic Theater Company, reopened last night at Circle in the Square Downtown, 159 Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, in a production presented by the Herrick Theater Foundation.
Following are excerpts from Mel Gussow's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 17, 1991.
Tempers are flaring on a construction site in Kevin Heelan's "Distant Fires," as five laborers pour cement and react diversely to the limits of their lives.
This perceptive group portrait of men at work is the combined contribution of the playwright, his director, Clark Gregg, and an ensemble cast.


U.S. Team Rallies In World Bridge Play
The American Open team played strongly at the World Bridge Championships here today, winning 25-4 against Argentina and then defeating the front-running Dutch team 18-12.
They are well placed to qualify for quarterfinal playoffs next week.
With almost half the qualifying rounds completed, the standings in their group are 1.
Netherlands, 274 victory points; 2.
United States, 267; 3.
Iceland, 255; 4.
Pakistan, 250; 5.
Norway, 249.


Books of The Times; Metaphor for Columbus, and Not a Pleasant One
Bay of Arrows  By Jay Parini  383 pages. Henry Holt &amp; Company. $22.50.
Christopher Genovese, or Geno, as he calls himself, is the hero of Jay Parini's latest novel and one of the more irritating fictional characters to come along in a long time.
Geno teaches English at a small Vermont college.
Though he took a leave just two years ago, he's eager to take another sabbatical: he wants to go to the Dominican Republic to research a poem he is writing on Christopher Columbus.
In fact, Geno is constantly thinking up get-rich-quick schemes that will enable him to quit his job altogether.
Among his ideas are gold speculation (using money borrowed from his father-in-law) and a thriller about a gay K.G.B. spy who tells the C.I.A. he will become a mole in exchange for nude photos of a handsome American agent.


A Risky Stance on the Falling Dollar
The sharp slide of the value of the United States dollar to all-time lows recently is an alarm bell going off in the world's currency markets.
But in Washington, no one seems to be listening.
With the American economy weak and a Presidential race in its homestretch, the Federal Reserve Board and the Bush Administration want to avoid raising interest rates.
An increase in rates would prop up the dollar, but also raise the cost of borrowing on everything from business loans to home mortgages.


Mitchell May Jr. Insurance Executive, 89
Mitchell May Jr., a retired insurance executive, died Tuesday at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y.
A resident of Bronxville, he was 89 years old.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


County Is Filing Suit In Effort to Postpone Election in Florida
Dade County commissioners officials directed the County Attorney today to file a Federal lawsuit in an effort to postpone a statewide primary election scheduled for Tuesday because of the extensive hurricane damage.
The Board of County Commissioners asserts that many Dade County voters would be disenfranchised if the election was held as scheduled because they would be unable to get to polling places.


CHRONICLE
The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington announced its 15th annual awards yesterday for "contributions to the cultural life of the nation."
They will go to LIONEL HAMPTON, GINGER ROGERS, MSTISLAV ROSTROPOVICH, PAUL TAYLOR, and PAUL NEWMAN and JOANNE WOODWARD.


At the Bar; The Patron Saint of the Homeless Says He's Had Enough of the Big-City, Big-Firm Life.
Plenty of fast-track New York lawyers have abandoned the city over the last few years, saying they were convinced that 24 hours a day are not enough to maintain both a family life and a successful career, New York style.
Others say they were overwhelmed by the intensity of life in the city and by the crush of poverty and homelessness outside their gleaming office towers.
But for many New York lawyers it was still a shock, almost like hearing Mother Teresa had had enough of India, when they learned that Robert M. Hayes, a leading advocate for the New York homeless, was resigning from O'Melveny &amp; Myers and making tracks for a nine-lawyer firm in Portland, Me.


MAKER OF COLT GUNS CUTS 12% OF SALARIED STAFF
In the latest move to restructure the Colt's Manufacturing Company, the West Hartford, Conn., gun maker will disclose today that it will eliminate 22, or roughly 12 percent, of its salaried staff.
Colt's, which entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings in March, dismissed a similar number of workers in June.
Ronald C. Whitaker, president and chief executive, said the cuts would save the company roughly $2 million a year.


City Ousts Homeless From Encampment
City officials acted quickly this week to remove a tent city for the homeless that had been set up in a rarely used public parking lot in Balboa Park.
The encampment was set up by an advocate for the homeless in an effort to force the city to come to grips with the growing number of homeless people in San Diego and the lack of enough public shelters for them.
The wooded hills of the park, a popular tourist area that overlooks downtown, have long served as an illegal campground for hundreds of the homeless.


Helen Del Monte; Magazine Editor, 62
Helen Del Monte, the fiction editor of McCall's magazine from 1969 to 1990, died Aug. 21 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 62 and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs. Del Monte died of cancer, said her husband, Roy.


Accord Reached, Somalia Airlift Will Start Today
After 10 days of negotiations, the Pentagon and the International Committee of the Red Cross said today that they had agreed to work together on an airlift of food to famine-stricken Somalia that would start Friday .
The Red Cross, the only relief organization working on a large scale in remote regions of Somalia, said the Americans had agreed to their longstanding conditions that the military aircraft ferrying Red Cross food would not carry armed men.
The Red Cross emblem will be affixed to the American planes, they said.


Gary B. Vowels, 57, Architect and Planner
Gary Bruce Vowels, an architect and planner, died on Monday at his home in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
He was 57 years old.
He died from an illness related to polio he contracted as a boy, said his wife, Lenore M. Lucey.


A TOP POLITICIAN RESIGNS IN JAPAN
A long-smoldering scandal claimed Japan's most powerful politician today and created a crisis for the Government of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.
The politician, Shin Kanemaru, the shadowy kingmaker of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, admitted that he had accepted an improper $4 million contribution from a trucking company and resigned his party positions.


Pop/Jazz; A World Written, and Rewritten, by Betty Carter
There isn't another jazz singer alive who can create as complete a world as Betty Carter.
Her tempos, slower than a glacier, allow her to move through the emotional moods of her pieces as if in a dream.
Because she rewrites so much of her material, completely remaking standards, the familiar, which draws a listener in, becomes the new, as if a memory had been somehow transformed.
And when she lets fly, her tempos hurtling along, she brings in her audience by the simple athleticism of her performances.
Ms.
Carter, at age 62, is jazz's finest singer.
But that's esthetics.
For years, Ms.
Carter, who is appearing at the Blue Note in Greenwich Village through Sunday night, has been providing the jazz world with immaculately disciplined sidemen.
A stint in her trio is a badge of achievement.
Ms.
Carter is also one of jazz's finest small-group arrangers, and she will change tempos, meters and keys in midtune, and abruptly.
She'll season a teen-age musician in just a few months.
With the death of the drummer Art Blakey in 1990, Ms.
Carter has become jazz's finest university as well.


Despite the Devastation, Louisianians Feel Lucky
The sounds of chain saws and bulldozers filled the ravaged towns and rural byways of Louisiana's Cajun country today as thousands of people who had fled Hurricane Andrew's ferocious winds returned home to begin cleaning up.
And as they cleared away streets clogged with debris, the people of south-central Louisiana also began the painful task of measuring the damage done to their lives.


Review/Pop; Sad Songs After Love Has Flown
Clint Black has a song about how it feels to lose the woman you love.
At the Meadowlands Summerfest outdoor stage here tonight, Mr.
Black performed all these songs and more: "Burn One Down," "Loving Blind," "Live and Learn" and "Killin' Time." By the end of the set, his characters had spent so much time brokenhearted, drunk, crying and lovelorn that one almost wondered why Mr.
Black hadn't written a song sending them collectively over a cliff to end their misery.


No Headline
"We've got 120,000 C-ration meals that are here somewhere, but we don't know where the hell they are. Right now, a truckload of food gets there, 200 people show up, 50 people get food and 150 people are angry. We've got to find a way to solve that." -- GOV.
LAWTON CHILES of Florida.  [ A14:5. ]


Transactions
Football  National Football League
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Claimed Wayne Haddix, cornerback, on waivers from the Cincinnati Bengals.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Waived Joe Fuller, defensive back; Chris Holder, wide receiver; and Frank Conover, nose tackle.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Signed Jack Trudeau, quarterback, to a three-year contract.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Signed Stacey Simmons, wide receiver.
Canadian Football League
CFL -- Announced that Vancouver Football Operations Ltd. has taken over the operation of the British Columbia Lions from the Prime Sports Limited Partnership.


After Homes Are Ruined, Hopes Are Dashed
It is a figure that staggers the imagination: at least one of every 10 of the two million residents of Miami and its southern suburbs was left without a home by Hurricane Andrew.
With the storm gone and the authorities occupied with cleaning up debris and delivering food and water, the many homeless are now searching, desperately and largely without help, for places to live.
In the working-class suburb of Princeton south of Miami, for instance, more than 40 members of the Soto family have been crowded into the four-bedroom home of the family patriarch, Jose Soto, since Monday.
Over the years, nine of Mr.
Soto's children, their spouses and 23 of his grandchildren have built or bought homes within blocks of his house.
All were destroyed.


Vincent Says A Mistake Was Made in Yankee Case
Commissioner Fay Vincent, locked in a dispute with a sizable group of club owners, settled a dispute with the Players Association yesterday over his questioning of three Yankees employees who testified in the Steve Howe arbitration hearing.
As a result, according to a person familiar with the settlement, the commissioner's office will issue a memorandum to all clubs and baseball employees acknowledging that the action might have been inappropriate.


QE2 Went Racing In a Shallow Passage
To the Editor:
Now that we know the Queen Elizabeth 2 struck an uncharted obstruction (news article, Aug. 15), the most important question is why the captain and pilot were speeding at 24 knots in the dark at mud low tide in an area where the charts read some 40 feet of water, while the Q.E. 2 draws 32?


Giving the Jobless Tips and Hope
Mel Speier learned some lessons today about maneuvering through the slippery economy, lessons like making sure that his business cards highlight his professional experience and his resume doesn't read like an obituary.
Mr.
Speier, an executive who was laid off from a steel importing firm eight months ago, already had a briefcase stuffed with resumes when he came to a conference for the unemployed and the underemployed at Westchester Community College.


No Headline
"We are really happy to be here. We're always going everywhere else to help people, so it's especially rewarding to be able to do this for our fellow Americans." -- SGT.
CHERYL GOODEN, doing relief duty in Florida.  [ 9:3. ]


BAGHDAD BRISTLES OVER JET PATROLS
With American and allied jets in control of the skies over southern Iraq for a second day, the Baghdad Government continued to bristle, but stopped short of proposing any kind of military response.
In a front-page editorial, a Government-controlled newspaper suggested that Iraq and the Government of President Saddam Hussein would survive and continue to rebuild, even if the country was attacked by the West.


I'm the Anti-Family Voter
I suspect President Bush thinks my kind doesn't exist, at least not in any great number.
So I thought I'd introduce myself.
I'm the anti-family voter.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the singer Betty Carter in the Pop/Jazz column misstated the times of her shows tonight and tomorrow at the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street.
They are at 9 and 11:30 P.M.


Standing Up for Tompkins Square Park
In the past few years, whenever I began to lose heart over Tompkins Square Park, I reminded myself that throughout its troubled history it has continually triumphed over strife and violence to survive as a haven for residents of the East Village.
For more than a century, the park has been a forum for public debate, and sometimes for violent confrontation.
In January 1874, 7,000 people agitating for work relief clashed with the police.
In 1877, railway workers supporting the nation's first railway strike convened in the park.


A Twisting Walk to Inner Peace on a Painted Purple Canvas
Stretched across the nave floor of the majestic Grace Cathedral like a tarpaulin hauled in from a football field, the 35-foot-wide labyrinth is nothing more than a bright purple pattern painted on an expanse of bleached canvas.
Yet the design has an extraordinary pedigree: it is a replica of a labyrinth built into the stone floor of Chartres Cathedral in France, and it inspires in the people who have come to walk along its sinuous, painted path a palpable mix of solemnity and joy.


Judge Rules Sexual History Is Admissible in Trial
A New Jersey judge ruled today that the past sexual conduct of a mildly retarded woman from Glen Ridge, N.J., is admissible evidence in the trial of four former high school football teammates accused of sexually assaulting her.
New Jersey's rape-shield law restricts the presentation to juries of information about the previous sexual activities of alleged victims of rape or sexual assault.
But under some circumstances, that shield can be lifted, and Judge Burrell Ives Humphreys said today that the need to protect the woman was outweighed in this case by the right of the defendants to a fair trial.


Road to Death in a Serbian Prison Camp
Omer Filipovic, a Muslim high-school teacher and political leader from the Bosnian town of Kljuc, died on July 28, his death certificate says, in the solitary-confinement stall of a prison camp run by the Bosnian Serb army at a cattle farm on this nearly treeless plateau.
His story, reconstructed from interviews with acquaintances and witnesses and buttressed by the death certificate, offers a rare look at the ordeal of one who died in a Serbian camp. 'Natural Causes,' Serbs Say
Thousands of Muslims have died as Serbian forces have swept through Bosnia and Herzegovina, uprooting and destroying centuries-old Muslim communities and herding into camps men suspected of resisting, or having the potential to resist, their takeover.


When Peoples Scattered by Iberian Empires Came to Olympics
To the Editor:
As a footnote to the Olympic Games, William C. Rhoden writes in Sports of The Times (some editions, Aug. 11) about the Spanish and Catalan reaction to the races represented in the games, especially formerly subjugated or alienated groups in the old Spanish and Portuguese empires.
He mentions "bozales," "ladinos," "morenos" and "mestizos," which really mixes oranges and bananas.


Devils Trade Burke, but Weinrich Goes, Too
After more than a year of trying, the Devils finally traded Sean Burke, their disgruntled goaltender, but they also had to part ways with Eric Weinrich, a talented and reliable defenseman, to get what they wanted in return.
Burke and Weinrich were sent to the Hartford Whalers yesterday for Bobby Holik, a 21-year-old Czechoslovak forward whose potential was never fully explored in his two years with the Whalers.
The Devils also received two draft choices in the deal.


Anderson May Be Counting The Days
When the Giants play the Steelers in Pittsburgh on Saturday night in their final preseason game, it may be the last game as a Giant for Ottis Anderson.
It has nothing to do with his performance.
It does have something to do with his age because the 35-year-old Anderson is the oldest running back in the National Football League.


Lloyd's Plan Is Approved
Lloyd's of London said the wealthy individuals who provide its capital had overwhelmingly supported a resolution of confidence in its management, giving the troubled insurer's leadership breathing room in an effort to restore the institution's profitability.
Lloyd's said 80.3 percent of the 23,000 people who voted had supported the resolution, which backs the current management team's strategy of tightening internal regulations but not taking extraordinary steps to bail out those investors who have suffered financially crippling losses.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; Seething, Clinton Assails Bush Over Tax Charges
To hear Gov. Bill Clinton tell it, he's "scalded."
Ever since the 1992 campaign began, he has been hammering President Bush for breaking his "read my lips" promise not to raise taxes.
Now the President is hammering back on the Clinton tax record, and the Governor says the turnabout is unfair play.
Mr.
Bush contends that while he slipped up and raised taxes once, Mr.
Clinton slipped 128 times in his years as Governor.


Observer; Rendered Onto Chancellor
A rare mistake appeared in this column last week.
I said John Chancellor of NBC had been hauled off the floor of the 1968 Democratic Convention in Chicago by the convention gendarmerie.
As thousands have correctly pointed out in letters, postcards, fax messages, voice mail, cables, overland telegraph wires, smoke signals, semaphore and handwritten notes attached to stones thrown through my window panes, it was at the 1964 Republican Convention in San Francisco, not the 1968 Democratic Convention in Chicago, that Mr.
Chancellor was hauled off the floor.


Claremont Journal; Where Tax Bills Rival the Mortgages
Owen and Camilla Wadleigh were proud owners of a gabled stone house that had been in Mr.
Wadleigh's family since the mid-1800's, a house where Mr.
Wadleigh's father grew up, as did his grandfather before him.
But in a matter of weeks, the Wadleighs will lose their much-beloved home at 43 High Street.
Squeezed by rising local property taxes, the Wadleighs, who borrowed from a local bank to buy the house from the estate of Mr.
Wadleigh's grandmother, aredeeding the house to the bank to avoid the additional costs of foreclosure proceedings.


Daniel Ludwig, Billionaire Businessman, Dies at 95
Daniel K. Ludwig, the self-made American shipowner and real estate man who was for years one of the world's richest men, died Thursday afternoon at his midtown Manhattan apartment.
He was 95 years old.
The cause of his death was heart failure, and he had been in poor health for several years, said R. Palmer Baker Jr., a lawyer who is Mr.
Ludwig's executor.


Gunshots So Loud They Drown Out the Dreams
WHEN his legs feel up to the task, John grabs his cane and a folding chair, slowly ventures down four flights of stairs and settles into a day of sidewalk talk and silent reveries.
A 66-year-old retired electrician, John has lived on Stebbins Avenue in Hunts Point for five years, and although it's only a short walk to Longwood Avenue where 12 young people were caught in a frenzied fusillade the other night, he said the place still beats his old ramshackle neighborhood in Harlem.
Sometimes he thinks about returning to his native Virginia and resuming the easy rhythms of a life interrupted by the need to work up North.
Sometimes he wonders what the neighborhood was like decades ago when it teemed with immigrants and working people seeking a better life.


Brazilian Government Elite Press for President to Resign
Brazil's military, political and judicial elite tightened pressure on President Fernando Collor de Mello today, urging him to resign in the face of national outrage over a corruption scandal.
The Navy minister, Adm.
Mario Cesar Flores, met again today with Mr.
Collor to urge him to negotiate his resignation.
In a show of force, army squads briefly occupied parts of downtown Rio Thursday on the pretext of "testing field radios." Two weeks ago, Army units conducted similar "radio tests" in downtown Sao Paulo.


METRO DIGEST
A CRACKDOWN ON DANGEROUS BUSES
Twenty charter buses were ordered off the road in two days of surprise roadside inspections by New York State officials.
The aim of the inspections is to prevent accidents like one last month in which six people were killed and 48 were injured on their way from Brooklyn to an amusement park in New Jersey.
Page 23.
NEW YORK CITY
CHANGING THE HABITS  OF A CITY
For at least a decade, the roiling debate over garbage disposal in New York City has been portrayed mostly as a bitter fight about building an incinerator.
But the truly radical part of the plan approved by the City Council this week has nothing to do with burning trash and everything to do with recycling it.
For if New York City actually reaches its ambitious new goals it will have by far the most aggressive recycling program in the United States, changing the daily habits of almost anyone who lives or works here.
News analysis, page 1.
NEW WEAPONS TO FIGHT GRIDLOCK
New York City is installing a system of sensors under its roadways to enable officials to monitor congestion, identify trouble spots and control the flow of traffic by quickly changing the duration of red lights.
The sensors and "smart" traffic lights are the major components of a planned $100 million traffic-tracking network, one of the most elaborate in the world.
Page 1.
STANDING FIRM ON AIDS OATH
Two of the four Board of Education members who voted to require AIDS educators to promise in writing that they would emphasize abstinence in the classroom said that they will not budge on the issue -- even if no one complies.
Page 22.
HOMELESS MAN MAY BE HOSPITALIZED
Psychiatrists evaluating a homeless man who has frightened Upper West Side residents with violent outbursts have tentatively concluded that he is mentally ill and should be committed to a mental hospital.
Page 23.
REGION
JUDGE DENIES BID ON NAME CHANGE
A judge refused to issue an injunction preventing Glassboro State College in New Jersey from changing its name to honor a benefactor who gave the school $100 million.
But in a companion ruling that left the outcome uncertain, the judge gave the plaintiff, a graduate of Glassboro, 30 days to gather evidence to support his claim that college officials had acted in violation of the state's Open Public Meeting Act by not seeking public comment.
Page 25.
SLAIN NEWARK TEEN-AGERS ARE BURIED
Two teen-agers slain in a confrontation with police officers in Newark were mourned and buried after services that expressed a growing frustration over the increasing violence on the streets.
Page 25.
A TWO-YEAR STRIKE IS OVER
A two-year strike by professors at the University of Bridgeport, one of the bitterest ever at an American university, is over, with a settlement that the union likened to a divorce.
Page 25.
ADVICE FROM A BISHOP
The Bishop of the Diocese of Trenton is advising people not to go to the home of a man in Marlboro who claims the Virgin Mary appears to him.
Page 25.
About New York by David Gonzalez Page 23


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Kenyan Just Misses Record  Moses Kiptanui of Kenya, who was not on his country's Olympic team, missed a world-record triple for this month when he won the 5,000-meter run yesterday at the Van Damme Memorial Grand Prix in Brussels.
His winning time of 13 minutes 0.93 seconds was the third-fastest ever and the best this year.
Kiptanui, 21 years old, left himself too much to do on the last lap to beat the time of 12:58.39 set by Moroccan Said Aouita.
Earlier this month, Kiptanui set world records in the 3,000 meters and the steeplechase.
Four Olympic champion runners were beaten.
Nigerian Olapade Adeniken beat 100-meter gold medalist Linford Christie for the third time since the Barcelona Olympics, clocking 10.12 seconds.
Merlene Ottey (10.89) was too fast for gold medalist Gail Devers, who was third in the women's 100.
Ellen van Langen was beaten in the last meters of the 800 by Maria Mutola of Mozambique.
And Spainiard Fermin Cacho lost to Kenyan Wilfred Kirochi in the 1,500. (AP)
(AP)
HORSE RACING  Four Victories Boost Antley  Chris Antley won four races at Saratoga yesterday, including the $130,000 Seneca Stakes aboard Preston Madden's Montserrat, and moved into a tie with Mike Smith for the lead in riding winners with three days to go in the meeting.
The Seneca supplied the day's drama when Montserrat and Colchis Island raced stride for stride through the home stretch and finished a neck apart after racing a mile and five-eighths on the grass.
Share the Glory ran third, four lengths back.
The winner, a 4-year-old son of Roberto trained by Elliott Walden, ran the distance in 2:27 flat and paid $7.60 for $2 to win as the favorite in a large field of 13.
Antley began the day trailing Smith in winners, 33 to 30.
Smith won one race, Antley won four, squaring matters at 34 apiece.
The field for Saturday's $250,000 Whitney Handicap was reduced to 10 when Allen Jerkens said he would scratch Devil His Due, the only 3-year-old entered in the race.
Devil His Due ran third in the Jim Dandy Stakes four weeks ago and second in the Travers last Saturday.
TENNIS  Capriati Tops Garrison  Second-seeded Jennifer Capriati overcame early mistakes to beat No. 7-seed Zina Garrison, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Mazda Classic in Carlsbad, Calif.
Capriati, in her first tournament since winning an Olympic gold medal in Barcelona, Spain, settled down to attack Garrison after losing the first four games.
By the end of the fourth game, Capriati had made 13 unforced errors.
Capriati, seeking her first tournament title since last year's Mazda event, will play in the semifinals today against the winner of last night's late match between fourth-seeded Anke Huber and sixth-seeded Nathalie Tauziat.
No. 3 Conchita Martinez also advanced with a 6-1, 6-3 victory over Ann Grossman.
Martinez will face Leila Meskhi, who ousted top-seeded Gabriela Sabatini on Thursday night. (AP)
Muster Advances: Thomas Muster of Austria, the top-seeded player, defeated Guillermo Perez-Roldan of Argentina, 7-5, 6-0, yesterday to advance to the semifinals of the $260,000 Croatian Open in Zagreb.
He will next face third-seeded Jordi Arrese of Spain, who beat countryman Jose-Francisco Altur, 6-4, 6-2.
Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine, the fourth seed, defaulted his match against Franco Davin of Argentina after being hospitalized with the flu. (AP)


82 People Killed in Russian Jet Crash


Japan Plans to Spend $86 Billion To Stimulate Its Lagging Economy
Saying the economy here is in severe straits, Japan's Government tonight announced the largest economic rescue package in the nation's history to try to stimulate growth and strengthen a banking system that has been jeopardized by falling land and stock prices.
The centerpiece of the plan, aimed at jolting the economy, consists of a one-time increase in Government spending of 10.7 trillion yen, or about $86 billion.
That money would be used to more than double public works spending for the current fiscal year, which ends next March 31, and to provide new incentives to encourage business investment.
U.S.
Seeks a Bigger Market
A second part consists of measures to stabilize banks and other financial institutions by making it easier for them to dispose of bad loans and by propping up land and stock prices.


Missing Someone? Red Cross May Help
The American Red Cross channels food, medicine, clothing and shelter to the victims of war and natural disasters.
It also tries to heal the emotional strain of separation, the kind of hurt that does not come through in television images of the shelling of Sarajevo or in newspaper reports of starvation in Somalia.
Through the International Movement of the Red Cross and Red Crescent and through Magen David Adom of Israel, the United States chapter tries to trace relatives and friends missing in the republics that were once part of Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union as well as in Somalia and other areas struck by famine, storms or volcanic eruptions.
Short personal messages can also be sent if a missing person is found.


2 Funerals Ask Youths To Reject Street Life
Two teen-agers slain in a confrontation with police officers were mourned and buried today after services that expressed, in loud and muted tones, a growing frustration over the increasing violence on the streets here.
The church service for one of the youths, 18-year-old Barry Shelton, included appeals to young people to turn away from the nightly car thefts that have become a rite of passage for young men in the city's poorest neighborhoods.
At one point, Patricia Shelton, 26, a sister of the young man, angrily left the church when Councilman George Branch of Newark appeared to defend the action of the police.


COMPANY NEWS
ALPHA SOLARCO INC., Cincinnati, a solar energy systems concern, announced the approval of the merger of Solectric Corporation, Cincinnati, into Alpha's subsidiary Solacq Inc.
GILLETTE CO., Boston, announced the signing of an agreement to form a joint-venture blade and razor manufacturing company with the Shangai Razor Blade Factoryin Shanghai.


An Air Embargo Over Iraq Leaves Little Rest for Pilots
Meeting no resistance, American planes kept up a grinding pace of round-the-clock patrols over southern Iraq today to enforce a ban on Iraqi flights in the region.
Military officials said pilots flew 200 sorties from the Independence alone in the first 24 hours of the operation, which began on Thursday afternoon.
This rate is well above normal for the carrier, especially if it is to be maintained for days or weeks.


Review/Music; A Symbiosis of Players and Audience
Professionalism in 20th-century musical performance gives audiences more expert playing but at the same time widens the separation between them and those on stage.
There was a time when the line between the amateur and the professional was much less clearly defined, often resulting in concerts where listener could have exchanged places with player without significant change in quality.
We are too accustomed to the passive receptacle and the highly trained dispenser to go back to those times, but community-based, partly professional orchestras -- like the New Amsterdam Symphony -- do offer a hint of that past.
In the orchestra's program of Delius, Haydn and Beethoven at St.
Peter's Church on West 20th Street on Thursday night, good and often intelligent intentions sometimes ran afoul of instrumental limitations, but in this musty yet acoustically attractive space, and before a good-sized audience, pleasure in giving and receiving was palpable.


Samuel Riskin, 85, Ex-Chairman And President of New Jersey Banker
Samuel F. Riskin, a retired chairman and chief executive of the Valley National Bancorp of Wayne, N.J., died Wednesday at Passaic General Hospital.
A lifelong resident of Passaic, N.J., he was 85 years old.
Mr.
Riskin had been in a coma since he suffered a stroke in December, said Gerald H. Lipkin, the bank's current chairman and chief executive.


Skies Over Turkey Hold Terror for Kurds in Iraq
Beyond the scrutiny of much of the outside world, a nasty air war is under way in the hinterlands of northern Iraq.
This time, the attacks are directed not from Baghdad or Washington but from Ankara, by Turkish Government officials bent on destroying rebel camps of the Kurdish Workers Party, a Turkish guerrilla group.


BREAKDOWN SEEN IN U.S. STORM AID
Pentagon officials said today that they were prepared to deliver large amounts of emergency aid to victims of Hurricane Andrew on Monday, the day it devastated South Florida.
But they did not do so because neither President Bush nor other civilian officials ordered a large-scale Federal response to the devastation until late Thursday.
At a White House news conference today Mr.
Bush asserted that the Federal Government was "responding promptly and massively to the hurricane disaster," and added that even though Florida officials had criticized the Federal relief effort, "I am satisfied that we responded properly."


Corrections
An article on Aug. 17 about a dispute over the fate of Union Station in Kansas City, Mo., misstated the outcome of the city's lawsuit against three developers that proposed in 1974 to renovate the station and redevelop its neighborhood.
On Aug. 13, a Jackson County jury found only one of the developers, not all three, liable for breach of contract.
That developer is the Pershing Square Redevelopment Corporation; the two others are the Kansas City Terminal Railway Company and the Trizec Corporation.
A subsidiary of Trizec owns a 50 percent share of the Pershing Square company.


When Peoples Scattered by Iberian Empires Came to Olympics; Polish Galicia
To the Editor:
Barnard Sharrow is in good company erroneously describing the roots of the term "Galicia" in Poland in "Castro's Celtic Roots?" as of Celtic origin (letter, Aug. 12).
At the Versailles peace conference at the close of World War I Prime Minister David Lloyd-George of Britain also believed that Galicia, soon to be united with resurrected Poland, was in Spain.


Executive Changes
IP FOREST RESOURCES CO., Purchase, N.Y., a unit of International Paper, named Edward J. Kobacker president and vice president and general manager of land and timber.
MABON SECURITIES CORP., New York, a securities brokerage firm, appointed E. Gareth Plank a research analyst and senior vice president in the institutional equities department.


Cacucaco Journal; 'This Is Our Land' Has Angola Astir
The problem is simple, Jonas Savimbi told supporters at a rally here recently.
For four centuries foreigners have ruled Angola -- first its Portuguese colonizers, then Soviet military advisers and eventually soldiers from Cuba, who backed the ruling party in this country's brutal 16-year-long civil war.
When he becomes President, Mr. Savimbi promised, Angola will be ruled by Angolans.


Sports of The Times; A Challenge To Soar Like An Eagle
NEARLY an hour after the Jets had defeated Philadelphia in the teams' final preseason game, the Eagles' locker room, though half empty, was charged with a distinctive, positive energy.
The Eagles had dropped a 22-13 decision, but the players seemed oblivious to the loss and their 2-3 preseason record.
Most of the conversations revolved around the season opener with New Orleans on Sept. 6 and an optimism that the battle-hardened Eagles, who have been on the verge of great things, might actually have the pieces in place this year.


Foe of New College Name Gets Reprieve From Judge
A state Superior Court judge refused today to issue an injunction preventing Glassboro State College from changing its name to honor a benefactor who gave the school $100 million.
But in a companion ruling that left the outcome uncertain, the judge, Samuel G. DeSimone, gave the plaintiff, a graduate of Glassboro, 30 days to gather evidence to support his claim that college officials had violated the state's Open Public Meeting Act by acting without seeking public comment.


Some Recall the Apple Sellers and Hoovervilles
To the Editor:
David Shipley's attempt to resurrect the reputation of Herbert Hoover (Editorial Notebook, Aug. 10) is a valiant effort.
Unfortunately, I remember Hoover.
Granted, he was a successful mining engineer.
We also heard a great deal about his success in the World War I relief effort, especially during his campaign.


Hard Times Indeed for Forecasters
For the third time in three years, the nation's most prominent economic forecasters have reversed themselves, and they now say the recovery they had expected by late summer will not happen until this winter -- if then.
With new blows to the American economy announced almost daily, some economists even acknowledge that their forecasting techniques might not be adequate to foresee accurately when the stagnation that has afflicted the United States for more than three years will come to an end.


Toney and McCallum Aiming To Rule Out Another Draw
At a news conference recently to promote their International Boxing Federation middleweight championship fight, James Toney and Mike McCallum sat at opposite ends of a conference table and shared a common look.
They both wore baseball caps pulled over their brows, dark glasses to hide their eyes and matching sneers.


Explosion Destroys House in Stony Brook


Storm Roars Across Guam
A typhoon with winds of up to 150 miles an hour roared across this American territory today, injuring 59 people, destroying houses and cutting power allover the island.
Landslides buried roads, lowlying areas were flooded and water supplies were disrupted.
All flights from the island, which is home to 140,000 people, were canceled.


Allegre Is Waived by the Jets
The Jets waived veteran place-kicker Raul Allegre yesterday, giving the starting job to Jason Staurovsky, a Plan B free agent who was with the New England Patriots for te previous four seasons.
In the 1992 preseason, Allegre, recognized as one of the best clutch field-goal kickers in the National Football League, made 2 of 5 attempts.
He missed a 47-yarder against the Eagles in the Jets' final exhibition game on Thursday night in Philadelphia.
Staurovsky, who at 29 is 4 years younger than Allegre, made 5 of 5 preseason attempts.


The 'Wild Man' and the Law
The case of Larry Hogue, the "wild man" of Manhattan's Upper West Side, seems at first glance to raise a profound conflict between civil liberties and public safety.
That may be a red herring.
The law appears to allow the commitment of Mr.
Hogue, if only officials would use the law.
Mr.
Hogue suffers from a brain injury incurred during military service.
Though the Veterans Administration pays him a substantial monthly benefit, he apparently prefers to live in doorways on West 96th Street, spending his money on drugs.


Patents; One Inventor Isn't Afraid Of Marketing
DRESSED in his standard work attire cut-off jeans, a knit shirt and a baseball cap labeled "toy inventor" -- Richard C. Levy whips through this affluent Washington suburb in his black Mercedes convertible while chatting at high speed about the most common mistakes of independent inventors.
"Inventors come in two forms: paranoid and more paranoid," he said.
"One of the most common mistakes they make is to assume that they're going to get ripped off by a company. I've never been ripped off in all the years I've been doing this. Why would a company want to? If a company depends on outside inventors, why would they want to kill the goose that lays the golden egg?"


The Elements (Female): The Elements (Male)
The elements -- female and male -- were created by Douglas Coupland for his novel "Shampoo Planet." He is also the author of "Generation X."


Troops Arrive With Food for Florida's Storm Victims
The first of 6,000 United States Army troops and 1,000 Marines arrived here today, bringing food, supplies, equipment and a much-needed psychological lift to residents of the areas that had been crippled Monday by Hurricane Andrew.
Throughout the day, huge military transport planes landed amid the tattered remnants of Homestead Air Force Base, disgorging troops in camouflage uniforms, military vehicles and boxes of canned food that included everything from pork and macaroni to apple sauce, green beans, pears, tomatoes and orange juice.
Less than an hour after the first plane landed early this morning, Army trucks and personnel carriers were rumbling through the streets, on their way to the sites where relief centers were being established.
Military Kitchens
At Campbell Drive Middle School, just off the Florida Turnpike, an Army supply and logistics unit of about 30 soldiers began setting up the first of what will soon be 20 mobile field kitchens here at around 9:30 this morning.
By early afternoon, after a delay due to a missing generator, the first meals, of ham and stuffing, were ready.
They were quickly snapped up by about 300 people who had gathered in line.


Miyazawa Accepts Resignation of Power Broker
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa accepted the resignation of the governing party's kingmaker today, a day after the official admitted accepting an improper cash contribution from a mob-linked trucking company.
Mr.
Miyazawa has come under fire for his reported attempts to persuade the official to remain his party positions.
Mr.
Miyazawa had acted after Shin Kanemaru, Japan's most powerful politician, stunned the country on Thursday by announcing at a press conference that he had accepted $4 million in cash from the trucking company and did not report it, as required by law.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  DEATH IN A SERBIAN CAMP
The story of Omer Filipovic, a Muslim high-school teacher who died in a Serb-run prison camp, offers a rare look at his ordeal.
Thousands of Muslims have died as Serbian forces have swept through Bosnia.  1


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Aug. 19 about photographs purporting to show American prisoners of war still alive in Southeast Asia misstated a detail about one of the prisoners, Maj.
Albro L. Lundy Jr.
Before the appearance of the photographs, which the State Department considers fakes, no fliers with genuine photographs of Major Lundy are known to have circulated in Southeast Asia.


Fugitive's Wife Killed in Shootout At Mountain Cabin, Officials Say
Federal authorities said tonight that the wife of an armed fugitive was killed in a shootout outside the family's cabin near Naples, Idaho, six days ago.
Federal agents had met earlier in the day with relatives of the fugitive, Randy Weaver, as a weeklong standoff continued at the man's home.
And tonight Gene Glenn, the F.B.I. special agent in charge, said that officials still hoped to reach a solution this weekend.


Consumer Groups Attack Regulations Freeze
In a joint report, two public-interest groups have strongly disputed the Bush Administration's statement that up to $20 billion will be saved under its current moratorium on new regulations.
"The Administration's claims of cost savings to the economy are pure voodoo accounting," Joan Claybrook, president of Public Citizen, said in issuing the report on Thursday.
Public Citizen, founded by the consumer advocate Ralph Nader, worked on the report with O.M.B.
Watch, a group that monitors the White House Office of Management and Budget.


Review/Dance; Spanish Solos of Several Schools
Pilar Rioja could probably stand on her head, whistle "La Cucaracha" and still draw cheers, so loyal and enthusiastic is the audience she has built up for her Spanish dancing.
Miss Rioja chose, however, to perform a selection of solos from several schools of Spanish dance in a program she presented on Thursday night at the engaging little Repertorio Espanol Gramercy Arts Theater.
Now celebrating her 20th anniversary at the theater, the Mexican-born dancer offered a gourmet sampling of Spanish styles, including flamenco, a farruca, a solo from the bolero school and choreographed pieces based on traditional Spanish dance styles.
One of the most enjoyable of the new works on this program of seven pieces was a solo choreographed to the First Dance from Manuel de Falla's 1905 opera, "La Vida Breve."


New Jersey Is the Garbage State No More; Once Known for Its Pollution, It Is Now Known for Getting Tough on the Polluters
In July, three demolition contractors were indicted here on charges of dumping building debris on city property.
In Jersey City, two brothers were just released from jail after serving nearly a year for allowing oil leaks at their auto salvage yard.
And in Newark, a 67-year-old chemical company president spent about two weeks in jail recently after being convicted of illegally storing and releasing hazardous waste.
The three cases are among dozens that have been pursued by a new breed of pollution fighters in New Jersey, environmental cops who are carrying out one of the nation's toughest environmental laws.


A Heaping Plate of Ventures for Chili's Impresario
On any given day or night, Norman Brinker, a tall, balding man who comes off as a slightly befuddled tourist, can be found wandering the parking lots of America's restaurants.
"How was the food?" he asks patrons as they leave.
So far, at least, there has been nothing befuddled about Norman Brinker.
The parking lots are probably his, or a competitor's, and what he is doing is his version of market reseach.


Corrections
A report in Religion Notes last Saturday misidentified the Southern Baptist minister who was convicted last April of sexual assault on boys in his congregation.
The minister was the Rev.
Don McCary, former youth and music minister at the Central Baptist Church in Hixson, Tenn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Ron M. Phillips, senior pastor of the church, was not involved in the misconduct.


A Mideast Lexicon: Words That Wound and Pacify
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is often cast in terms of sticks and stones and broken bones.
But it is also a war of words, and in this case, the old children's verse is wrong because names can indeed hurt.
They can certainly influence opinion.
That point emerged this week in the Middle East peace talks in Washington, where Hanan Ashrawi, the spokeswoman for the Palestinian delegation, noted that Israeli negotiators had stopped using certain terminology now that a new Government is in charge in Jerusalem.


Bears Trade Hilgenberg to the Browns
The Chicago Bears traded their veteran All-Pro center, Jay Hilgenberg, to the Cleveland Browns yesterday as the National Football League's version of fraternity rush week got under way with a million-dollar vengeance.
There's nothing quite like the end of the training-camp grind and the final weekend of the exhibition season to prompt N.F.L. teams and laid-back veterans to begin giving some thought to the season ahead.


In 14th, Twins Win Battle Of Nerves
Lenny Webster's pinch-hit double in the 14th inning drove in Shane Mack to give the Minnesota Twins a desperately needed 4-3 victory over the Yankees at the Metrodome tonight.
Webster's double, off reliever Greg Cadaret (4-8), gave the Twins their fourth victory in the last 13 games and ended a four-game Yankee winning streak.


New $100 Million Sensor System To Direct New York Traffic Flow
After years of delay, New York City is installing an elaborate and costly system of sensors under its roadways to enable the Transportation Department to monitor congestion, identify trouble spots and control the flow of traffic by quickly changing the duration of red lights.
Spanning a city whose crowded streets and highways often seem to be little more than a gridlocked maze, the sensors and "smart" traffic lights are the major components of a planned $100 million traffic-tracking network.


Strike at General Motors Plant Shuts Down Production of Some Car Models


Beliefs
"If you are religious, it is like looking at God," Dr.
George Smoot said last April -- a curious description, it might seem, of temperature variations of 30 millionths of a degree that a NASA satellite, after nearly two years of orbiting and hundreds of millions of measurements, had detected in the far reaches of space.
Dr.
Smoot, a physicist at the University of California at Berkeley who led the analysis of satellite data, was not alone.
"The Handwriting of God," was Newsweek's headline about the same discovery, which was made by a satellite designed to study the microwave radiation in the universe from a vantage point above the barrier of Earth's atmosphere.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; The Hurricane and Bush: an Opportunity Missed?
After flattening parts of Florida, Hurricane Andrew has crashed into Washington, taking dead aim at George Bush's effort to portray himself as a decisive, domestic-policy President at the very cusp of his fall campaign.
As the nation's fourth-most-populous state staggered early this week from the storm's blow, Mr.
Bush dispatched fighter jets to Iraq and barnstormed the Midwest, promoting his foreign-trade agenda.
More than 250,000 Floridians rendered homeless on Monday simmered for four days in the August sun, waiting for Federal help.


Daniel K. Ludwig Dies


Strike by Professors Is Settled At the University of Bridgeport
A two-year strike by professors at the University of Bridgeport has been settled, the administration and faculty union announced Thursday, with the union likening the settlement to a divorce.
As part of the settlement, both sides agreed not to disclose its terms.
But people familiar with the agreement said the 66 professors and librarians who have remained on strike since September 1990 are dropping all claims against the university in return for buyouts of as much as a year's salary.
They will not get their jobs back.


Hope, Off the Ash Heap; New York City Fought Over an Incinerator, But Real Focus of Waste Plan Is Recycling
For at least a decade, the roiling debate over garbage disposal in New York City has been portrayed mostly as a bitter fight about building an incinerator.
But the truly radical part of the plan approved by the City Council this week has nothing to do with burning trash and everything to do with recycling it.
For if New York City actually reaches its ambitious new goals, it will have by far the most aggressive recycling program in the United States, changing the daily habits of almost everyone who lives or works here.


G.M. Details Plan to Issue More Shares
The General Motors Corporation said today that it would issue 25 million new G.M. class H shares and use the proceeds to pay for its previously announced acquisition of the General Dynamics Corporation's missile business.
The stock sale might also generate some fresh capital for G.M., depending on demand for the stock and its price when the offering takes place.
In composite trading, G.M.'s class H stock closed at $23.375 today, down $1.125 a share, on volume of 86,300 shares.


Bush Signs Public TV Bill
President Bush has signed into law a bill that sharply increases Government subsideies for public television and bans the broadcast of programs considered indecent before midnight.
Congress approved the three-year, $1.1 billion reauthorization for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting this month.
It has yet to pass legislation appropriating the money.


Judith Berg Fibich, 80, Jewish Choreographer
Judith Berg Fibich, a dancer and choreographer who used Jewish themes, died on Aug. 19 at Mt.
Sinai Hospital.
She was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of pneumonia, said her husband, Felix Fibich.


Your Money; Important Time For Job Seekers
THE next two weeks can be crucial for people looking for jobs in today's tough market.
They need to organize their campaigns, make or renew personal contacts, put together resumes and cover letters and do research on potential employers, so that they can send out letters and schedule interviews after Labor Day.
"The period from Sept. 14 through mid-December is when people are back from vacation and in full swing in terms of planning, budgeting and staffing," said Bob Hart, a managing associate of Foster Partners in New York, one of the top 20 international executive search firms.


Cone He's Not, but He Sure Has Pop
There is no question as to what the Mets are looking for from Jeff Kent, the self-described "boring guy" they got from Toronto on Thursday in the David Cone trade.
They want someone to fill the hole at second base and provide a little more power in a lineup that's been hitting below .240 most of this year.
The Mets didn't wait long to test Kent's talent.
He started both games of last night's doubleheader against the Cincinnati Reds at Shea Stadium, batting third in the order in the second game.
And in a Mets season that has gone from flame to embers, Kent provided at least a spark of hope for the future on a night on which the Mets managed to come up with a sweep.


2 on Board Defend AIDS Oath
Two of the four Board of Education members who voted to require AIDS educators to promise in writing that they would emphasize abstinence in the classroom said that a rebellion against the measure had convinced them that they were right to impose the requirement.
The two members, Dr.
Irene H. Impellizzeri and Michael Petrides, said yesterday that they would not budge on the issue -- even if no one agrees to sign the pledge.
But with the two other members of the majority unreachable yesterday and the board president, Carl H. McCall, saying he hoped the board would change its position, it was unclear whether protests against the policy might result in its being reconsidered.


Insurers' Stock Prices Jump
The stocks of several insurance companies rose yesterday after Steven Gavios, an industry analyst at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, issued a "buy" recommendation.
He said the heavy losses from Hurricane Andrew would force companies to raise premiums, a move that would ultimately bolster their profits


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Quayle Draws Distinctions on Environment
Picking up where President Bush left off in Michigan three days ago, Vice President Dan Quayle portrayed the Democratic Presidential ticket today as "environmental elites" who have lost sight of the need to balance ecological protection with job creation.
In a speech to the Economic Club of Grand Rapids, Mr.
Quayle outlined what he identified as the underpinnings of the debate between Republicans and Democrats on the environment.


Heady Opportunities for Home Buyersw
Since the economy started to sputter a few years ago, home prices, which soared during the 1980's, have leveled off or declined nearly everywhere.
Buyers have also benefited from steadily falling mortgage-interest rates.
As a result, homes throughout the country are more affordable now than they have been since the mid-1970's.
Nationwide, mortgage interest rates have fallen about 2.5 percent since 1989.
But even in a favorable market, the task of finding and paying for a house can be a daunting one.
And when the price is right, there is often a temptation to overlook flaws or to rush the deal.


45 Are Charged In Drug Fraud Of Medicaid
In what Federal officials said was the largest number of Medicaid-fraud indictments ever filed in New York State, 45 people have been charged by a Federal grand jury in Manhattan with the illegal sale and redistribution of prescription drugs.
The indictments against 3 ringleaders, 32 pharmacists and 10 other defendants were filed on Thursday and announced yesterday by Otto G. Obermaier, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York.
The 45 defendants were among 69 people arrested in raids conducted throughout the New York City metropolitan region on June 30 by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


No Headline
Dr.
Cyril Stanley Smith, Institute Professor Emeritus at M.I.T. and a prominent metallurgist and historian of technology, died Tuesday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 88 years old.
The cause of death was cancer, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology said.


2 Teams Pleased to Kick Off in Jersey
How many people are going to pay $26 for a ticket to a college football game in New Jersey between teams from Iowa and North Carolina State on a summer evening?
The answer is 50,000. The event is the Kickoff Classic.


Review/Film; One Long Last Gasp For Laura Palmer
Everything about David Lynch's "Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me" is a deception.
It's not the worst movie ever made; it just seems to be.
Its 134 minutes induce a state of simulated brain death, an effect as easily attained in half the time by staring at the blinking lights on a Christmas tree.
The film, which opened yesterday, was put together for hard-core fans of the "Twin Peaks" television series, that is, for people so crackers over the show that they will pretend they don't know who killed Laura Palmer.
Most others, including those who don't care, won't go to see the movie anyway.


Workers Try to Track Down Elderly Scattered by Storm
As the chaos of Hurricane Andrew showed signs of abating today with the arrival of Federal troops, public and volunteer agencies turned to the task of finding thousands of elderly residents whose homes were wrecked by the storm.
Officials said they were receiving calls from worried families throughout the nation who have not heard from elderly and infirm relatives since Monday, when the hurricane laid waste to southern Dade County.


U.S. Delivers Tons of Food to Somalia
Four American military aircraft delivered tons of food to this hot, sand-swept town today, in the first airlift by United States planes to this nation torn by war and hunger.
Bags of rice and beans and containers of cooking oil were carried out of transport planes onto battered trucks and driven to a Red Cross warehouse.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
SUNDAY: 10 P.M., C-Span, tape of speech in Findlay, Ohio.  Gov. Bill Clinton
SUNDAY: 9:30 P.M., C-Span, tape of speech in Nashville.


Trials and Tribulations In the World of Qualifiers
They were two left-handers looking to rev up their careers by playing through the qualifying competition and gaining entry into the United States Open, which begins Monday.
Tommy Ho, a 19-year-old left-hander from Winter Haven, Fla., took his 6-4, 6-4 victory yesterday over Doug Flach of St.
Louis as a sign that he is battle ready for the big show.


Severance Deal for Ex-Macyu Head
After months of tense bargaining, Edward S. Finkelstein, former chairman of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, has agreed on a severance package with the bankrupt retailer and its creditors.
Who came out the winner depends on one's point of view.


Adult-Style Recovery by Woods
Eldrick (Tiger) Woods faced down extreme duress in a brave new world of adult golf today to narrowly win his first match and advance to the second round of the 92d United States Amateur Championship.
Resuming a rain-suspended match in which he stood 2 up after 13 holes, the 16-year-old Woods recovered from the loss of his first three holes of the day to defeat Dan Gleason with a 15-foot birdie putt on the 19th hole at the Muirfield Village Golf Club.
Also advancing into the round of 32 were Jay Sigel, a two-time champion, who defeated David Eger, 3 and 2, and Manny Zerman, a finalist in 1990 and 1991, who defeated Matt Robbins, 5 and 3.
David Duval, who won the medal phase of the event, was a 1-up loser to Tom McKnight when he three-putted the final hole from 15 feet.


Some Recall the Apple Sellers and Hoovervilles; Expanded Government
To the Editor:
In "Remembering Herbert Hoover" (Editorial Notebook, Aug. 10), David Shipley honors the humanitarian record of a failed President, whose perceived role in causing the Depression has unfairly obscured contributions even his enemies acknowledged.
That makes all the more astonishing the writer's remark that "Given Hoover's faith that capitalism would fix itself without heavy government intervention, he makes an easy target."


More Cage at Museum
The Summergarden 1992 concert series concludes this weekend with instrumental works by the late John Cage tonight at 7:30 in the Museum of Modern Art's sculpture garden, 14 West 54th Street, mid-Manhattan.
The program features "10," for wind and string quartets, piano and percussion, to be played at both the beginning and the end of the concert, and Cage's tribute to the artist Jean Arp, titled "But What About the Noise of Crumpling Paper Which He Used to Do in Order to Paint the Series 'Papiers Froisses' or Tearing Up Paper to Make 'Papiers Dechires?' Arp Was Stimulated by Water (Sea, Lake and Flowing Waters Like Rivers), Forests." The concert is free.
Information: (212) 708-9750.


Digital Equipment Expected To Take New View on Debt
In what some analysts say is the first clear signal of the change in leadership at the Digital Equipment Corporation, the troubled computer maker has moved toward taking on as much as $1 billion in new debt.
Kenneth H. Olsen, Digital's founder and president, earned a reputation over his 35-year tenure for carefully avoiding debt.
In so doing, Digital has long held one of the industry's most pristine balance sheets, with no long-term debt.


When Peoples Scattered by Iberian Empires Came to Olympics; From Galatia to Wales
To the Editor:
Barnard Sharrow writes (letter, Aug. 12) that Galicia, the name of a region of northwestern Spain, "has the same root as Gaul, Galicia in Poland and Galatia in Anatolia." Matters are not that clear-cut.


Price Tag: Fitness at Home
Comparative costs of selected home exercise equipment and teaching aids.
Prices shown are retail and mayvary by region.
Taxes and shipping are not included.


21 People Arrested at Tompkins Sq. Park
In another tense night at the newly renovated Tompkins Square Park, 21 people people, many of them shouting obscenities at the police, were arrested early this morning and charged with violating the park's midnight curfew, the police said.
One man who was found to be carrying the equivalent of a quarter-stick of dynamite was also charged with possession of an explosive device, the police said.


Letter: On Term Limits; What Voters Want Is Choice
To the Editor:
A vote for term limits restricts entrenched politicians, not the voter as your editorial implies ("Why Vote to Restrict Voters?" Aug. 25).
You profess that term limits are a Republican plot to remove the Democratic majority from Congress.
But Republican politicians overwhelmingly oppose term limits, as do their Democratic counterparts.
Many high-profile Republicans, including former President Reagan, Congressman Jerry Lewis of California and the House minority leader, Robert Michel, are strong opponents of Congressional term limits.


Chief Executive of Sam's Club to Retire
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. said today that the chief executive of its rapidly expanding Sam's Wholesale Club division, Al Johnson, would retire next Friday.
Dean L. Sanders, head of operations at the giant discount retailer's Wal-Mart stores division, was named to succeed him.


Bronx Man Is Convicted In 3 Slayings
A Bronx jury convicted a livery-car driver yesterday of killing a young woman and two girls, and the emotions of the long and tense trial exploded in the courtroom as family members cursed the defendant and screamed cries of thanks.
As the jury foreman answered "guilty" to the first of three murder counts, the 31-year-old defendant, Alejandro Henriquez, sat still at the defense table, his eyes cast down.
The defense lawyer, Mel A. Sachs, wiped his forehead, and after the last two guilty counts were read, leaned over as Mr.
Henriquez whispered in his ear.


Saberhagen Sees the Future and Ponders an Out
One day after the Mets traded David Cone to Toronto, two of their veteran pitchers, Bret Saberhagen and John Franco, publicly questioned the wisdom of the organization's move.
The two also wondered about the failure of the front office to negotiate with Cone and about their own futures in the organization.
Saberhagen expressed strong concerns over his own desire to negotiate with the Mets, given their handling of the Cone situation.
He called the Cone deal for two young prospects a "poor move" and stated that he planned to consider his option of demanding a trade at the end of this season.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Race; In Bible Belt, Underdog Runs On Backing Abortion Rights
For the Bible Belt, it was a political caricature from hell: Steve Lewis, the Democratic candidate for the Senate, distributing bumper stickers from the window of an abortion clinic.
In a normal election year that would not be the cartoon image a politician wants to see in The Daily Oklahoman, the largest-circulation newspaper in a state where religion often mixes with politics like barbecue and beans.


West Side Homeless Man Is Tentatively Ruled Ill
Psychiatrists evaluating Larry Hogue, a homeless man who has frightened Upper West Side residents with his irrational, occasionally violent outbursts, have tentatively concluded that he is mentally ill and should be committed to a mental hospital for treatment, state mental health officials said yesterday.
The case drew wide attention this week after it was reported in The West Side Spirit.
Mr.
Hogue's long presence in the neighborhood has raised questions about why law enforcement and mental health authorities did not move more quickly to get Mr.
Hogue off the streets or make sure he received proper help.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Quayle Draws Distinctions on Environment
Picking up where President Bush left off in Michigan three days ago, Vice President Dan Quayle portrayed the Democratic Presidential ticket today as "environmental elites" who have lost sight of the need to balance ecological protection with job creation.
In a speech to the Economic Club of Grand Rapids, Mr.
Quayle outlined what he identified as the underpinnings of the debate between Republicans and Democrats on the environment.


Finding a Home Below Market Value
In regions where the economic downturn has been particularly brutal to the real estate market, house hunters may have opportunities in special sales.
Often, owners, whether banks, builders or public agencies, will offer homes below market value in order to make a sale.
Here are some sources for opportunities.
Bank foreclosures Foreclosures are a fact of life for any lender making home loans.
But some lenders saw foreclosures rise to record levels in the last two or three years.
As a result, many banks and other lenders have set up departments to handle the resale of foreclosed properties.


Team Members Leave Worrying to Adults
So what were the best Little League teams on earth doing the day before competing against each other for the World Series title?
"We're going to an amusement park," said Jeff Burroughs, the coach of Long Beach, Calif. (19-0), the United States representative in Saturday afternoon's championship showdown at Howard J. Lamade Field.


Guilty Plea By Military Contractor
The United Technologies Corporation today admitted fraud charges that were brought as part of a wide-ranging Federal investigation into military contracts.
The company pleaded guilty to four felony counts and agreed to pay $6 million in penalties.
Judge Claude M. Hilton of the Federal District Court in Alexandria, Va., approved the plea agreement, in which the company admitted conspiring to defraud the Government by using insider information to bid on two Pentagon contracts.


Review/Music; A French Baroque Suite, Splashy, Dramatic and Modern
After years of bobbing gently in the East River, Bargemusic, the floating chamber-music series, retains the touch of eccentric novelty that drew music lovers' attention when Olga Bloom started it in 1977.
The renovated coffee barge, moored at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge, seats about 130 listeners and allows a musical intimacy that one misses in even the smallest concert halls.
In this kind of living room setting, musicians deal in subtleties that are lost in larger spaces.
The series also attracts first-rate young players, and two of its regulars, the cellist Carter Brey and the pianist Christopher O'Riley, joined forces on Thursday evening.


20 Buses Ordered Off Roads As New York Checks Charters
Twenty charter buses have been ordered off the road over the past two days after surprise roadside inspections by New York State officials, who are trying to prevent accidents like one last month in which six people were killed and 48 injured on their way from Brooklyn to an amusement park in New Jersey.
New York State transportation officials acknowledged after the crash that many charter bus operators fail to get the required safety inspections, and only a small fraction of the violators are caught.
There are an estimated 12,000 to 15,000 charter buses operating in the state.


American Women, Too, Should Have Statues
To the Editor:
Penny Colman reports on her efforts to track down monuments to American women in New York City in a delightful letter (Aug. 6).
As co-chairman of the Eleanor Roosevelt Monument Fund, I would like to point out that the July 16 article to which she refers did not state there were no monuments or memorials to American women in New York City, but that there were no public statues of American women.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Greenwich Avenue between Seventh and Eighth Avenues will be closed fron 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Horatio Street fair.
TOMORROW
Seventh Avenue between 35th and 42d Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Seventh Avenue fair.


INSIDE
Conviction in Bronx Murders
A Bronx jury found a livery-car driver guilty of killing a young woman and two girls, as emotions exploded in the courtroom.
Page 21.
A Semantic Olive Branch
Israelis are calling the Palestinians "Palestinians" at peace talks -- a small but significant step in the Arab-Israeli war of words.
Page 2.
Penalty for Pentagon Fraud
United Technologies admitted defrauding the Government on military contracts and agreed to pay $6 million in penalties.
Page 33.
Less Pay for Ex-Macy Head
R.
H.
Macy and its former chairman, Edward S. Finkelstein, have agreed on his severance pay, which is far less than he had planned.
Page 33.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Japan announced the largest economic rescue package in its history.
Public works spending is to be doubled to $86 billion to stimulate growth.
The plan is also intended to strengthen a banking system that has been jeopardized by falling land and stock prices.
The market soared in response.  [ Page 1. ] The Economy
United Technologies pled guilty to fraud in military contracts and agreed to pay $6 million in penalties in a five-year Federal investigation that has snared six other companies.  [ 33. ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.18
3.36
5.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.14
5.34
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.21
5.37
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.14
6.13
7.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.41
7.39
8.05
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.47
8.45
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.36
6.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Million Kids Held Hostage
New York City's Board of Education has so polarized AIDS education that many health professionals now refuse to sign a "loyalty oath" pledging to stress abstinence over safe sex in lessons on AIDS prevention.
Their refusal threatens to deprive students of expert information about a fatal disease.
Will the the Board now finally recognize that its obstinacy regarding AIDS education has become destructive?


Source for Book on Race Faulted for Racism
To the Editor:
In "Book on Race Used Scientific Findings" (letter, Aug. 15), Michael Bradley, author of "The Iceman Inheritance," protests that Prof.
Henry Louis Gates Jr. neglected to inform readers of "Black Demagogues and Pseudo-Scholars" (Op-Ed, July 20) that Mr.
Bradley's book was merely quoting the conclusions of "The Origin of Races," a 1962 work by Dr.
Carleton Coon.


Japan Prepares Yeltsin Visit
Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe left for Moscow today to prepare for a visit to Tokyo next month by President Boris N. Yeltsin.
Mr.
Watanabe plans to meet with Mr.
Yeltsin on Wednesday and with Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev before returning to Japan Sept. 4.
The Japanese have so far held up large-scale financial aid to Russia because they are seeking the return of four islands that were seized by the Soviets near the end of World War II.


When Peoples Scattered by Iberian Empires Came to Olympics; Before Portuguese
To the Editor:
The Aug. 12 letter from Barnard Sharrow calling the language of Galicia a Portuguese dialect misrepresents the facts.


CHRONICLE
New Year's Eve may seem a long way off to some, but not to ELLEN DEWITT STONE, who has been named executive producer of First Night New York '92, which will offer a 13-hour alcohol-free alternative to the usual rowdy celebrations in midtown.
Ms.
Stone has 122 days left to raise the $200,000 needed, she said yesterday.
That comes to roughly $1,639 a day.
She plans to ask businesses and philanthropies for the money.
This will be the second "First Night New York" celebration.
Some 15,000 revelers are expected, and for $15 each, they will be able to take part in 60 events at 20 spots in midtown, including the recently refurbished Bryant Park.


CHRONICLE
The Emmy Awards will have an East Coast angle tomorrow night.
While the awards ceremony is being broadcast from the Pasadena (Calif.) Civic Auditorium, 200 guests, including nominees and television-industry members from New York, will watch at a black-tie dinner party and screening at the Russian Tea Room in Manhattan.
They will see the live broadcast of the 44th annual award presentations on a 20-foot screen and on television monitors in an upstairs room at the restaurant, on West 57th Street.
The Academy of Television Arts and Sciences, which has headquarters in Hollywood, will present the awards, for prime-time television programming.


Dai Vernon, 98; An Expert Magician Who Taught Others
Dai Vernon, a sleight-of-hand artist who was a mentor to many of the most accomplished magicians of the last half-century, died Aug. 21 at the home of a son, Edward Wingfield Verner, in Ramona, Calif., where he had lived for the last two years.
He was 98 years old.
Many magicians called Mr.
Vernon "The Professor" because he was the inventor of hundreds of tricks that magicians now routinely perform and because he shared his knowledge so liberally, said Charles Reynolds, a friend and former pupil.


Jets and Eagles Reach Regular-Season Pitch
The Jets got in some final sparring -- literally -- against Philadelphia on Thursday night in their final preseason game, and it could come in handy in their season opener Sept. 6 when they face the Falcons at the new Georgia Dome in Atlanta.
The Jets finished the preseason with a 5-0 record by beating the Eagles, 22-13, in a game played at a regular-season tempo, complete with flaring tempers, punishing hits and big plays.


Bridge
The American open team moved to the top of its qualifying group this afternoon at the World Bridge Championships here, but the American women continued to have difficulties in their division.
The open team scored two good victories, defeating Iceland, the reigning Bermuda Bowl champions, 24-6, and India 20-10.
With 12 rounds remaining, they seem virtually certain to qualify for quarterfinal playoffs beginning Wednesday.
The leaders in their group, with 17 of 29 rounds completed, are 1.
United States, 325; 2.
Netherlands, 319; 3.
Turkey, 306; 4.
Sweden, 303; 5.
France, 301.


Some Recall the Apple Sellers and Hoovervilles; His Manner Did Him In
To the Editor:
David Shipley's Aug. 10 Editorial Notebook about Herbert Hoover's 118th birthday anniversary showed that Hoover was indeed a valiant President, a brilliant man of business and even a great humanitarian of global repute.


Some Recall the Apple Sellers and Hoovervilles; His 'Pavement Boys'
To the Editor:
Thank you for your re-examination of the work and accomplishments of Herbert Hoover.
While Hoover is known for his humanitarian work on the international level (Editorial Notebook, Aug. 10), he also helped make life a bit brighter for hundreds of thousands of American youth.


Dolphins Game Is Rescheduled
The regular-season opener between the Dolphins and the New England Patriots in Miami on Sept. 6 has been rescheduled for Oct. 18 because of continuing cleanup efforts in the wake of Hurricane Andrew.
Both teams were originally off on Oct. 18.
Their other meeting is scheduled in Foxboro, Mass., on Dec. 27, the regular-season final.


Afghan Rockets Block Russians
Ignoring a temporary truce, dissidents fired a salvo of rockets today that set a Russian evacuation plane ablaze, stranding Russia's Ambassador and other diplomats and their families.
Four Russian commandos aboard the plane were wounded.
But two military transport planes escaped the bombardment and ferried 120 Russian Embassy workers, their wives and children safely out of Kabul with little more than what they could carry.
The planes had circled around the mountains that ring the city, spewing dozens of flares designed to deflect heat-seeking missiles that were fired at the aircraft.


Dr. Mortimer G. Rosen, 60, Expert Who Wrote About Perinatal Care
Dr.
Mortimer G. Rosen, the director and chairman of obstetrics and gynecology at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center and a leader in the field of perinatal care, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old.
Dr.
Rosen died of Lou Gehrig's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, said his son Bradley.


Review/Film; Freudian Horror and a Dead Dog
In the infinitely vengeful world of Stephen King, a snake lurks under every rock, and that's only if you're lucky.
If you venture into places where it says "Keep Out," far worse things are likely to pop up, and they're a lot harder to get rid of than snakes.
In "Pet Sematary Two," the sequel to the successful 1989 horror film adapted by Mr.
King from his best-selling novel, "Pet Sematary," those nearly indestructible pests are the corpses of dead animals and people interred in an ancient Indian burial ground.
The sequel, which opened yesterday, tells the story of Chase Matthews (Anthony Edwards), a Los Angeles veterinarian, and his 13-year-old son Jeff (Edward Furlong), who move back to his mother's hometown of Ludlow, Me., after a family tragedy.
In the movie's opening sequence, Jeff witnesses the hideous accidental electrocution of his beloved actress-mother Renee (Darlanne Fluegel) while she is making a horror film.


One-Fisted Strength on China
Whether the issue is intellectual property rights or intellectuals jailed for their beliefs, the same facts apply.
The U.S. has vast trade leverage with China and can use it to induce better Chinese behavior.
The Bush Administration now threatens China with sweeping tariff penalties for trade infractions.
But at the same time, indifferent to the obvious contradiction, it insists that linking tariff penalties to human rights would jeopardize reform and hurt the wrong Chinese.
The Administration cannot, honorably, have things both ways.


DIARY OF A DROPOUT
It took courage for Senator Tim Wirth to share his doubts, his sadness, his struggles and frustrations with us ("Diary of a Dropout," Aug. 9).
We may have more to learn from his words than all the rhetoric we will hear this year.
What Wirth depicts is an operational disaster where, by necessity, the bulk of a Congressman's time is spent attending to the business of getting elected and then re-elected, rather than getting down to the hard work of hammering out legislation that can solve real problems.


Conductor-Sleuths Nose Out Bogus Rail Tickets
Fred T. may look like any other conductor on the Metro-North Commuter Railroad, but he has a special undercover assignment: catching counterfeiters.
Usually, he can tell a bogus ticket by touch alone.
In the last few months, he has caught an advertising executive, a civilian employee of the Coast Guard and most recently "a very high-priced lawyer."


'Joy to the World'
To the Editor:
Your lack of objectivity on the Presidential election is disheartening.
You reported the performance of the band Three Dog Night at the Republican National Convention, stating that it is best known for the song "Mama Told Me Not to Come," a paean to drugs and hedonism ("The Houston Thing," Aug. 19).


THE GERBIL MYSTIQUE
Tamar Lewin's descriptions of "grouchy mom" conversations were funny and accurate (Hers: "The Gerbil Mystique," Aug. 9).
Most moms and dads still differ drastically in the amount each contributes to family care, and raising "feminist sons" may correct this in the coming generation.


World Markets; Skittish London Looks Abroad
It was a wild week on the London stock market, and the next month promises to be just as unsettled.
For most of the week, stocks here were battered on all fronts.
There were more gloomy economic statistics, including a 16 percent increase in the trade deficit in July, giving little hope that the long British recession would end soon.
Following the lead of the dollar, the pound plunged against the surging German mark, forcing Prime Minister John Major to consider raising interest rates, despite the recession, to keep sterling within the range required by an agreement among the leading European nations to link their currencies.


A Nautical View and Traditional Italian
PORTOBELLO mushrooms, splashed with balsamic vinegar, are among the appetizer stars at the new Porto Bello restaurant in Greenport.
But it is the glorious view, not the mushrooms, that gives this restaurant its name.
Situated at the Stirling Harbor Marina, it is indeed a beautiful port.
Its vistas of bobbing boats and distant church spires evoked memories of Cape Cod for some customers and European ports for others.


DIARY OF A DROPOUT
Tim Wirth impresses me less as a senator than as a special-interest advocate.
His intention to fight for a viable national environmental conservation policy is admirable, but it ought not to be the abiding interest of a senator.
Idealism is a luxury afforded philosophers.
Statesmen must defer idealism to the rigors of pragmatism.
ALIM S. GAFAR
Bellerose, Queens


Arson Suspected in One of Three Brooklyn Fires


Shipwreck May Be Oldest Found in Americas
Diving in the turquoise waters of the Bahamas, down to white coral sands stretching away from a treacherous shoal, treasure hunters and archeologists are combing through the remarkably well-preserved remains of an early Spanish sailing ship, a prized artifact from the opening years of the Age of Discovery.
Experts who have examined the shipwreck say it may be the oldest ever found in the Americas, from the early 16th century, and is sure to give archeologists and historians insights into the ships and lives of explorers of the New World in the years immediately after Christopher Columbus.


A la Carte Open Face, Open Kitchen
ALTHOUGH there will not be an open kitchen at Tutto Pazzo, a new 150-seat contemporary-Italian cafe in Huntington, diners will still be able to watch their food being prepared.
The restaurant, which is opening in two weeks at 84 New York Avenue (271-2253), is installing a video system with a large dining room screen that will show the kitchen at work.


Reverse English
A couple of years ago, American youth wear invaded Continental fashion.
Italian and French designers promoted sweatshirts, T-shirts and jean jackets, often including colorful patches that looked collegiate and were written in, well, English.
A young woman in Rome sported a white sweatshirt that read, "New York City, U.S.A., In Cash Concept." A shop displayed a maroon sweatshirt proclaiming, "The American System. Round Winnipeg Lake. Huntman Shed." A young man's black warm-up jacket proclaimed: "BEST MONTANA. Costum  [ sic ]  this season."


Roadside Attractions
APPROACHING the roadside farm stand or the urban farmers' market, there is -- always -- the anxiety.
It erupts in fitful, tangible and rational spurts.
Will there be a parking space?
Will the corn be just off the stalk?
Will the best tomatoes be gone?
But these apparently logical concerns are facets of the larger and unnameable fear that the farm stand itself will disappear.
Under cover of night, Warner's Sweet Corn in Columbus, Ohio, will replace its creaking bushel baskets with a bank of frozen yogurt machines.
Farmer Latham will put away his shell beans and spinach and put a Blockbuster Video outlet on the north fork of Long Island.
The St.
Paul Farmers' Market will turn into a big Gap.


G.O.P. Campaign of Hate Can Only Harm U.S.
To the Editor:
In "George Bush, Prisoner of the Crazies" (Op-Ed, Aug. 16), Garry Wills portrays the political despair that has led the Republican Party to flatter the extreme right.
But the festival of cultural hatred that took place in Houston shows the systematic social evil of what Mr.
Wills sees as a desperate political strategy.


Julia Silverman, J. H. Billington 4th
Dr.
Julia Ann Silverman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Silverman of Altoona, Pa., was married yesterday to James H. Billington 4th, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James H. Billington of Washington.
Rabbi Gary Klein performed the ceremony at the Heinz Chapel at the University of Pittsburgh, with the Rev.
Peter Mayhew, an Anglican priest, participating.
Mrs.
Billington, 29 years old, is an internist at Jennings Community Hospital in North Vernon, Ind.
She graduated from Harvard University, as did her husband, and received her M.D. degree from the University of Pittsburgh.
Her father is a psychiatrist in Altoona.


A Show of Appreciation


English Shuttle Hauls Packs
Travelers who are intrigued by Britain's 190-mile Coast-to-Coast Walk but not by the prospect of carrying everything they need on their backs, can get a helping hand from the Coast to Coast Pack Horse backpack shuttle service.
The company was started last year by Elizabeth and John Bowman, who live in Newbiggin-on-Lune, a village at about the midpoint of the trail, which runs across northern England from St.
Bees in Cumbria to Robin Hood's Bay in Yorkshire.
The horsepower is automotive: Each morning from April through October, Ms.
Bowman drives west and Mr.
Bowman east, stopping at 17 prearranged pickup points in hotels and bed and breakfasts to transport walkers' luggage to their next stop.
This leaves the walkers free to carry only a day pack.
The cost is $102 a bag for the whole route (figured at an exchange rate of $2 to the pound); for individual segments of the trail, the price is $6 a bag, except for one particularly long leg, which costs $12.
The company prefers handling backpacks rather than suitcases; bags weighing more than 35 pounds cost extra.


Fort Dix May Become Federal Prison
The Pentagon and the United States Bureau of Prisons are close to an agreement to convert Fort Dix, the sprawling Army base in central New Jersey that has been stripped of its function as an active duty training center, into the largest prison in the Federal system.
The plan calls for five empty barracks to be converted, by early 1994, to a low security prison complex for 3,200 convicted drug offenders and white-collar criminals, Daniel R. Dunne, a spokesman for the Bureau of Prisons, said in a telephone interview yesterday.
The prison would be larger than any of the Government's 67 other prisons, he said.


Oldest Episcopal Seminary Hopes for Fresh Start
After completing much work in a $21 million restoration project, General Theological Seminary in Chelsea will celebrate its 175th birthday next month with a new president on his way and with the challenge to reverse years of declining enrollment.
The new president and dean, Bishop Craig Barry Anderson, will succeed The Rev.
James C. Fenhagen, who has led the seminary, the oldest Episcopal seminary in the nation, for 14 years.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about New York City residents enjoying themselves on the beach in Southampton, L.I., misstated the location of the weekend house of two New Yorkers, Steven Goldstein and Robin Timothy.
It is in the Hamptons, not Manhattan.


Voices of Hunts Point Talk of Drugs and Decay, but Rebirth Too Voices of Hunts Point Talk of Drugs and Decay, but Reality Too
On the streets of Hunts Point, young men and women, aimless and bored, hang out in front of storefronts covered with graffiti, abandoned buildings and vacant lots.
Dealers brazenly sell drugs, paying children 5 cents to collect used crack vials.
A guard at the McDonald's on Garrison Avenue tries to keep prostitutes from using the bathrooms as shooting galleries.
On other streets, children play stickball late into the evening as their parents linger on the sidewalks and stoops to escape hot, humid apartments.
A woman on Bryant Avenue grows tomatoes and peppers in her front yard.
Government officials from France tour the neat rows of new town houses bearing plaques trumpeting the day they opened.


MCMILLAN'S MILLIONS
Alice Walker versus Terry McMillan ("McMillan's Millions," by Daniel Max, Aug. 9)?
Do we assume that readers of John Updike never long for an encounter with Anne Rice?
McMillan's readers are the same men and women who are reading Toni Morrison's "Jazz," en route to Alice Walker's "Possessing the Secret of Joy."


Matisse Exhibit on the Riviera
The Henri Matisse Exhibition: La Chapelle de Vence 1948-1951" opened at the Chateau de Villeneuve-Emile Hugues Foundation in Vence on the French Riviera last month and continues to Oct. 30. It is devoted to the four years in which Matisse designed and decorated the Chapelle du Rosaire for the Dominican nuns who had nursed him through a long illness.
The exhibition traces, through original drawings, gouaches, models, sculptures and photographs, Matisse's work on the chapel, from the architecture, stained glass windows and ceramic panels to the religious garments and spire.
The exhibit also has several paintings done by the artist while he lived in Vence. (A Matisse restrospective begins Sept. 24 at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.)


Dr. Mortimer G. Rosen, 60, Dies; Was an Expert on Perinatal Care
Dr.
Mortimer G. Rosen, the director and chairman of obstetrics and gynecology at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center and a leader in the field of perinatal care, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old.
Dr.
Rosen died of Lou Gehrig's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, said his son Bradley.


Philippines in Breeze To Little League Title
With Ryan Beaver at the plate and two out in the sixth and final inning, the Filipino fans scattered among the 40,000 people watching the Little League World Series championship contest rose from their seats and began to chant: "Isa Pa, Isa Pa."
A moment later, Beaver had grounded out to shortstop, and the Long Beach team from California had been defeated, 15-4.


The Jets Put a No. 1 On Nagle's Uniform
In a much-anticipated announcement, Jets Coach Bruce Coslet today named Browning Nagle as the starting quarterback over Ken O'Brien, who had been the starter for the last 8 years.
"I didn't tell the players at the team meeting but I spoke to the quarterbacks privately after the meeting," said Coslet.
"We're going to start Browning Nagle against Atlanta." 'We're Going to Work Together'
Inasmuch as O'Brien had virtually conceded that he had lost the starting job following the Jets' final preseason game on Thursday, the announcement was not much of a surprise.


The Companies Offering Those Cut-Rate Air Fares
THIS department gets a steady flow of letters and calls from people who want to buy those super-cheap airline tickets listed in one-inch advertisements but fear such tickets are illegal, or are dubious about the reputation of a particular company.
It is difficult for consumers to evaluate these consolidators, as they are known, and the companies have no trade association or self-policing body.
The American Society of Travel Agents does not even know how many are operating in the United States.
Generally, consolidators that have been in operation for a long time are better bets, but companies with big reputations have found themselves without cash and close overnight, leaving travelers and travel agencies in the lurch.
New companies may be fine, or they may be old unreliables going by another name.


Voices of Hunts Point Talk of Drugs and Decay, but Rebirth Too
On the streets of Hunts Point, young men and women, aimless and bored, hang out in front of storefronts covered with graffiti, abandoned buildings and vacant lots.
Dealers brazenly sell drugs, paying children 5 cents to collect used crack vials.
A guard at the McDonald's on Garrison Avenue tries to keep prostitutes from using the bathrooms as shooting galleries.
On other streets, children play stickball late into the evening as their parents linger on the sidewalks and stoops to escape hot, humid apartments.
A woman on Bryant Avenue grows tomatoes and peppers in her front yard.
Government officials from France tour the neat rows of new town houses bearing plaques trumpeting the day they opened.


Seafood Plus Italian and Japanese Fare
A LETTER from a reader led us recently to Clearwaters, a restaurant less than a year old, situated in a small roadside shopping center in Monroe. (Though C.I.A. -- Culinary Intelligence Apparatus -- is not 100 percent reliable, in this case it served us well.)
Modest looking from the outside, Clearwaters does not instantly compel you to enter the premises.
Once inside, there is nothing especially riveting about the decor.
There are two dining areas: smoking in the front facing the windows and a larger nonsmoking dining room in the rear.
Both are studies in pastels.
In the back room, pale robin's-egg blue walls are hung with framed prints, wreaths of dried flowers and strands of garlic.
There is oak wainscoting around much of the room, and the dark blue-green padding of the Art Deco chairs echoes the wall color.
The tone is pleasantly low-key.
Adding a welcoming touch is the friendliness of staff members, who are attentive and seem anxious to please.


The Inside Story on the Trusty Geranium
In spite of the rainy season, geraniums seem to be holding their own.
The plants have put on a good show, whether set in window boxes or patio tubs or planted as borders, or along walls and walks.
No matter where they are grown, the jolly flowers of the geraniums, in shades of bright red, pink or white, have brightened the garden.
Even though most gardeners feel they should have a refund on their summer, it is time to think about taking some of these favorite plants indoors for the winter months.
The good old reliable geraniums, which have put on a consistent show in spite of the lousy growing weather, are excellent choices to keep indoors as decorative house plants.
Most garden books and professionals recommend a series of elaborate instructions to save them.
They describe how to cut the geraniums back, pot them, and take them indoors after the plants have settled.
Others say that geranium cuttings must be taken now to be rooted and potted if the plants are to carry over the winter months.


Courier Has Eyes for the Championship, Not the Standings
He's hot, he's bothered, and he's hoping practice makes perfect.
The scene is Queens at high noon, and out on Court 16, Jim Courier, the world's No. 1 player, stands silent and shirtless and capless as he awaits howitzer serves from the pair of able-bodied practice partners he's enlisted to pelt him in stereo from across the net.
The sun is at fry level, the humidity is deadening, and already, before the United States Open has even begun, expectations and complications abound.


Susan Dempsey, Peter G. Wade
Mrs.
Robert Magee of Vero Beach, Fla., and Charles Dempsey of Fountain Valley, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Marie Dempsey to Peter Grahame Wade, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Wade of Interlaken, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Dempsey, 31 years old, is the president of Ventry Ltd., a maker of home furnishings in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Hunter College.
Her father, who is retired, was an aerospace engineer in Hawthorne, Calif., for the Northrop Corporation.
Her mother, Kathy Magee, who is retired, was an interior designer in Fountain Valley, Calif.


Mondavi Pours New Wines, And Adds a Whiff of Romance
Since December 1990, when R. Michael and Timothy Mondavi took over the reins of the Robert Mondavi Winery from their father, the wine world has waited to see what they might do.
On Tuesday, Michael will introduce the family's first new brand since 1974, a line of California varietal wines called Vichon Coastal Selection.
Starting with a 1989 cabernet sauvignon and a 1991 chardonnay, the wines will be priced under $10, and will be made from grapes grown in Santa Barbara, Paso Robles and the Napa Valley.
They will be finished and bottled at the Vichon Winery, which Mondavi acquired in 1985.
Vichon previously made only Napa Valley wines priced at $10 to $20.


U.S. Open '92; Grand Slam-Bang Tennis
It may look like heaven to Jimmy Connors, but most players describe it as two weeks of living hell, a concrete hornets' nest of a workplace surrounded by steamy blacktop and screeching subway trains, a Grand Slam cauldron where hope evaporates quickly and survival comes close to being a medical miracle.
Take in too much of the rapid, radical pulse of the United States Open at Flushing Meadows, and you risk sensory overload.
"The Open is definitely the most hectic one of them all," said Jennifer Capriati, who was born in nearby Mineola, L.I., feels halfway streetwise in Manhattan and knows a thing or two about handling herself inside the various pressure cookers of her profession.
"There's not just the competition to deal with, there's the place."


Glenda Fowler, Alfred Law 3d
Glenda Ann Fowler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Noel B. Fowler of Milledgeville, Ga., was married yesterday in St.
Michaels, Md., to Alfred John Law 3d, a son of Mrs.
Law of Chattanooga, Tenn., and the late Mr.
Law.
The Rev.
Vernard Robertson performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Law, 45 years old, is of counsel to the Washington law firm of Arnold &amp; Porter.
She graduated from Emory University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in library science from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and a J.D. from Georgetown University.


Felicia M. Varlese And William Viscovich
Felicia Maria Varlese, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rocco S. Varlese of Whitestone, Queens, was married yesterday in Flushing, Queens, to William Anthony Viscovich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruno Viscovich of Manhasset Hills, L.I.
Msgr.
James P. King officiated at St.
Mel's Roman Catholic Church.


Tallinn's Medieval Heart
A new sign has gone up by a block of ruins in Tallinn's Old Town, informing passers-by that what they see before them was the work of a Soviet bombing raid in March 1944 -- a truth that could only recently be told.
Since Estonia won its independence a year ago from the wreckage of the former Soviet Union, this old city is free to say and to do whatever it pleases -- which, more often as not, is artfully designed to put as much distance between itself and Moscow as possible.


Voices of Hunts Point Talk of Drugs and Decay, but Rebirth Too
On the streets of Hunts Point, young men and women, aimless and bored, hang out in front of storefronts covered with graffiti, abandoned buildings and vacant lots.
Dealers brazenly sell drugs, paying children 5 cents to collect used crack vials.
A guard at the McDonald's on Garrison Avenue tries to keep prostitutes from using the bathrooms as shooting galleries.
On other streets, children play stickball late into the evening as their parents linger on the sidewalks and stoops to escape hot, humid apartments.
A woman on Bryant Avenue grows tomatoes and peppers in her front yard.
Government officials from France tour the neat rows of new town houses bearing plaques trumpeting the day they opened.


A 70th Anniversary For Silvermine Guild
CONSIDERING the millions of artists in the world, a group of 300 is negligible.
But when all are members of the Silvermine Guild and are gathered to celebrate the Guild's 70th anniversary the number seems formidable, the more so when one realizes that each submitted three works, of which one was chosen.
Credit for the culling goes to Carlus Dyer, a member in long standing and a former director of the Silvermine board.
Fortunately for him, artists cannot join the Guild without first having their output scrutinized by a panel of peers.


Wall Street; A Debt Collector With Its Own Troubles
Another day, another lawsuit.
Worldwide Collections Fund Inc., a Reno, Nev., company in the business of suing people who haven't paid their bills, put a fresh batch of consumers on notice last week to pay up or meet them in court.
Worldwide's six suits targeted 1,669 Florida residents, and were "the first in a series" to collect on $50 million owed it, the company said.
Worldwide's lawsuits Thursday are but the company's latest attempt to pressure thousands of consumers in Florida to pay past due bills for solar water heaters.
Worldwide says the customers ducked out on obligations to pay $100 a year for 20 years after making initial $2,000 investments in the solar units.
The customers, who bought or leased their solar units in the early and mid-1980's, say they stopped paying because the repairmen stopped answering their phones.


Strikes And Spares
"BOWLING and old cars -- what more could you want?" said Mary Emmerling, an author and aficionado of Americana, at the Parrish Art Museum's benefit at East Hampton (L.I.) Bowl last weekend.
"I bring my kids here all the time, and we play the transistor radio," she added with a simple easygoing flick of her wrist, which was laden with several silver charm bracelets and a Rolex watch.
"Nobody's having fun anymore.
This
is fun." She finished her hot dog and went off to bowl a strike with the authority of someone who has made herself expert on many things.
Bowling is not just for the fashionable.
It's for the philisophical, too.
It's not only about the fun of knocking things down with something heavy and sort of dangerous, but also about calming oneself, taking aim and letting go.
Like motorcycle maintenance and archery, it inspires self-awareness.


Joanne Tower, Jonathan Roth
Joanne Ibrook Tower, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David E. Tower of Newburgh, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jonathan Carl Roth, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Roth of Madison, Wis.
The Rev.
Charlotte Warner officiated at St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church in Wellesley, Mass.
Mrs.
Roth, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from Smith College and is an M.B.A. candidate at Dartmouth College.
Her father is a lawyer in Newburgh, where her mother is a portrait photographer.


What Are Mets Scouts Looking For?
As an old-time Brooklyn Dodgers fan and a new-found Mets fan of only 30 years, I am both dismayed and outraged by the findings in "When Dreams Meet Harsh Realities at Shea Stadium"  [ "About Long Island," July 19 ] .
My son, a catcher, was at the Mets tryout July 14 at Shea Stadium.
He was good enough, or fortunate enough, to be one of the final 20; getting a chance to hit.
After putting down my hard-earned money for 30 years to watch the Mets, who have only brought home two championships in their history, I am a tad concerned about the abilities of their scouting personnel.
If they see an average of 200 young men a year, for 25 years, this means that they have looked at at least 5,000 potential minor (if not major) leaguers.
They have offered only one of these men a contract?!


A Chair With Its Feet On the Ground
You don't see a lot of slipper chairs anymore -- low to the ground, perfect for slipping on slippers.
This American one, from the turn of the century, is woven of rough textured hemp, with a bit of wicker trim.
Its back is topped by an open-work design ($325).
It was donated by a Greenwich Village antiques dealer, along with a hemp tete-a-tete ($875) -- a two-person settee with an S-shaped arm of wicker.


Wickman Wins His First
Bob Wickman won his first major league game tonight, an efficient eight-inning effort in a 6-3 Yankee victory over Minnesota that compounded the problems of the floundering World Series champion Twins.
Backed with a six-run lead by the second inning, Wickman limited the Twins to a bunt single over his final six innings.
Minnesota's 21st defeat in its last 32 games dropped the Twins seven and a half games behind first-place Oakland in the American League West.


Poor Yardstick
To the Editor:
It is perhaps true that a faked Pollock can be distinguished easily from the real McCoy, but the same could be said of any impersonator of Jerry Lewis (also a national icon, albeit in France).
Pollock may indeed be the best at what he does, but that is hardly a valuation of what he does.
ROSS NEHER New York
The writer is a professor of graduate fine arts at Pratt Institute.


Subsidized by Taxes
To the Editor:
I object to James A. Baker 3d's conducting the Bush re-election campaign from the White House as the new White House chief of staff and counselor to the President -- and using my tax dollars to do so.


Persistence Pays Off at a Shop With a Cause
THE measure of a charitable thrift shop is the quality of donations it attracts.
At Out of the Closet, a nonprofit Upper East Side shop whose proceeds benefit AIDS-service organizations, the clutter is top drawer.
"We've been lucky in getting choice items," Edward Maloney, the store's manager and founder, said one recent afternoon.
Among items that have been donated, he said, are lamps and furniture from the shop Hubert des Forges, a 19th-century English coach print from Cotswold Antiques Ltd. and several items from the auctioneer William Doyle.


Any Takers?
To the Editor:
The important question is
not
who painted the picture, but who could be convinced to pay $400,000 or more for that sort of paint on a canvas.
FRED KAHN Evanston, Ill.


Vivian Le Blanc and Ashley Clark
Vivian Mary Le Blanc, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andre Le Blanc of Huntington Station, L.I., and Rio de Janeiro, was married yesterday in Cold Spring, N.Y., to Ashley Michael Clark, a son of Alexander M. Clark and Joan S. Clark, both of New York.
The Rev.
Francis Geer performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Mary's in the Highlands.
Mrs.
Clark, 31 years old, is a microcomputer analyst with McKinsey &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father, a professor at the School of Visual Arts, is a cartoonist and illustrator.
Her mother, Elvira Telles Le Blanc, who is retired, was a translator for the Brazilian Government in Rio de Janeiro.


The Refrigerator of the Future, for Better and Worse
Refrigerators and freezers have changed little in their basic design in decades.
Shoppers have grown to expect them to be exceptionally durable and trouble free.
Instead manufacturers have competed on the basis of new features like through-the-door ice water and special storage bins.
But now refrigerator makers, pressed by Government mandates to become more energy efficient and by environmental interests to eliminate a family of chemicals essential to proper operation, are being forced into a situation they loathe: rapid technological change.


Matisse Exhibit on the Riviera
"The Henri Matisse Exhibition: La Chapelle de Vence 1948-1951" opened at the Chateau de Villeneuve-Emile Hugues Foundation in Vence on the French Riviera last month and continues to Oct. 30.
It is devoted to the four years in which Matisse designed and decorated the Chapelle du Rosaire for the Dominican nuns who had nursed him through a long illness.
The exhibition traces, through original drawings, gouaches, models, sculptures and photographs, Matisse's work on the chapel, from the architecture, stained glass windows and ceramic panels to the religious garments and spire.
The exhibit also has several paintings done by the artist while he lived in Vence. (A Matisse restrospective begins Sept. 24 at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.)


Adding a Dash of Inspiration to Zucchini
IF zucchini were available early in the summer, perhaps it would generate more enthusiasm.
As it is, the peak of the zucchini harvest presents a challenge for many cooks.
After the first couple of weeks, one has lost the audience unless you can come up with interesting new ways of cooking this vegetable.
The places to look for inspiration are Italy and France.
While the English were happily winning gardeners' prizes with zucchinis grown to the size of a man's boot, in Italy, people were eating their flowers, which are a great delicacy.
The flowers are bright yellow and have a delicate but pronounced flavor.
They are extremely perishable, lasting only a day or so after they have been picked.
They can be stuffed with mozzarella (with diced prosciutto or anchovies sometimes added) and then fried.
Another very simple way to serve baby zucchini is to slice it thin with a cheese parer and saute it in oil with red peppers and garlic.
This makes a pleasant change from the more usual method of sauteeing zucchini cut in chunks or in half.


Ms. Woodcock, Eric M. Conti
Heather Stevens Woodcock, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Woodcock of Potomac, Md., was married yesterday in Providence, R.I., to Eric Michael Conti, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Conti of Arlington, Mass.
The Rev.
Howard O'Shea, a Roman Catholic chaplain at Brown University, officiated at the Manning Chapel there.
The Rev.
Dr.
Janet Cooper-Nelson, the university chaplain, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Woodcock, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Brown, where she is an associate director of admissions.
She received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
Her father is a lawyer in the solicitor's office of the Interior Department in Washington.
Her mother, Estelle Woodcock, teaches the first grade at the Burning Tree School in Bethesda, Md.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 9 about the artist Peter Max incorrectly associated him with the animated movie "Yellow Submarine." He did not work on it.


Holed Up in the Roxy
KICKING TOMORROW
By Daniel Richler. 310 pp. New York: Random House. $21.


Don't Spare the Horses!
On Aug. 21, the start of a Newport coaching weekend, getting to cocktails and dinner was half the fun.


As Night Approaches, an Unexpected Stop
Heavy clouds filled the valley of the Matapedia River, a fine rain was falling, and darkness and mist were closing in.
"I need to be able to see the rocks in the rough water on our way back, Mr. Bryant," said Kevin Gauthier, my young guide, "so I guess this will be our last drop." When fly fishing from a canoe for Atlantic salmon, you begin at the upper end of a salmon-holding pool or run, covering with gradually longer casts all the water you can reach from the anchored craft, then "drop" 100 feet or so downstream, anchor and repeat the ritual.


Talking; Small Co-ops Sharing The Tasks Equally
SCATTERED around New York City are dozens of brownstones and other small buildings that since the late 1970's have been converted into co-op and condominiums.
These buildings have special problems and one of the most difficult is getting resident-owners to carry their fair share of management and maintenance work.
Because they do not have the income and resources to afford a full-time superintendent or professional management, the chores tend to fall directly on the residents' shoulders.


Demolishing Myths About the Art of Ancient Japan
Behind its utilitarian title and strong archeological bias, "Ancient Japan" at the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery of the Smithsonian Institution sets some notable precedents for Japanese art in America.
It is the first loan show from Japan to appear at the Sackler, and the first exhibition in the West devoted to that country's prehistoric art.
More important, the 250 objects gathered here -- many of them of great beauty -- prompt a re-examination of long-held opinions about Japanese art.
They support, for example, the view that Japanese art is a highly synthetic phenomenon, assimilating foreign influences that enter its sphere.
But they demolish the myth that it is fundamentally derivative, that it began only with the arrival of Buddhism from Korea and China and appropriated such techniques as lacquerware from continental Asia.
"Ancient Japan" (through Nov. 1) confirms not only that a strong indigenous esthetic has always existed in Japan but that the melding of art and life for which the country is famous has roots deep in its own past.


Lisa A. Munster, S. A. Tananbaum
Mr. and Mrs.
Sigmund J. Munster of Columbus, Ohio, have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Lisa Anne Munster, and Steven Andrew Tananbaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David J. Tananbaum of New York.
Miss Munster, 27 years old, graduated from Northwestern University and is a candidate for a master's degree in public policy and administration at Ohio State University.
Her father is a senior vice president in Columbus for Dean Witter Reynolds, the securities brokerage.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
TURKISH BROTHERHOOD
From the time the Jews were expelled from Spain in 1492, and re- settled in the countries of the Ottoman Empire, they have enjoyed a particularly salubrious life in Turkey.
"Can we get along?" is a question that apparently does not arise between Muslims and Jews in Turkey, no matter how adversarial their counterparts are elsewhere.


Many Left Homeless on Guam
A typhoon that swept Guam on Friday brought vast destruction.
Officials there said between 75 and 90 percent of all buildings on the island had been heavily damaged.
Page 23.


Mighty Big of Bogues
Point guard MUGGSY BOGUES signed a multiyear contract extension Friday, giving the Charlotte Hornets more room under their salary cap to sign ALONZO MOURNING, their first-round draft pick.
Details of the contract were not made available.


Louise Anne Vaughn, Scott Alan Lauretti
Louise Anne Vaughn, a daughter of Don J. Vaughn of San Diego and the late Irene A. Vaughn, was married in San Diego Friday to Scott Alan Lauretti, the son of Ronald F. and Geraldine J. Lauretti of Carlisle, Pa.
Msgr.
I.
B.
Eagan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Mission San Diego de Alcala.


AUGUST 23-29: Conference on Bosnia; Tightening the Screw In the Name of Peace
To a world demanding an end to the brutality in Bosnia, last week's conference in London on the Yugoslav crisis was too little, too late.
"What will you tell the people of Sarajevo tomorrow morning?" a European journalist asked Acting Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger as the meeting ended with accords that were widely viewed as unenforceable.
But among the diplomats who had set up the meeting of two dozen countries and international organizations, there was satisfaction in first steps toward a systematic way of tackling ethnic wars short of military intervention.


Martha M. Broad, Glenn M. Tarullo
Martha Mary Broad, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Stuart Broad of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday in Stowe, Vt., to Glenn Martin Tarullo, the son of Blair Tarullo of Toms River, N.J., and the late Irene Tarullo.
The Rev.
Ingrid Lukas performed the Congregational ceremony at Edson Hill Manor, an inn.
Ms.
Broad, who is 34 years old and is keeping her name, is the co-manager of Community Products Inc., a candy manufacturer in Montpelier, Vt.
She graduated from Hampshire College and received a master's degree in management from Yale University.


Whitney Ross, Stephen Moseley
Dennis B. Ross of New Canaan, Conn., and Sarah Whitehouse of Ringoes, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Whitney Beekman Ross, to Stephen James Moseley, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Roger V. Moseley of Princeton, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Ross, 26 years old, graduated from Hamilton College and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
She is a counselor at the Center for Comprehensive Health Practice in New York.
Her father, who is retired, owned the Ross Real Estate Agency in New Canaan.


Steel Wall Framing Is for Houses, Too
STEEL wall framing is common in commercial buildings, including apartments, but not in houses.
As a result, many amateur carpenters barely know of its existence.
But building with steel framing is easier in many ways than building with conventional wood framing, and steel framing has advantages over wood that make it worth considering for many remodeling projects, not to mention new-house construction.


Data Bank/August 30, 1992


The Inside Story on the Trusty Geranium
In spite of the rainy season, geraniums seem to be holding their own.
The plants have put on a good show, whether set in window boxes or patio tubs or planted as borders, or along walls and walks.
No matter where they are grown, the jolly flowers of the geraniums, in shades of bright red, pink or white, have brightened the garden.
Even though most gardeners feel they should have a refund on their summer, it is time to think about taking some of these favorite plants indoors for the winter months.
The good old reliable geraniums, which have put on a consistent show in spite of the lousy growing weather, are excellent choices to keep indoors as decorative house plants.
Most garden books and professionals recommend a series of elaborate instructions to save them.
They describe how to cut the geraniums back, pot them, and take them indoors after the plants have settled.
Others say that geranium cuttings must be taken now to be rooted and potted if the plants are to carry over the winter months.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FANNY CROSBY'S DAY
Frances Jane Crosby was born in a Brewster farmhouse in 1820.
While still an infant she was blinded when her mother was mistakenly advised to apply mustard plasters to her eyes to treat discharges caused by a cold.
The child's father died the same year, requiring her mother to seek employment and her grandmother to come and care for her.


Sure Shots and Long Shots
Nobody can ever be sure they've got sufficient grit to survive the various pitfalls of the United States Open: sooner or later, the heat, the humidity, the noise, the blimps, the upset artists, the rain delays, the hecklers, the traffic conspire to fray the nerves of even the most qualified candidates on the men's side.
On the other hand, the women seem to cope in their standard manner, holding rank at all costs: that's why Monica Seles, Steffi Graf, Martina Navratilova and Gabriela Sabatini, the top four women in the world, are expected to be working on the final weekend.
The surest bets among the men are the ones who've done it all before; this tournament packs enough obstacles to make breakthroughs next to impossible.
THE SURE SHOTS:


Kayaking
To the Editor: The kayaking trip in the Alands described by John F. Kennedy Jr. sounds like great fun.
As with many challenging adventures, their trip included the adrenalin high of life-threatening situations.
But paddling sea kayaks in open ocean waters with no knowledge of rescue techniques is dangerously irresponsible.
Had Newt's capsize occurred farther from shore, or had the winds shifted to slow or prevented their landing, hypothermia (the leading cause of sea-kayaking fatalities) could well have ended his life.
Open water rescues are easy to learn and fun to practice -- why not spend a few hours improving skills?


Alison T. Gray, Peter S. Fiske
Gilson B. Gray 3d of New York and Melissa T. Harrison of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alison Travis Gray to Peter Sewell Fiske, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Fiske of Bethesda, Md.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gray, 26 years old, is an assistant director of development at the Seton Medical Center in Daly City, Calif.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Hughes Hubbard &amp; Reed.


Refashioning the College Game as a Springboard
With maximum growth virtually accomplished, the next step for collegiate soccer in the United States is creating a more competitive environment for the players.
With the lack of a viable nationwide professional league of the caliber of the defunct North American Soccer League, the collegiate ranks remain as the highest ground of development for players in this country.
A large contingent of college coaches feel a responsibility to develop players for the United States Olympic and World Cup teams, but there are just as many coaches who put their players' academic accomplishment ahead of their soccer development.


Where the Pack Goes to Be Polite
Despite such treats as lojromsgravad stromming med vaasterbottensost and pyttipanna med stekt agg och odbetor, even the management concedes that the food is only an incidental attraction at the Cafe Opera, Stockholm's most infamous cafe-bistro-nightclub.
"We're quite proud of our cuisine," said Frederik Lidbergh, an assistant manager.
"But I'm not sure how many of our guests really notice it."


Doctors Split on Hepatitis Vaccination
THE Federal Government and the nation's leading group of pediatricians recently recommended that every infant be vaccinated against hepatitis B, the liver infection that has become the world's ninth leading killer.
But pediatricians on Long Island are divided over who should receive the vaccine and when.
Linda Golden of Dix Hills was told by her pediatrician that her 2-year-old son, Eric, the youngest of her four children, should be vaccinated, but she agonized before deciding to go ahead.
The process involves three injections over six months for the hepatitis B virus (HBV), a viral infection that attacks the liver and may progress to chronic liver disease, including cirrhosis and liver cancer.


How to Help the Storm Victims
Following is a list of organizations seeking donations for the hurricane relief effort:
The American Red Cross: Checks may be sent to American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 9140, Church Street Station, New York, N.Y. 10256.
Credit-card donations may be made by calling (800) 842-2200, or, for Spanish speakers, (800) 257-7575.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush


'Girls Lean Back Everywhere'
To the Editor:
As the executive director of the National Coalition Against Censorship, I am certainly among those whom Richard Pildes considers inflexible, dogmatic extremists because we consider free expression a truly serious matter.
His characterization is comical, since
he
supports censorship demands by antipornography feminists, whose ideas were well described by the British writer Suzanne Moore as "a frighteningly prescriptive belief system with religious undertones.  [ Andrea ]  Dworkin is its high priestess and the language is one of conversion."


Fortress
To the Editor: To John Tagliabue's fine piece on a Saxon Switzerland in Germany (July 26) I should like to add a footnote on the role of Konigstein Fortress in World War II.
Because it was considered impregnable and escape-proof, Konigstein was used as a prison camp for V.I.P.'s, and housed all the French and Dutch generals and their aides captured in 1940.
Despite the security, Gen.
Henri Giraud managed to escape by lowering himself down the sheer sides of the cliff using twine from packages sent to prisoners.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League


A Lower Gear for Japan's Auto Makers
The Nissan Motor Company has gone to great lengths to give customers what they want.
Japanese buyers of the Nissan Sunny, known as the Stanza in the United States, can choose from nearly 200 variations with different engines, bodies, tires and transmissions.
The company has sold fewer than a dozen units of some combinations.
But those days are over.
Nissan, which said Friday it will lose money this year for the first time in about four decades, is trying to save money by cutting back on the number of variations it is offering, even it if means sacrificing market share.
It is also leaving some models on the market longer than the customary four years.
And it is trying to use the same parts in more models.
Right now, for instance, there are about 70 kinds of steering wheels used in its automobiles, when far fewer would do.


Brigid T. Joyce, Sean Mitchell
Brigid Todd Joyce, the advertising coordinator for Walt Disney Records in Burbank, Calif., was married yesterday to Charles John Mitchell Jr., a product manager in cash management at First Interstate Bancorp in Los Angeles.
The Rev.
Christopher K. Eade performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Parish of St.
Matthew in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
The couple, both 25 years old, are graduates of Johns Hopkins University.
Mrs.
Mitchell is a daughter of Judy N. Joyce of Pebble Beach, Calif., and George R. M. Joyce of Newport Beach, Calif.
Her father is an executive vice president of Tessa Financial Group, an investment-banking concern in Irvine, Calif.


AIDS Fund-Raiser Called a First for Porn Stars
A struggling AIDS organization has turned to porn stars to rescue itself.
This Wednesday, the five-month-old Youth AIDS Foundation of Los Angeles -- whose advisory board includes several young TV stars -- will benefit from a birthday party for Amber Lynn, the star of many X-rated films.
The event will be held at the BelAge Hotel in West Hollywood, Calif., and is being billed as the sex industry's first AIDS fund-raiser.


'Strong, Self-Sufficient, Blah Blah Blah'
EASY KEEPER
By Mary Tannen. 198 pp. New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.


Explosion and Fire Halt Service On Lexington IRT Subway Line
An explosion and fire beneath a No. 5 train in Manhattan injured 13 people yesterday afternoon, forcing the evacuation of more than 300 passengers and causing major delays in service on the East Side, transit and fire officials said.
The explosion, apparently caused when a piece of metal struck the electrified third rail, occurred at 4:48 P.M., as an uptown No. 5 express train pulled out of the Grand Central subway station, said a spokesman for the Transit Authority, Termaine Garden.


Update; Award in Ad Bias Case Is Reduced by Judge
Two black couples, each of whom had been awarded $100,000 in compensatory damages in a racial discrimination case saw that award reduced to $20,000 last week by a Federal judge in Manhattan, who found that that the discrimination, by a real-estate company, was not serious or profound enough to warrant the higher amount.
The judge, Robert W. Sweet, also ruled that the Harry Macklowe Real Estate Company did not have to pay $62,500 in punitive damages, on the ground that there was no malicious racial intent behind a series of advertisements for two of its luxury apartment buildings in Manhattan that featured only white models.


A Radical Idea Sweeps Latin America: Honest Government
Three years ago, Fernando Collor de Mello, Governor of one of Brazil's smallest and poorest states, rose from obscurity to the presidency on one issue: an unfailing commitment to rooting out corruption.
Today, President Collor's Government hangs by a thread, fatally weakened by a Congressional report that charged last week that he benefited from an influence-peddling ring that extorted bribes and stole Government money to the tune of $100 million in the first two years he was in office.


The Russians' New Code: If It Pays, Anything Goes
After a year of political and economic turmoil, Russians have become accustomed to watching things fall apart.
But the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Communist Party and other institutions that once controlled their lives did not prepare them for the last and perhaps most painful shock: a breakdown in the trust and discipline that bound their society together.
It is not just a matter of crime, corruption, prostitution, smuggling, and drug and alcohol abuse, although there is plenty of evidence that these are on the rise.
There is also a widespread view that now, as Russia goes through another historic convulsion, people are out for themselves and anything goes.


Three Balls, Two Strikes And a Flat C
There it was, right in the pages of the August issue of Opera News.
Christopher Keene, the general director of the New York City Opera, was asked whether he had anything yet to accomplish.
"To make opera as popular as baseball," Mr.
Keene announced.
"This is the goal I've set." The moment I read that, I knew I would be hearing from my friend Dirk, a world-class conspiracy theorist.
Dirk's theory -- based, he says, on copies of memos leaked to him by contacts in the opera world -- is that the major companies are involved in a Faustian bargain with the world of sports marketing, and that if they have their way, the nature of opera will be changed forever.
The plan is to convert opera fully into a spectator sport by 1995, as a way of building its audience and generating the income needed to keep up with the likes of Luciano Pavarotti's fees and the costs of Franco Zeffirelli's productions.


New Choreographers Listen to New Muses
According to Peter Martins, "Classical ballet is a language -- not a style." Now there's a statement to ponder.
Mr.
Martins, New York City Ballet's ballet master in chief, was thus quoted in the souvenir program for his company's spring gala.
Chronic worriers could spend sleepless nights fretting, "Which is it better for ballet to be -- a language or a style?"
Rest easy.
Mr.
Martins knows what he's talking about.
To exemplify a style, one must always behave or look in a certain way.
Because any deviation from that look violates that style, a style can imprison.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
The jacket of THE BLOOD OF THE LAMB, by Thomas F. Monteleone (Tor/Tom Doherty, $21.95), describes the book as "a novel of the Second Coming." The year 2000 is nigh upon us, and certain religious sects fully expect the Messiah to appear at the second millennium.
Using a bit of science fiction and a great deal of fantasy, Mr.
Monteleone addresses the subject in a gripping if not altogether believable manner.
But, believable or not, Mr.
Monteleone does not let the reader down.
In 1967, he tells us, important cardinals in the Vatican, working on their own in complete and ruthless secrecy, conceive an idea that will bring the Messiah back.
Jump to 1998, when a charismatic priest in Brooklyn discovers that he has incredible powers.
When attacked by a mugger, he inadvertently kills him with a lightning bolt.
He finds that he has the power of healing.
He can, and does, perform miracles.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The White House; From T-Shirts to Tackle, a Treasury of Presents
For Ronald Reagan, hearing aids were irresistible.
For Jimmy Carter, it was a platinum collection of Willie Nelson records.
And for President Bush, temptation lies in shampoo.
Presidents receive scores of gifts while they are in office from citizens as well as foreign dignitaries.
But they keep only a tiny portion of the presents, which vary from the mundane (T-shirts) to the magnificent (life-sized depictions of Presidential pets).
The rejects are logged and stored in the White House gift unit.


Federal Aid Unclogs Drug Backlogs in Courts
A WESTCHESTER program that enables the county court system to handle an increased volume of felony narcotics cases has received its fourth year of Federal financing.
The $197,283 in financing for the Expedited Case Processing Program, which is administered through the State Division of Criminal Justice Services, pays for the services of three full-time lawyers and one part-time lawyer from the Legal Aid Society of Westchester in White Plains.


Bus Companies Get Ready for School
IN the wake of a recent fatal charter-bus crash in New Jersey, the approaching new school year brings questions about where school districts get the buses that transport thousands of Westchester students each day, and how they monitor the performance of the drivers and the vehicles.
"Transportation is especially important in the northern part of the county where distances are greater," said Dr.
Jeffrey Hansen, deputy superintendent of the Bedford Central School District, which is composed of five elementary schools, a middle school and a high school.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday about campaign contributions in New Jersey from the National Rifle Association misidentified the elections for which the contributions were made.
The money was contributed for state legislative races.


One Emerald Shines, Others Go Unpolished
Night had fallen when the police officers swept into the park and approached the shantytown, a loose collection of 17 shacks cobbled together from fruit crates and other castoffs.
Taking the inhabitants by surprise, they arrested 25, and the deputy parks commissioner announced that their homes would be razed.
No, the scene wasn't Tompkins Square Park, the green fleck on Manhattan's Lower East Side that for years has been a battleground between clashing visions of who the "public" is in public space.


A Settlement Is Proposed On Car Rentals
Two car-rental companies have agreed to settle allegations by the Federal Trade Commission that they failed to disclose certain charges and restrictions when quoting prices to consumers.
The F.T.C. says the cases -- against Dollar Rent-a-Car Systems and Value Rent-a-Car -- are the first in which it challenged what it calls the companies' failure to disclose mandatory charges on computerized reservations systems used by travel agents.
The two rental agencies, the F.T.C. alleges, also avoided mentioning charges on toll-free telephone reservation lines and in advertising.
Proposed agreements to settle the allegations require Dollar and Value to disclose all rental-related charges that cannot reasonably be avoided by drivers.


The Executive Computer; A Fast Way to Discover Patterns in Vast Amounts of Data
In their quest for an edge in the financial markets, a number of traders have turned to a computer system called the Market Information Machine, created by Logical Information Machines Inc. of Austin, Tex.
MIM, as its fans call it, combines a powerful desktop computer with an extremely fast method of searching data bases to sort through current and historical market data, looking for patterns or correlations.
Once a pattern is discovered, it can be used to increase the chances of making a profitable trade -- in theory, at least.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-18  IN RUSSIA, DISCIPLINE FADES


Five Months Old and Counting
It's not exactly advanced algebra, but babies in the cradle can add and subtract simple numbers.
At least that's the conclusion of a study of five-month-old infants published last week in Nature.
Dr.
Judith Wynn, a developmental psychologist at the University of Arizona, presented problems like 1 plus 1 to the infants by using four-inch figures of Mickey Mouse.
She tested the babies' abilities by, for example, putting first one Mickey Mouse, and then another behind a screen while the baby watched.
Then she pulled the screen away to reveal either a correct answer -- two Mickeys -- or a wrong one -- three or one, say.
The procedure is, admittedly, rather Mickey Mouse.
But it does the scientific job: Developmental psychologists find that babies stare longer when something unexpected happens.
And these babies gazed in presumed perplexity for several seconds longer when a wrong answer came up than they did for right answers, suggesting they knew the answers all along.


How to Repel Immigrants' Threat
The generally supportive and approving tones describing the local front in the third-world invasion of the United States  [ "Hispanic Influx Being Felt on East End," July 12 ]  is reprehensible.
With the left-wing political culture doing everything it can to discourage assimilation, promote bilingualism and cheapen the value of American citizenship, no one on Long Island or in the nation can afford to be apathetic, let alone passively supportive, of the breakdown of national soverignty which characterizes United States immigration policy.
In an age of increasing technological sophistication, the United States can not afford to continually accept massive immigration by slash-and-burn third-world peasants.
The overload of non-Western immigrants threatens the cultural and political traditions which created this republic and made it the envy of the world.


Sports of The Times; New Adventure for Ex-Big Leaguer
WHEN they played the Little League World Series championship game in Williamsport, Pa., yesterday, Jeff Burroughs was in uniform, coaching 14 pre-teen-agers from California, including his son Sean, closing one circle in his life from 30 years ago, but knowing that another from his own playing career would remain open forever.
Jeff Burroughs, you see, accomplished quite a bit as a major leaguer.
A big, burly, sandy-haired slugger who had a look of studiousness because of wire-rim glasses, Burroughs was voted the American League Most Valuable Player award in 1974, the only Texas Rangers player to win that honor.
He hit 41 home runs for Atlanta in 1977, and he was with Toronto when the Blue Jays won their first division title in 1985.


The Lace Is in the Gloves
"RIGHT!" barks Tony Canarozzi.
Kristen Connolly, a 25-year-old researcher for the Wall Street firm Tudor Investments giggles and pushes her right arm toward her 24-year-old colleague, Stacy Beecher.
Ms.
Connolly grins impishly, like a little girl on a playground trying to see just how far she can go.
Her punch is tentative, soft, halting.


Double Standards Seen for Athletes
To the Sports Editor:
Harvey Araton's article on Michael Jordan, "Making the 'G' Stand for Gold" (The Times, Aug. 8) is illustrative of the conflicting demands we make on our athletes.
Araton states that Jordan is greedy but then suggests ways to increase his sagging marketing appeal.
How can a person be greedy on one hand and show disregard for his marketing appeal on the other?


Up for Auction, a Trove of Americana (Warts and All)
For more than a half-century, Lillian Blankley Cogan hung price tags on every item in the parlor and bedrooms of her shingled cottage here on High Street.
But Mrs.
Cogan, the doyenne of Americana dealers, managed somehow to forestall selling some of her favorite 18th-century antiques, including a William and Mary butterfly table, a Connecticut blanket chest and 29 New England chairs adorned with hearts and crowns.
At her death last December at the age of 93, the house where she had lived and conducted her antiques business, called Hearts and Crowns, was crowded with furnishings from the 17th to the 20th centuries.
All 340 offerings, some of which show wear and repairs, are to be auctioned here on Labor Day by Christie's of New York in a sale estimated to bring as much as $600,000.
Prior to the auction, the collection will be on display in and outside the house from Friday to next Sunday.
For the price of the catalogue ($20), two people will be admitted to the viewing and sale.


The Not-So-Exclusive Membership of a Book Club
The 1920's were prosperous for those in the literary world.
Reader's Digest was introduced in 1922, Time in 1923, The New Yorker in 1925; and in 1926 Harry Scherman invented the Book-of-the-Month Club.
The 1990's have been anything but a boom time, particularly for the Book-of-the-Month Club, which has been suffering from shrinking membership.
Juanita James, 39 years old, hopes to change that, having spent the last seven months at the book club aggressively trying to reverse the trend.
Time Warner Inc. has owned the book club since 1977 and amid a profit squeeze is looking to the book divisions to bolster the bottom line.


Steel Wall Framing Is for Houses, Too
STEEL wall framing is common in commercial buildings, including apartments, but not in houses.
As a result, many amateur carpenters barely know of its existence.
But building with steel framing is easier in many ways than building with conventional wood framing, and steel framing has advantages over wood that make it worth considering for many remodeling projects, not to mention new-house construction.


Technology; Coming Soon: The PC With Ears
A typical personal computer is a dumb machine that shares only one of humanity's five senses: touch.
It will take directions only if a user touches something attached to it -- a keyboard, a mouse or a touch-sensitive screen.
Increasingly, however, computers are being developed that react to spoken language, and the trend will soon accelerate.
Speech-recognition systems are expected to be more and more common in personal computers sold to home users, in public phone systems and in banks' automatic teller machines.


Business Diary/August 23-28
THE ECONOMY
One Theory Says Andrew Will Help the Economy


Cherie Gillette, W. J. Sigward Jr.
Cherie Gillette, a daughter of Ann Witter Gillette and Edmond S. Gillette Jr., both of San Francisco, was married yesterday to William John Sigward Jr., a son of William and Mary Ann Sigward of Indianapolis.
The Right Rev.
G.
Richard Millard, retired suffragan bishop of California, performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
Matthew in San Mateo, Calif.
Mrs.
Sigward is the publishing-program director for Penguin USA in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father, who is retired, was a partner in the Johnson &amp; Higgins insurance brokerage in San Francisco.
Her mother manages the Lone Pine cattle ranch in Covelo, Calif.
The bride's late grandfather Dean Witter founded the San Francisco securities brokerage that was a forerunner of Dean Witter Reynolds in New York.
Mrs.
Sigward is a stepdaughter of Ingrid Gillette of San Francisco.


High-Profile Players Eliminated
The 92d United States Amateur was trimmed down to eight survivors today, with two-time champion Jay Sigel, two-time runner-up Manny Zerman and two-time national junior champion Eldrick (Tiger) Woods all eliminated.
In Sunday morning's quarterfinals, David White will play Justin Leonard, George Zahringer will play Allen Doyle, Kelly Mitchum will play Mike Stone, and John Harris will play Thomas Scherrer.


Abortion Is Key Issue
To the Editor:
I am an elected official in a northern Westchester County town, serving my second four-year term on the Republican ticket.


Some Prefer Going Coach
The past lived again in Newport, R.I.
Images of the summer community's golden age were recaptured briefly last weekend, when coaches took to the streets, and residents took to white lace parasols and white gloves, or top hats.
Fourteen "whips" from the Coaching Club of America were the guests for a weekend of drives, luncheons and balls sponsored by the Preservation Society of Newport County.
They came from all along the East Coast and as far west as Minnesota, bringing more than a hundred horses.
The stables museum at the Breakers came alive with the smell of hay and the sound of braying.


Let's Not Be Reasonable
VOLTAIRE'S BASTARDS
The Dictatorship of Reason in the West.
By John Ralston Saul. 640 pp.
New York:  The Free Press. $29.95.


Back to School For Photographers, Too
THE price of change is education.
In the 1990's, professional photographers and advanced amateurs who usually work in a chemical/mechanical medium to shoot and process their work must now adapt to a computerized electronic craft, in which film can be transmitted by telephone and arrive fully processed as prints.
While most low-priced, point-and-shoot cameras have become easier to use, the complex cameras that star in this new chain of picture making are driven by computers that demand precise programming.


It's Back to Barcelona: Let the Games Begin Once Again!
EARLY on the morning of March 22, 1984, after a local gig, 19-year-old Geoffrey Matesky was being driven home to Canton by a member of his band.
On Route 44, about a mile from Mr.
Matesky's home, the car went out of control, slamming into a culvert with such force that he smashed through the windshield and landed 75 feet away.
Several of his ribs were broken and both his lungs were collapsed in the impact.
But even though he was only semiconscious, he knew immediately that something else was terribly wrong.
He could not feel anything in his legs.
It was like he had no legs.
He had broken his back.


Cone Gets To Toronto But Can't Find Plate
Home is a hotel room, and so who knows where the heart is.
There are moments when David Cone feels his in his throat.
There are moments, infrequent but inescapable, when it is hard for him not to feel it in pieces.
"Shellshocked," Cone said of himself.


Leave Religion Out of the B.C.C.I. Debate . . .
To the Editor:
In "The Real B.C.C.I. Agenda: Islam" (Forum, Aug. 9), Rachel Ehrenfeld, the author, has blamed Islam for whatever the Bank of Credit and Commerce International's founder and other individuals associated with this bank have supposedly done violating the United States or international laws.
Ms.
Ehrenfeld, however, mentions nothing specific which the bank or its officials have been accused or convicted of doing in the name of Islam.


Mariana Webb, Sean McDonnell
Mariana Stabler Webb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger S. Webb of Belmont, Mass., was married yesterday in Cambridge, Mass., to Sean McDonnell, the son of Mrs.
Barrington Boardman of Beaufort, S.C., and the late Sean McDonnell.
The Quaker ceremony took place at the Cambridge Friends Meeting House.
Ms.
Webb, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is studying for a master's degree in landscape architecture at Harvard University.
Her father founded and heads the Architectural Heritage Foundation of Boston, a nonprofit company that restores historic buildings.
Her mother, Anne V. V. Webb, owns the Apponagansett Bay Vineyard in South Dartmouth, Mass.


Q and A
Minors as Hotel Guests?
Q.
My 19-year-old son was recently turned away from a Comfort Inn somewhere in Illinois because he was under 21.
Is this legal? -- Barbara Bennett Woodhouse, Philadelphia


Southwestern Exposure
Four essays by the mystery novelist Tony Hillerman and more than 30 photographs form a lavish tribute to the American Southwest in NEW MEXICO, RIO GRANDE: And Other Essays (Graphic Arts Center, $24.95).
"New Mexico" covers the vast sweep of geologic and human history in that state.
Mr.
Hillerman's descriptions of the forces that formed some of New Mexico's natural wonders are awe-inspiring, and he is instructive on how history and geography enabled the peaceful Pueblo Indian culture to survive Spanish conquest essentially intact.
"Rio Grande," which describes the source and course of the nation's second longest river, goes over much of the same material; the essay is obviously dated, not only in the use of several statistics from the mid-1970's but in its failure to address the consequences of the industrial and population booms that have taken place along the river since then.
The other two essays may be of special interest to fans of Mr.
Hillerman's mysteries, as they are candid reminiscences on how the author locates his plots and characters in the country and cultures of the Southwest.
Both demonstrate Mr.
Hillerman's extensive knowledge of Native American myths, legends and beliefs.
The photographs by David Muench and Robert Reynolds complement the text, although the captions are frustratingly vague.


U.S. Flying Angolan Soldiers to Civilian Life
An airlift run by the United States military is helping to dismantle forces from the Angolan Government and its guerrilla adversaries under a peace accord last year that ended the southwest African country's 16-year civil war.
Air Force transport planes are flying the former combatants from assembly points throughout the country back to their home provinces.


Coping With The Divorce 'Logjam'
In regard to "Divorce Logjam Leads to Alternatives" (July 26), which refers to a severe backlog in many of the state's family courts and alternative methods being used to relieve the backlog: The article stated that in some counties the wait for a trial in a contested case can last up to four years and referred to counties with substantial backlogs, including Essex, Middlesex, Morris, Passaic and Somerset.
In Middlesex County, if all discovery is completed, a contested matter can be assigned to trial date within six months of the filing of the complaint.
The average wait is 11 to 12 months.


INSIDE
Women and the Church
A proposed Catholic pastoral letter rejects the ordination of female priests even more strongly than did three previous drafts.
Page 20.
Zaire Growing Poorer
Zaire, a nation of nearly 40 million people, is one of the world's poorest and getting poorer at a rate that has been gathering speed.
Page 14.


Adding a Dash of Inspiration to Zucchini
IF zucchini were available early in the summer, perhaps it would generate more enthusiasm.
As it is, the peak of the zucchini harvest presents a challenge for many cooks.
After the first couple of weeks, one has lost the audience unless you can come up with interesting new ways of cooking this vegetable.
The places to look for inspiration are Italy and France.
While the English were happily winning gardeners' prizes with zucchinis grown to the size of a man's boot, in Italy, people were eating their flowers, which are a great delicacy.
The flowers are bright yellow and have a delicate but pronounced flavor.
They are extremely perishable, lasting only a day or so after they have been picked.
They can be stuffed with mozzarella (with diced prosciutto or anchovies sometimes added) and then fried.
Another very simple way to serve baby zucchini is to slice it thin with a cheese parer and saute it in oil with red peppers and garlic.
This makes a pleasant change from the more usual method of sauteeing zucchini cut in chunks or in half.


The Inside Story on the Trusty Geranium
In spite of the rainy season, geraniums seem to be holding their own.
The plants have put on a good show, whether set in window boxes or patio tubs or planted as borders, or along walls and walks.
No matter where they are grown, the jolly flowers of the geraniums, in shades of bright red, pink or white, have brightened the garden.
Even though most gardeners feel they should have a refund on their summer, it is time to think about taking some of these favorite plants indoors for the winter months.
The good old reliable geraniums, which have put on a consistent show in spite of the lousy growing weather, are excellent choices to keep indoors as decorative house plants.
Most garden books and professionals recommend a series of elaborate instructions to save them.
They describe how to cut the geraniums back, pot them, and take them indoors after the plants have settled.
Others say that geranium cuttings must be taken now to be rooted and potted if the plants are to carry over the winter months.


Sheryl Ann Etergino and Paul Otto Wimer
Mr. and Mrs.
Fred V. Etergino of Upper Montclair, N.J., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Sheryl Ann Etergino and Paul Otto Wimer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Franklin S. Wimer of Englewood, Colo.
Ms.
Etergino, 27 years old, is to become a management consultant with Coopers &amp; Lybrand in New York in September.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's in management from Northwestern University.
Mr.
Wimer, 28, is a strategic services manager at Andersen Consulting in New York.
He also graduated from Yale and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.


Correction
The Travel Advisory column last Sunday gave outdated information about a festival called Taste of Massachusetts that was scheduled to be held in Boston during the Labor Day weekend.
After the Travel section went to press the event was canceled.


Nguyen Thi Dinh, the Senior Woman In Vietcong Ranks
Nguyen Thi Dinh, a leading figure in the Vietnamese Communist struggle against the French colonial Government and in the American war more than a decade later, died on Wednesday in Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon.
She was 72 years old.
Her death was reported from Hanoi yesterday by the Reuters news agency.
The cause was not given.


Matisse Exhibit on the Riviera
The Henri Matisse Exhibition: La Chapelle de Vence 1948-1951" opened at the Chateau de Villeneuve-Emile Hugues Foundation in Vence on the French Riviera last month and continues to Oct. 30. It is devoted to the four years in which Matisse designed and decorated the Chapelle du Rosaire for the Dominican nuns who had nursed him through a long illness.
The exhibition traces, through original drawings, gouaches, models, sculptures and photographs, Matisse's work on the chapel, from the architecture, stained glass windows and ceramic panels to the religious garments and spire.
The exhibit also has several paintings done by the artist while he lived in Vence. (A Matisse restrospective begins Sept. 24 at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.)


Thomas Frank, 75, Authority on Metals And a Stockbroker
Thomas W. Frank, a metallurgical engineer and a member of the New York Stock Exchange, died on Aug. 23, at his home in Manhattan.
He was 75 years old.
He died of a cardiac arrest, a family member said.


Andrea Rosen, Andrew Weisbach
Andrea Tracy Rosen, the daughter of Michael and Barbara Rosen of Commack, L.I., was married last evening to Andrew Howard Weisbach, a son of Martin and Roberta Weisbach of East Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Mark Winer performed the ceremony at Temple Beth-El in Great Neck, L.I.
Mrs.
Weisbach, 25 years old, is an account executive at Bohot Communications, a media-buying agency in New York.
She graduated from the University of Hartford.
Her father is the director of advertising systems at The New York Times in New York.
Her mother owns Come Party With Us, an events-planning concern in Great Neck.


Kelly Is Looking for the Twins of Old
The clock had already ticked beyond midnight, but Tom Kelly was still having a hard time letting go of yesterday.
There have been two World Series celebrations in and around Kelly's office in the five seasons before this perplexing one for the Minnesota Twins.


Madeline Siefke, Matthew Estill
Madeline Marie Siefke, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick V. Siefke of Pelham Manor, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Matthew Reilly Estill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry F. Estill of St.
Louis.
The Rev.
H.
Scudder Edwards officiated at the South Salem (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Estill is an assistant vice president in American decorative arts at Christie's in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Smith College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in early American culture from the University of Delaware.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior marketing adviser at the Exxon Corporation in New York.


Free Agents May Find Many Closed Wallets
The Mets' decision to trade David Cone rather than give him millions of dollars as a free agent did not come as a surprise to at least one general manager.
Even while Al Harazin, the Mets' general manager, was saying a couple of weeks ago that he would not trade Cone, his counterpart on another team, during a discussion of the coming free-agent market, remarked, "The Mets may have more constraint because they're so awful this year."
Perhaps that general manager had greater insight into Harazin's thinking than Harazin himself.
Whatever, by trading their best pitcher to the Toronto Blue Jays, the Mets have begun what can be considered the Cone constraint.


Lawmakers Ask How Trenton Lost Half Billion
New Jersey Republicans will begin an investigation this week into what some in the party are calling "Medicaidgate," the state's loss of nearly half a billion dollars in anticipated Medicaid reimbursement funds.
The money has been at the center of a frequently nasty dispute between Democrats and Republicans that at one point even embroiled the White House.
With partisan tempers still simmering over the issue, the six-member Joint Select Committee on Medicaid Reimbursement, which comprises two Republicans and one Democrat from each house, will meet for the first time on Wednesday.


Cruises Add TV Sports
Passengers on Norwegian Cruise Line and Royal Viking Line will be able to watch ESPN International Network sports events on big-screen television this fall.
The programs, to be shown in the ships' public lounges, will include major league baseball and National Basketball Association games and will start Sept. 6 with broadcasts of National Football League contests.
The network is a satellite sports system serving cable subscribers in 49 countries in Latin America and the Pacific Rim.


Iraq Softens Anger Over Air Quarantine in South
Iraq tempered its angry response to American air patrols today and made what seemed to be an appeal for sympathy, conceding that the plan by the United States and its allies to take control of the skies in the south would further weaken the country.
The Government-run newspaper Al Jumhouriya said in an editorial that the United States and its allies had waged a long campaign to weaken Iraq through "wars, economic sanctions and partition plans."


Corrections
The Coins column in the Styles of the Times on Aug. 2, about the only known example of a proof 1921 Missouri Centennial Half Dollar, misidentified the first capital of Missouri.
It was St.
Charles, not Sedalia.


DIARY OF A DROPOUT
If Tim Wirth felt he would be forced into a negative, mud-slinging campaign, then shame on him.
No one is holding a gun to his head to keep him from campaigning strictly on the issues and on his record.
He could let his opponent sling the mud and refuse to lower himself that way.
I think the voters would respect him for it.
STEVEN KALOW
Glenmont, N.Y.


The Life and Death of a Lounge Singer
Sammy Davis Jr. sent word down from heaven to Frank Sinatra.
"Don't hurry to get here now that Sonny Averona has joined our Angel Entertainer's Society. We have someone who sounds like you and cooks better sauce." -- Pinky Kravitz in Whoot!, South Jersey's Entertainment, Casino and Dining Newspaper, July 23, 1992


Quebec Premier Hard-Sells Canadian Federalism
Robert Bourassa, the Premier of Quebec, began a campaign today to convince skeptical Quebecers that an agreement just reached with English-speaking Canada resolves many of their longtime grievances and should end their drive for independence.
With polls signaling an uphill battle to win backing for the accord in a referendum on Oct. 26, the Quebec leader moved to overcome his first major hurdle.


A la Carte Open Face, Open Kitchen
ALTHOUGH there will not be an open kitchen at Tutto Pazzo, a new 150-seat contemporary-Italian cafe in Huntington, diners will still be able to watch their food being prepared.
The restaurant, which is opening in two weeks at 84 New York Avenue (271-2253), is installing a video system with a large dining room screen that will show the kitchen at work.


Reverse English
A couple of years ago, American youth wear invaded Continental fashion.
Italian and French designers promoted sweatshirts, T-shirts and jean jackets, often including colorful patches that looked collegiate and were written in, well, English.
A young woman in Rome sported a white sweatshirt that read, "New York City, U.S.A., In Cash Concept." A shop displayed a maroon sweatshirt proclaiming, "The American System. Round Winnipeg Lake. Huntman Shed." A young man's black warm-up jacket proclaimed: "BEST MONTANA. Costum  [ sic ]  this season."


Minority-Contract Rules Raise Issue of How to Measure Discrimination
In 1990, just a year after making record sales, Bill Howell's Brooklyn-based oil company was cutting staff and costs to stay afloat.
Certainly the recession hurt, but to Mr.
Howell, the culprit was something less tangible, if more insidious: discrimination.
Arousing his suspicions was the timing of his financial downturn.
In July 1990, New York State suspended a program that gave preferences to minorities and women bidding on state contracts.
Without the program, Mr.
Howell, who is black, lost out on bids for $300,000 in state business -- almost half the annual sales of Howell Petroleum Products.


POSTINGS: Hauppauge Industrial Park; Day Care for Young and Old
In the past few years, many companies have responded to the child-care needs of employees by setting up day-care centers at work.
In October, an intergenerational day-care center for both preschool children and adults age 60 and above will open in a 10,000-square-foot building in the Hauppauge Industrial Park on Long Island.
The center, sponsored by the Hauppauge Industrial Association, will have space for 100 children and 30 adults.
John Rebecchi, vice president of Disc Graphics, one of the 500 companies in the industrial park, said a public-private partnership was responsible for the center, to be called Serendipity Discovery World.
Much of the $200,000 development cost of the center, which also benefited from $57,500 in state and Federal grants, came from Hauppauge businesses and professionals who donated their time and expertise.


MCMILLAN'S MILLIONS
I do not understand why Terry McMillan continues to sulk over her failure to be accepted into the small group of such highly regarded African-American authors as Alice Walker and Toni Morrison.
As Daniel Max indicates in his article, McMillan writes "conventional" novels, unconventional only because the characters are black.
There is a place and market for books like "Waiting to Exhale," but McMillan cannot hope to be accorded the same level of literary respect as Walker or Morrison until she produces a work that commands such recognition.
ROBIN ZACKERY
New York, N.Y.


Bernard J. Minetti, 86, Ex-Railroad Executive
Bernard J. Minetti, a former executive with the Central Railroad of New Jersey, died on Monday at the Indian River Memorial Hospital in Vero Beach, Fla.
He was 86 years old and had recently moved to Vero Beach from Pompano Beach, Fla.
Mr. Minetti died three days after suffering a major stroke, his son Richard said.


'How Stupid Do They Think We Are?'
The other day, a plumber stopped me and said, "Ross, there's not a nickel's worth of difference between the two political parties." A construction worker told me, "If I hear one more phony speech about 'family values,' I think I'll throw up!" The most frequently repeated statement by good, hard-working people since the Democratic and Republican conventions has been: "How stupid do they think we are?"
Both parties act as if they bear no responsibility for the $4 trillion debt that burdens our country.
But the world financial markets tell the story, as the dollar dropped to new lows against the German mark after the Republican convention.
A computer engineer summed it up: "We can't be a superpower unless we are first an economic superpower -- just look at Russia."


DIARY OF A DROPOUT
It is nothing short of tragic for our nation, and for Colorado, that Tim Wirth has decided to return to private life rather than face a second, disheartening term in the Senate.
I read his diary with a profound sense of sadness.
He strikes me as someone who is sincere, accessible and willing to break through the confines of conventional partisan politics to tackle the challenge of what is possible, not just what has been.


Transition in the Baltic
IN a corner of the reception desk, in the sleek lobby of Riga's new Hotel de Rome, are two awkward-looking black boxes, each with a small whip antenna protruding from its top and a telephone handset clipped to its side.
These are the house satellite phones, and for travelers staying at the hotel, they are the only working window on the world beyond Latvia.
For about $5.40 a minute, depending on atmospheric conditions and sunspots, callers are able to do something they cannot do from the telephones in their rooms: make scratchy direct-dial calls to Western Europe or the United States.
With its well-stocked bars, polished multilingual staff and sun-splashed atrium, the 90-room Hotel de Rome is Latvia's finest hostelry, opened in December 1991.
A joint venture involving a group of Latvian and German investors, and affiliated with Lufthansa, the German national airline, the hotel is a symbol of how life and times have improved for travelers to the Baltic states in the 10 months since they were given their independence from Moscow.
But as business people and tourists who have traveled to Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia in recent months have discovered, the Baltic states still have a long way to go.


Wall Street; Politics Aside, Some Bet Their Convictions
Gerry Dodson, money manager at the Parnassus Fund, says he has no idea what the Presidential candidates mean by the popular phrase "family values." But his socially conscious mutual fund buys companies with "human values," said Mr.
Dodson, including nontraditional life styles.
Mr.
Dodson owns shares of Baldor Electric, an electric motor company that began a literacy program rather than fire workers when computerization demanded better reading skills.
Another Parnassus holding: Cummins Engine, which paid for architects to spiff up public buildings in its hometown, Columbus, Ind.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Colonia 166,500
39 Mercury Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old split level; 3-zone heat, alarm system, newly painted; taxes $3,160.
Colts Neck 300,000
10 Redhawk Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; c/ a, full basement, Jacuzzi; $5,078.
Freehold 170,500
356 Elton Adelphia Road  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 22-year-old ranch; 2-car garage, c/a, inground pool; taxes $3,844.
Middlesex 171,900
202 Ashland Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; corner lot, eat-in-kitchen, washer/dryer; taxes $3,421.
Millstone 215,600
354 Millstone Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 13-year-old contemporary; c/a, full basement, balcony; taxes $4,980.
Short Hills 455,000
17 Twin Oak Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, family room, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $7,767.
OTHER AREAS Trumbull, Conn. 172,500
67 Moose Hill Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; foreclosed property, needs work, family room, 1 acre; taxes $3,433.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 205,000
324 Millwood Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 55-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, den, full basement; taxes $3,915.
Massapequa, L.I. 165,000,
3 Fairfield Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, dining area, 1-car attached garage; 60- by 100-foot lot; taxes $3,000.


Catholic Panel Rewrites Letter On Female Role
Trying for a fourth time to draft a pastoral letter on the role of women in the Roman Catholic Church, a committee of United States bishops has offered a version that rejects the ordination of female priests even more vigorously than the one that stirred intense debate at a meeting of the bishops in June.
The new version, which also plays down the condemnation of sexism found in earlier drafts, appears to reflect strongly the criticisms made by conservative bishops.


Conversations/Juzo Itami; A Director Boasts of His Scars, and Says He Is Right About Japan's Mob
Drawing his finger along a fresh scar stretching from one end to the other of his famous craggy cheek, and then across the soft flesh behind his ear, which had also been disfigured, Juzo Itami described how three gangsters had toyed with his life.
"They cut very slowly; they took their time," he said.
"They could have killed me if they wanted."


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
July new-home sales, percent change
7.9
2.0
Tuesday
July leading indicators, percent change
0.2
0.1
July construction spending, percent change
-1.5
-0.3
August purchasing managers index, percent
54.2
54.5
Wednesday
July factory orders, percent change
2.3
1.0
Thursday
2d-quarter productivity, percent change
2.3
2.3
Mid-August jobless claims, in thousands
382
400
Friday
August unemployment rate, percent
7.7
7.7
Monday: August farm prices *
Japanese unemployment report *
G-7 industrial countries' deputy finance ministers meet  Thursday: Bundesbank Council meets  Friday: European Community ministers meet in London


Networking; Bringing Laptops Into the Fold
People who travel with portable computers are sometimes called road warriors.
Like the Mad Max character, they feel alone and surrounded by hostiles.
Airport security won't let them on the plane until they can turn on the computer to show it's not an explosive, but the battery just died and no spare is available.
The hotel telephone is wired so a modem can't be used.
The disk containing that spiffy electronic slide show is damaged and the only copy sits several thousand miles away on the network file server.
While the road warriors are not physically connected to the network, more and more of them are demanding service as if they were.
A sales rep who missed a $3 million sale because she couldn't get approval in time from her manager is not mollified by a network manager's explanations about the need for a node address, routing difficulties over a wide area network and the high cost of 56-kilobit data lines.
Nor is she interested in a detailed explanation of why she couldn't E-mail the proposed contract changes from the customer's site, the way she would have in the office.


New Housing At Lowest Since '85
THE once frenetic pace of housing construction in New York City has slowed to a virtual halt over the last three years, impeded by the lingering recession, a dearth of Federal funds and a bureaucratic bog of rent and land-use regulations.
Housing experts are unsure exactly how many new units are needed today.
They contend, though, that despite attempts by the administrations of Mayors Edward I. Koch and David N. Dinkins to stimulate both construction and rehabilitation, vast numbers of affordable homes for low- and middle-income residents need to be built, particularly in the outer boroughs.


Post-Punk Fury From INXS
One afternoon about a year and a half ago, Michael Hutchence, the lead singer of INXS, was sitting in a posh suite in the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan.
INXS's album "X" was on the charts, and Mr.
Hutchence was surrounded by vestiges of his band's success: expensive hotel furniture, floor-to-ceiling draperies, a tray piled with buckets of ice and more mineral water than anyone could drink in a single sitting.
But fame and fortune were not on Mr.
Hutchence's mind.
No, at the moment he was contemplating the rock underground and a band that had made its name without hit singles or sales in the millions.
"I think Sonic Youth are brilliant," he trumpeted.
The irony of the fact that Sonic Youth had probably never conducted interviews from a suite at the Plaza Hotel didn't seem to dawn on him.


Commercial Property: Manhattan Supermarkets; Space Shoppers Discover Bargains on the Shelves
EVERYONE agrees on the barebones fact: John A. Catsimatides, chairman of Red Apple Companies, has renewed the lease on the 8,000-square-foot space used by his Sloan's supermarket at 1343 Lexington Avenue, at 89th Street.
But as for the details -- well, its Rashomon, real estate style.
Koeppel &amp; Koeppel, which owns the building, says it is getting $55 a square foot, as well as 45 percent of any increase in real estate taxes.
"In Manhattan, good supermarket space is rare, and the rarer the commodity, the better the rent," said William W. Koeppel, a partner.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Farmers Fighting Tax Reclassification
IN the rural town of Morris, where 2,000 people occupy 18 square miles of Litchfield County's rocky hills, a dispute over a state law that permits preferential tax treatment for farms, forest land and other open space threatens to open a Pandora's box of lawsuits and land sales throughout Connecticut.
Public Act 490, sacred to farmers and large landowners since it was enacted in 1963, allows them to pay one-tenth the property taxes of ordinary property owners because they preserve open space and use almost none of the services required by residential and commercial development.


Astrid the Atom and Other Cute Little Guys
TAMING THE ATOM
The Emergence of the Visible Microworld.
By Hans Christian von Baeyer.
Illustrated. 223 pp.
New York: Random House. $23.


Parking Ticket Penalties Are Due to Rise Steeply
Motorists in New York City who fail to pay their parking tickets on time will face at least double the penalties under new rules mandated by the state, the city's Transportation Department said yesterday.
The city had fought the new measures, passed by the State Legislature last year, because city officials considered them too harsh for most motorists, said a Transportation Department spokesman, Joseph DePlasco.


'Paint Your Wagon' Gets A Sold-Out Touch Up
"PAINT YOUR WAGON," the musical Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe wrote between "Brigadoon" and "My Fair Lady," remains untouched by legend, or, for that matter, popularity.
In the harvest of their collaborations, which culminated with "Camelot," the 1951 show about the Gold Rush in California is but a granule, but it still nourishes.
And to a veteran musical-theater enthusiast, the very mention of "Paint Your Wagon" conjures memories of a bountiful score, opulent production numbers (with Agnes DeMille choreography and Oliver Smith scenery) and an ambitious, original book -- a rarity then as now -- that doesn't flinch from the dark side of fortune hunting, beginning, in fact, with a burial scene and a "you-ology."


As the Nation's Economy Collapses, Zairians Squirm Under Mobutu's Heel
A Madison Avenue hair stylist who calls himself Mr.
Andrew says that every two weeks for the last eight years he has traveled here to cut the hair of President Mobutu Sese Seko.
Taking into account Mr.
Andrew's first-class air travel from New York, hotel accommodations at the luxurious Inter-Continental Hotel and whatever fee he earns, each presidential haircut is estimated to cost the citizens of Zaire at least $5,000.


Rachel Shemper, Ronald Schwartz
Rachel Ann Shemper, the daughter of Jerry Shemper of Hattiesburg, Miss., and Aida S. Shemper of Atlanta, was married last evening to Dr.
Ronald Louis Schwartz, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard Schwartz of Maplewood, N.J.
Rabbi Judith A. Bluestein performed the ceremony at the B'nai Israel Congregation in Hattiesburg.
Mrs.
Schwartz, 25 years old, is an assistant at the Alexander Gallery in New York.
She graduated from the University of Southern Mississippi and is a candidate for a master's degree in social work at Columbia University.
She is the stepdaughter of Linda C. Shemper.


A Show Focuses On Young Collectors
THE Greater New York Numismatic Convention's fall meeting will be held Sept. 10, 11 and 12 at the Omni Park Central Hotel in Manhattan.
Like many conventions and coin shows, this one will have plenty of floor space, where dealers' displays will span the history of numismatics from the earliest coins of the Mediterranean to recent commemoratives.
In an effort to increase children's interest in coin collecting, the convention's organizers are continuing a tradition of providing a day for young numismatists, ages 8 to 16.
The children's program, which includes a free lunch, will take place on Saturday Sept. 12, from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
It will feature special exhibits and a junior coin auction in which the children will use play money to bid on not-so-rare coins that will be theirs to keep.
Moe Weinschel, the head of the convention committee, said he hoped the children would gain enthusiasm for coin collecting and an appreciation of the diverse elements of numismatics.


Japan's Next-to-Last Stand
TENNOZAN
The Battle of Okinawa and the Atomic Bomb.
By George Feifer.
Illustrated. 622 pp.
New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields.


Turkey Puts on a New Face and Sidles Up to Europe More Coyly
Across the long decades of the cold war, this vast land, composed of a sliver of Europe and a slab of Asia, knew exactly where it stood.
As East confronted West, Turkey was the last outpost on the frozen Anatolian steppe; it offered the United States air bases and missile installations, and it guarded the long southeastern flank facing the Soviet Union.
It was a loyal and doughty member of the Western alliance that might one day aspire to full acceptance among those its huge army and outmoded tanks were supposed to protect.


Show of Force on Iraq Signals New Direction
The creation of a "no-fly zone" over southern Iraq by the United States and its allies last week was ostensibly aimed at preventing President Saddam Hussein from continuing to terrorize and slaughter the region's large, dissident Shiite Muslim population in the name of quelling its persistent, if ineffectual insurgency.
But it also signaled the start of a reversal of Administration policy toward Iraq, which has failed in its implicit goal of ousting Mr.
Hussein.
After 18 months of studiously ignoring, first, Mr.
Hussein's brutal crushing of the March 1991 Shiite uprising after the Persian Gulf war and more recently, Iraq's repression of the southern Shiites, the Bush Administration is sending condolences to the victims.


China Frets as U.S. Mulls Taiwan Jet-Fighter Deal
The Chinese Government is worried that the United States and France may soon sell fighter planes to Taiwan, but is finding itself with little maneuvering room to block the sales, according to Chinese and foreign officials and scholars.
Officials in the Bush Administration have said that the President is leaning toward approving a proposed $4 billion sale of about 150 F-16's to Taiwan, a move that would save thousands of American jobs.


Anger and Confusion Tangle Congressional Race
Lace Ballard sat fanning herself in a cramped, dimly lighted room in a run-down section of Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Like 40 other residents of this Brooklyn neighborhood -- one that has long been a bedrock of support for Representative Edolphus Towns -- she had waited almost two hours in the sweltering heat, determined to meet one of Mr.
Towns's opponents in next month's Democratic primary.
If anti-incumbency sentiments have a voice, it was hers.
"Before, I just went along with the program," said Ms.
Ballard, a 24-year-old clerical worker.
"But I still have to walk the streets with a knife in my purse because I'm scared. I want some change."


Marblehead's Passion for Preservation
PERCHED on a rocky headland that juts into the Atlantic, 17 miles north of Boston, Marblehead has an inbred independence.
Before superhighways, its remoteness guaranteed that no traveler would have passed through on the way to somewhere else.
This isolation shaped a character that endures today.
In a crazy-quilt rising from the harbor, more than 300 pre-Revolutionary War buildings crowd the barely one-half square-mile Historic District.
The Colonial pedigree shows in post-and-beam construction and plain but distinguished facades.
Since 1968 local preservation law has insured that alterations to the mostly Colonial and Georgian homes in the district are true to period -- thus forbidding Victorianized additions and modern picture windows.
The million-dollar bedroom residences on Marblehead Neck, across the causeway, may skew the effect somewhat.
But at least the town has spurned the red trolleys, bayberry-scented "shoppes" and other Disneyesque touches that often coax the tourist trade.


Voices of Hunts Point Talk of Drugs and Decay, but Rebirth Too
On the streets of Hunts Point, young men and women, aimless and bored, hang out in front of storefronts covered with graffiti, abandoned buildings and vacant lots.
Dealers brazenly sell drugs, paying children 5 cents to collect used crack vials.
A guard at the McDonald's on Garrison Avenue tries to keep prostitutes from using the bathrooms as shooting galleries.
On other streets, children play stickball late into the evening as their parents linger on the sidewalks and stoops to escape hot, humid apartments.
A woman on Bryant Avenue grows tomatoes and peppers in her front yard.
Government officials from France tour the neat rows of new town houses bearing plaques trumpeting the day they opened.


Investigating the L.A.P.D.
To the Editor:
Thomas A. Reppetto's worthwhile review of Daryl F. Gates's "Chief: My Life in the LAPD" (June 21) is marked by a commonly repeated factual error.
Mr.
Reppetto writes that the Christopher Commission, which investigated the Los Angeles Police Department after the beating of Rodney King, was "appointed by Mayor Bradley."


Victoria Shirley, George W. Mead
Victoria Coke Shirley, a daughter of George F. Shirley and Mrs.
Ray Speier Hausler, both of Portland, Ore., was married there yesterday to George Winslow Mead, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Grimston Mead of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
William Stephens performed the ceremony at Ascension Episcopal Chapel.
Mrs.
Mead, 30 years old, graduated from the University of Washington and received a master's degree in journalism from New York University.
Her father is a lawyer in Portland with the Nationwide Insurance Company.


A Lower Gear for Japan's Auto Makers
The Nissan Motor Company has gone to great lengths to give customers what they want.
Japanese buyers of the Nissan Sunny, known as the Stanza in the United States, can choose from nearly 200 variations with different engines, bodies, tires and transmissions.
The company has sold fewer than a dozen units of some combinations.
But those days are over.
Nissan, which said Friday it will lose money this year for the first time in about four decades, is trying to save money by cutting back on the number of variations it is offering, even it if means sacrificing market share.
It is also leaving some models on the market longer than the customary four years.
And it is trying to use the same parts in more models.
Right now, for instance, there are about 70 kinds of steering wheels used in its automobiles, when far fewer would do.


Update; Mystery Illnesses in Albany Still Under Investigation
The mysterious ailments that began plaguing workers in State Office Building Eight in Albany two years ago, striking with particular force last February, have abated in recent months, officials say, and there have been few reports of new sicknesses.
But investigators are still trying to figure out exactly what caused all the problems, which sent hundreds of people to the hospital on complaints ranging from dizziness and nausea to partial paralysis.
The National Institute of Safety and Health is still analyzing data from the building, said Thom Tubbs, a spokesman for the State Office of General Services.
He said that the state had spent more than $3 million to improve the ventilation system, remove malfunctioning machinery and replacing aging equipment, among other things.


A Folk Concert by Odetta at Katonah
PARENTS who want to expand their childrens' awareness of art, history and music all in one Labor Day Weekend party can take them to the Sculpture Garden of the Katonah Museum next Sunday at 3 P.M.
To complement its ongoing exhibition, "In Good Conscience: The Radical Tradition in 20th-Century American Illustration," the museum has invited Odetta to present a folk concert of American ballads, blues, spirituals and children's songs.
Blessed with what one reviewer called "the most glorious voice in American folk music," Odetta is a hypnotic personality on stage, her comments adding depth and insight to the music, and her warm personality is as appealing to children as it is to those who have admired her work for more than 40 years.


Ms. Horacio, Mr. Di Tommaso
Mr. and Mrs.
Almando J. Horacio of New York have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Sandra Susan Horacio and Nicholas Di Tommaso, a son of Victor Di Tommaso of Dongan Hills, S.I., and the late Frances Di Tommaso.


Miss Freeman, Francis X. Gilhool
Kimberly Davis Freeman, a daughter of Frederic W. Freeman 5th of Greenwich, Conn., and Mrs.
William R. Benner of Old Saybrook, Conn., was married yesterday to Francis Xavier Gilhool Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilhool of Rumson, N.J.
The Rev.
David Owen performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Mary's by the Sea in Old Saybrook.
Mrs.
Gilhool, 28 years old, is a promotion coordinator for Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
Her father heads the Freeman Design Group, a graphic arts concern in Greenwich.
Her mother, Millicent E. Benner, owns Fenwick Cottage, a gardening shop in Essex, Conn.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 30, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
31
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
20
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
3
7
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
4
9
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
5
8
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
6
11
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
7
1
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $6.99.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
8
31
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
9
1
DANIEL'S BRIDE, by Linda Lael Miller. (Pocket, $5.50.) A woman is saved from the hangman's noose through a marriage of convenience to a rancher in the 19th-century Washington Territory.
10
1
THE NOVEL, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Life as lived by writers, critics and editors in the Pennsylvania Dutch country and New York.
11
3
AGAINST THE WIND, by J. F. Freedman. (Signet, $5.99.) A lawyer undertakes to defend a gang of bikers against a ruthless district attorney.
12
1
SANCTUARY, by John Vornholt. (Pocket, $4.99.) The U.S.S.
Enterprise crew pursues a dangerous criminal; a new "Star Trek" tale.
13
1
A TREASURE WORTH SEEKING, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) A 1982 novel about a woman whose quest for a brother she never knew brings her heart-wrenching experiences.
14 *
1
EXCEPTIONAL CLEARANCE, by William J. Caunitz. (Bantam, $5.99.) A New York police detective on the trail of a serial killer.
15 *
15
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch's life.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
19
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington and Wall Street have benefited only a few Americans.
3
67
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
4
59
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
5
10
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of rustic France.
6
460
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
7
1
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
8
15
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
9
15
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series.
10
131
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
11 *
2
L.A.
SECRET POLICE, by Mike Rothmiller and Ivan G. Goldman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The L.A.P.D.'s Organized Crime Intelligence Division.
12 *
2
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Several hundred examples of Government waste.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
55
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
84
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
103
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
19
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what various people have learned about life.
5
4
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1992 edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


The Alchemy Needed to Rethink Times Square
Though the final curtain may not have fallen on Times Square Center, the massive office complex proposed for Broadway and 42d Street, news of the project's postponement has already begun to generate discussion about how Times Square should be rebuilt.
Interest mounted two weeks ago, with the news that Robert A. M. Stern had been chosen to lead a design team that will create an "interim plan" for 42d Street pending further development of the area.
It would be a pity, though, if attention were focused solely on the architectural solutions to this blighted place.
For what has arisen now is a spectacular opportunity to rethink the processes by which urban places are made.
It's a chance to redefine relationships between the public, public officials, and the architects of public space.
From these relationships, architecture arises.


Dr. Rodland, Brian Carson
Joanne H. Rodland of Ringwood, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter Dr.
Catherine Ruth Rodland to Brian T. Carson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Carson of Watertown, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.
Dr.
Rodland, 26 years old, is the director of music at the First Congregational Church of Washington in Washington, Conn.
She graduated from St.
Olaf College.
She and her fiance received master's degrees in music from the Eastman School of Music, from which she also received a doctorate in organ performance.


BEST SELLERS: August 30, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
2
2
25
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
3
3
14
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
4
4
7
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $20.) Life at a Maine summer retreat.
5
6
8
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Random House, $21.) A book set in the Third Reich -- in 1964.
6
5
11
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
7
13
3
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
8
1
SWEET LIAR, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $22.) On a visit to New York to track down her grandmother, a Kentucky woman copes with a mystery dating back to the Roaring Twenties.
9
1
NIGHT OF THE HAWK, by Dale Brown. (Fine/ Putnam, $22.95.) American airmen and marines undertake to rescue a serviceman in Lithuania.
10
1
THE VOLCANO LOVER, by Susan Sontag. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) A romantic novel about Lord Nelson, his lover Emma Hamilton, her husband and Neapolitan society in the 18th century.
11
7
13
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) A "Star Wars" novel.
12
9
123
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
13
1
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on a wild chase through the Caribbean on the trail of a deceased rock star who has been sighted there.
14 *
1
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $20.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
15
12
7
EYE OF THE STORM, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) An Iraqi tries to kill Margaret Thatcher.
16 *
11
16
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) A woman becomes rich by dealing in jewels. (LP)
17 *
10
6
IMZADI, by Peter David. (Pocket, $20.) A "Star Trek" adventure.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
14
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
3
11
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
3
2
9
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
4
5
4
THE LAST TSAR, by Edvard Radzinsky. (Doubleday, $25.) The life of Nicholas II and his family, and their assassination in 1918.
5
4
12
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses the environment.
6
7
2
MARILYN: THE LAST TAKE, by Peter Harry Brown and Patte B. Barham. (Dutton, $23.) Did intrigues in Hollywood boardrooms and in the Kennedys' circle lead to Marilyn Monroe's death?
7
9
3
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
8
8
10
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who created Wal-Mart.
9
6
7
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
10
10
17
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
11
12
31
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
12
13
9
A BRILLIANT MADNESS, by Patty Duke and Gloria Hochman. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress talks about living with manic-depressive illness.
13
11
16
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How powerful monied interests dominate the Government.
14
14
38
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
15 *
14
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) The first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
16 *
15
11
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $20.) Essays on the pleasures of living extravagantly during the high-flying 1980's.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
28
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
4
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) The head of the Children's Defense Fund offers rules to live by for her own children and others'.
3
4
7
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
4
3
39
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
5
5
38
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
BEFORE AND AFTER, by Rosellen Brown. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) A family is crushed by bad news and betrayed to chaos by individual choices in this suspenseful novel that forces its characters to decide between integrity and survival.
CROSSED OVER: A Murder, a Memoir, by Beverly Lowry. (Knopf, $22.) A novelist's thoughtful -- and very uncomfortable -- effort to figure out a young woman convicted of a brutal murder in Texas, and to understand her own interest in the murderer.
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE: Third Edition. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) This lively wordbook offers, in its current generation, lots of scholarship plus illuminating word histories and usage notes.
RUSSIA TRANSFORMED: BREAKTHROUGH TO HOPE.
Moscow, August 1991, by James H. Billington. (Free Press, $19.95.) Mr.
Billington, a distinguished historian of Russia, had the luck to be there during the failed putsch of 1991; this is his perceptive, guardedly optimistic witness to a possible miracle.
SHE'S COME UNDONE, by Wally Lamb. (Pocket Books, $21.) An ambitious first novel, written in the voice of a 40-year-old woman who recounts her harrowing progress into adulthood.
THE MURDERER, by Roy Heath. (Persea, $19.95.) A grim novel about a young man who runs from everything until, boxed in by misery of his own creation, he can run no more.
TRAUMA AND RECOVERY, by Judith Lewis Herman. (Basic Books, $27.) A clinically and philosophically sophisticated argument that household abuse of women causes a trauma identical with post-traumatic stress disorder in soldiers, and equally treatable with intelligent psychotherapy.


POSTINGS: The Ginger Man; Its Loss Is a Gain
The Ginger Man, a 28-year-old restaurant at 51 West 64th Street, is experiencing the construction equivalent of middle-age spread.
The restaurant, which straddled two buildings, has lost the western front room that held its bar, 55 seats, main kitchens and entrance.
Now it is rebuilding all that, plus more, in new space to the east and north of what's left.


Cash-Poor but Wily Californians Live by Their Chits
California, so goes the cliche, is the wellspring of trends in nearly everything from chardonnays to beach sports to New Age music.
Now California is pioneering again in something new: how to run a government without money.
Since July 1, unable to pass a budget, the state has been handing out i.o.u.'s instead of cash to anyone it can.


Barrier to Somali Unity: Clan Rivalry
More than most countries in Africa, Somalia has appeared to scholars, and even its own citizens, as possessing the basic ingredients for a cohesive nation.
The nearly six million Somalis speak the same language, almost all of them are Muslims of the Sunni sect and most lead a nomadic pastoral life herding camels and cattle in the deserts.
But underlying these common themes is a deep clan rivalry that in the last 20 years has been enhanced by an armory of modern weapons supplied by both cold-war superpowers.
Instead of fighting with traditional spears and shields, the clans have more recently conducted their feuds with mortars and machine guns.


Carla Gochman, Claude Devillers
Mr. and Mrs.
Mervin Gochman of Closter, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Carla Ellen Gochman, to Claude Herve Devillers, the son of Francoise Devillers and Gerard Devillers, both of Paris.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Gochman, 29 years old, is the manager of treasury services for the Coca-Cola Company in Paris.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received an M.B.A. and a master's degree in international management from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the senior vice president and chief marketing officer of the Washington National Life Insurance Company of New York.
Her mother, Barbara Gochman, is an executive assistant in the corporate advertising department at the Sony Corporation of America in Park Ridge, N.J.


Paradox of '92: Weak Economy, Strong Profits
America is not doing very well, but its corporations are doing just fine.
That, in any case, seems to be the message from the data coming out of Washington.
Economic growth can be seen only with a microscope, and by one important measure it vanished altogether in the second quarter.
But corporate earnings are hitting new highs as profit margins expand.


A Tycoon Named Mu: Product of Old China Leading the New
As he sips tea from a battered white ceramic cup, oversized so that he needs to refill it less often, Mu Qizhong speaks slowly -- sometimes painfully, through pursed lips -- and reveals his scars.
It's not as if he pulls up his shirt to show some surgeon's stitching.
Mr.
Mu, a large, soft-spoken man seated at the gleaming black conference table in the headquarters of his diversified international company, is much too sophisticated for that.
But like many capitalists in China, he is prodded by memories that run rather deeper than a Western executive's indignation at some analyst's sell recommendation.


Braves Again Find The Power Formula
Braves 7, Phillies 6
PHILADELPHIA, Aug. 29 (AP) -- Charlie Leibrandt pitched a four-hitter over eight innings and David Justice homered and drove in three runs as the Atlanta Braves beat the Philadelphia Phillies, 7-6, tonight to end a four-game losing streak.


One Man in 25
LIFE SENTENCES
Rage and Survival Behind Bars.
By Wilbert Rideau and Ron Wikberg.
Illustrated. 342 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House.
Paper, $15.


AUGUST 23-29: Trying Mr. George; Truth a la Washington Deadlocks a Jury
When the trial of Clair E. George, a former top official of the Central Intelligence Agency, ended in a mistrial last week after the jurors could not reach a verdict, the prosecutors were stunned.
To them it had seemed a straightforward case.
Mr.
George, in their view, had lied when asked many times by members of Congress and staff aides about the Reagan Administration's sale of arms to Iran and diversion of profits to the Nicaraguan contras.


Beth H. Cohen, P. B. Rosenwald 2d
Beth Helaine Cohen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard S. Cohen of Merrick, L.I., was married last evening in Old Westbury, L.I., to Peter Benno Rosenwald 2d of Baltimore.
Rabbi Ian S. Jacknis officiated at the Old Westbury Hebrew Congregation.
Mrs.
Rosenwald, 26 years old, is an investment adviser at Ferris, Baker Watts, a Baltimore securities brokerage.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father is the director of environmental services at Fenley &amp; Nicol, an environmental and construction concern in Deer Park, L.I.
Her mother, Beverly Cohen, is a partner in BCL Interiors, a design firm in Merrick, L.I.


Duly Noted


Mary Lou Hotesse and Norberto Delgado
LAST Saturday afternoon, Norberto Delgado, 45 years old, stood on the edge of the ball field in Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx.
Mr.
Delgado, a pitcher for the Bronx Yankees, wore his team uniform, cleats and mirrored sunglasses.
Gazing out at the pitcher's mound, where he was soon to be married, he said: "When I'm pitching, I get butterflies, but not like this. This is a different kind of butterflies. Right now, I'm thinking about this woman and hoping she treats me right."
The Bronx Yankees is a baseball team for men over 35 that regularly plays other "old-timer teams" in the New York area.
Many of the bridegroom's teammates played in the major or minor leagues.
The shortstop, Tony Belli, said, "We're all getting old but clinging to the dream of our childhoods."


AUGUST 23-29: Negotiations Resume; Israel Softens Its Tone In Talks With Arabs But Deals Remain Elusive
The truculent tone of the first five rounds of Middle East peace talks gave way last week to a businesslike one, but whether the new spirit will enable old enemies to forge resolutions to a half-century of conflicts remains to be seen.
The current series of negotiations, which involves separate talks of Israelis with Syrians, Lebanese, Jordanians and Palestinians, began in Madrid last October.
The Syrians denounced Yitzhak Shamir, who was then Prime Minister of Israel, as a terrorist.
And the Israelis charged that the Arabs had worked with Hitler and Eichmann in planning the Holocaust.


Florida Relief Effort Prefers Money to Goods
In the wake of Hurricane Andrew, southern Florida has been swept by another kind of deluge: cars, trucks and vans packed with goods for the storm victims and with people volunteering their services.
Fraternity brothers from South Carolina drove trucks full of canned goods to the Miami area.
A paper company sent 20 tons of toilet paper, tissues and paper towels.
A beer company sent aluminum cans full of water.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE OLD WORLD'S NEW WORLD By C. Vann Woodward.
New York Public Library/ Oxford University, $21.95.


In Portugal
To the Editor: D. Keith Mano's article on Alentejo Province ("Portugal's Great Plains," July 5) brought back many happy memories.
In Evora in 1973 we asked a travel agency to book us into a hotel for the Easter weekend.
They described a recently opened inn in Monsaraz.
On arrival we looked for a new structure but found the inn, consisting of five old buildings joined together.
We got a comfortable room, attractive dining area with good food and even a swimming pool.
On Sunday I went to the local bullfight.
A young bull, horns covered with rubber, was being challenged by young men who would dash madly and jump onto or over the wall when chased.
No bloodshed or injury except some bumps on those who were too slow.


Steel Wall Framing Is for Houses, Too
STEEL wall framing is common in commercial buildings, including apartments, but not in houses.
As a result, many amateur carpenters barely know of its existence.
But building with steel framing is easier in many ways than building with conventional wood framing, and steel framing has advantages over wood that make it worth considering for many remodeling projects, not to mention new-house construction.


Man Slain in Robbery Attempt
Eugene Lewis liked to take walks and visit with friends.
"Not the least bit menacing," was how a detective described him yesterday.
When Mr.
Lewis, 73 years old, was shot to death early yesterday morning on a Brooklyn Heights street corner after someone tried to rob him, his family and the police were left with the chore of trying to make some sense out of another pointless crime.


Voices of Hunts Point Talk of Drugs and Decay, but Rebirth Too
On the streets of Hunts Point, young men and women, aimless and bored, hang out in front of storefronts covered with graffiti, abandoned buildings and vacant lots.
Dealers brazenly sell drugs, paying children 5 cents to collect used crack vials.
A guard at the McDonald's on Garrison Avenue tries to keep prostitutes from using the bathrooms as shooting galleries.
On other streets, children play stickball late into the evening as their parents linger on the sidewalks and stoops to escape hot, humid apartments.
A woman on Bryant Avenue grows tomatoes and peppers in her front yard.
Government officials from France tour the neat rows of new town houses bearing plaques trumpeting the day they opened.


What Customers Want: Ask a Computer
THE sight dearest to the hearts of those who manufacture the food on supermarket shelves is their products in a shopper's cart.
And a high-tech market research company in Valhalla, headed by Howard R. Moskowitz, an experimental psychologist, is trying to help them achieve that goal.
What makes Moskowitz Jacobs Inc. different from other market research companies, Mr.
Moskowitz said, is the way computers are used in interviews.
The process revolves around a high-tech software package called Ideamap, through which interviews of consumers in shopping malls are conducted by computer.


Don't Spare the Horses!
On Aug. 21, the start of a Newport coaching weekend, getting to cocktails and dinner was half the fun.


Subscription Concerts Begin Anew
EARLY reservations to the many concerts and recitals that await Connecticut listeners in the months ahead can bring many benefits.
Subscribers, after all, not only are doing good by the arts organizations involved by giving them the knowledge of guaranteed income, but they are also assuring themselves of discount rates, better seating, and never having to face "sold out" signs when the superstars come to town.
Among major attractions, for example, is Luciano Pavarotti, who will sing at the Hartford Civic Center Thursday evening at an 8 o'clock event sponsored by the Connecticut Opera.
The tenor's last Hartford visit in 1988 was a sellout, though, so best check to see that tickets do indeed remain.


Hate Groups Hanging On in Idaho Haven
The alfalfa pastures beneath the Selkirk Mountains of Idaho were full of visitors last week: National Guard troops and Federal agents in full combat gear.
They were protecting power stations against terrorist attacks and pursuing a fugitive, Randy Weaver, a white supremacist who was holed up in his mountain top cabin.
Played against the pastoral tapestry of boys fishing for trout in a lazy creek and girls riding horses at sunset, the sight of an armed siege was all the more jarring.
But it is something that was not unexpected in this part of Idaho, where neo-Nazis and their sympathizers have been trying for the last two decades to establish a "homeland" for a sect of white Christians who thrive on violence and hate.


Saving Herself for Dr. Right
THE LORD'S MOTEL
By Gail Donohue Storey. 212 pp. New York: Persea Books.


Estonia Beats Russia In World Olympiad
THE list of competing countries in the World Team Olympiad, now at its midpoint in Salsomaggiore, Italy, includes some surprises.
One is that South Africa has returned to international competition for the first time since 1980, when it was sidelined by international pressure against apartheid.
The breakup of Yugoslavia has brought teams from Croatia and Slovenia, and the breakup of the Soviet Union has also led to the arrival of two teams.
One is named C.I.S., for Commonwealth of Independent States, which theoretically includes Russia and Belarus, but since all the players are from Moscow, Russia would have been an appropriate name.
The other team is Estonia, returning to international competition for the first time since 1939.


Marlboro Girds for Another Onslaught
BECAUSE one of their neighbors says he has been seeing a vision of the Virgin Mary on the first Sunday of the month since May, the residents of this Monmouth County township are looking forward to next Sunday with emotions ranging from wonder and sympathy to anger and dread.
On Aug. 2, some 8,000 visitors filled the area around the home of Joseph Januszkiewicz, a 54-year-old draftsman, who said the vision had appeared to him on his patio.
The township police fear that, given the fact that it will be a holiday weekend, and that the events here have been reported around the world, next Sunday could find Marlboro inundated by as many as 14,000 visitors.
The township's total population is 29,000.


Amex Licensed For Moscow
Travelers in Moscow can now make airline reservations, obtain tickets, revalidate tickets and change travel plans through the Moscow office of American Express.
The Moscow office received official accreditation this month from the International Air Transport Association, the international airline industry's governing body, and was granted a license to sell airline tickets.
Previously, airline tickets in Russia could be obtained only through the state airline Aeroflot or from local offices of other airlines.


Winning the Presidency Unexpectedly
IN "Vote of Confidence" at the Williams Center, Kenneth Schapiro, who wrote it, has an embryonic comic conceit.
In an uninspiring election year, a mock campaign is taken for the real thing, and an unlikely candidate, a television talk show host, winds up winning the Presidency.
It all begins when a guest on the Winston Dumont Show tells Dumont on the air that he would make a good President.
The network's frantic producer takes hold of the idea as a ploy to boost the energy and the ratings of a program so forlorn that members of the studio audience, a rowful, are nodding off.


HARD AS NAILS
John Jerome's About Men column "Hard as Nails" (Aug. 2) drove home my belief that there is a big difference between thrift and cheapness.
Some of the most generous people I've known have had very small bank accounts.
But they knew when they had to be frugal, and when it was important to be generous.
This was true even during the Depression.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Up Against the Wall
AH, the pressures on Kathe Tanous.
"She is the single most powerful person in the Hamptons," Jerry Della Femina said.
"She's the keeper of the pencil."


DIARY OF A DROPOUT
The diary of Senator Tim Wirth reminded me of the time, in 1986, when I mailed a campaign contribution to his colleague and fellow dropout, Kent Conrad.
Aware of how much was wrong with "politics as usual," we thought that people like Wirth and Conrad would work for change from the best place to achieve it: the floor of the Senate.
Did they think it would be easy?
If they now realize how much is wrong and how difficult it is to change the corrupted process, why don't they feel any compunction to stay and fight?


Maradona, Chapter 27
FIFA, the international governing body of soccer, plans to organize another meeting between Italian and Spanish officials to discuss the future of DIEGO MARADONA, a FIFA spokesman said yesterday.
GUIDO TOGNONI, speaking from Geneva, said the Italian federation had asked JOSEPH BLATTER, FIFA's general-secretary, to moderate the talks.
He said the meeting would take place shortly, though no date had yet been fixed.


Voices of Hunts Point Talk of Drugs and Decay, but Rebirth Too
On the streets of Hunts Point, young men and women, aimless and bored, hang out in front of storefronts covered with graffiti, abandoned buildings and vacant lots.
Dealers brazenly sell drugs, paying children 5 cents to collect used crack vials.
A guard at the McDonald's on Garrison Avenue tries to keep prostitutes from using the bathrooms as shooting galleries.
On other streets, children play stickball late into the evening as their parents linger on the sidewalks and stoops to escape hot, humid apartments.
A woman on Bryant Avenue grows tomatoes and peppers in her front yard.
Government officials from France tour the neat rows of new town houses bearing plaques trumpeting the day they opened.


After Many a Summer, A Sculptor Comes of Age
Finally, at the improbable age of 80, the sculptor Louise Bourgeois has truly arrived.
When she represents the United States at next year's Venice Biennale it will culminate a long process.
"It could have come earlier, but it's better than nothing at all," Ms.
Bourgeois acknowledged the other day about the belated recognition, trying not to make too much of it.
In recent months, her work was featured for the first time in two major contemporary art surveys, the Carnegie International in Pittsburgh and Documenta in Kassel, Germany.
And Ms.
Bourgeois was the only woman the Guggenheim saw fit to include alongside Kandinsky, Brancusi, Beuys and the other artists in the inaugural exhibition of its much-touted SoHo outpost this summer.


The Do-Rag Revisited
WHAT: A bandana or handkerchief tied around the head.
WHO'S WEARING THEM: Male pop icons and civilians who are, or want desperately to be, hip, from rappers to club-kid ravers to the editor of the New Republic.
From Bruce Weber, the photographer and couture documentarian, to Spike Lee, the director.
The one worn by long-haired tennis player Andre Agassi is lavender; the British punk violinist Nigel Kennedy sports paisley.
The man suspected of shooting Curtis Sliwa, leader of the Guardian Angels, in June wore one adorned with drawings of small animals.
He wore it under a baseball cap -- the same headgear combination favored by the rock-and-roll bad boy Axl Rose.


Pentagon Plans Big Budget Cut, Saving Billions
Anticipating that steeper cuts in future military spending are inevitable, the Pentagon is quietly preparing to reduce its forces below the lowest levels the Bush Administration has said would be acceptable, senior Defense Department officials say.
The cuts, which would affect fundamental military programs, including troops, weapons purchases and military bases, could free as much as $80 billion in military spending by 1997 for use in other domestic programs.


Q and A
Broker's Agreement  Question: I recently signed an 18-month "exclusive right to sell" real estate brokerage agreement that included the provision: "above contract binding on successors, heirs, devisees and assigns." Does this mean my heirs would have to abide by any agreement I made with a broker? . . .
Robert Brandt, the Bronx.
Answer: No.
Maureen F. Glasheen, general counsel to the New York State Department of State, which regulates real estate brokers and companies, said that while the clause is common in brokerage agreements, it is not enforceable.


Streetscapes: 95 Madison Avenue; Overcoming the Fear of Terra Cotta
ALONG with asbestos and lead paint, terra cotta is one of the panic materials of the late 20th century.
"Owners are basically terrified of having a terra-cotta building" says Walter Melvin, an architect working on the facade of the old terra-cotta Emmet Building, at 95 Madison Avenue.
But the Emmet Building is in surprisingly good shape and Mr.
Melvin considers terra cotta a cause for attention, not alarm.


Trenton G.O.P. Shifting School Aid to Suburbs
After abandoning a plan to amend the State Constitution to cut the underpinnings from a law set up to funnel aid to the state's urban schools, the Republican legislative majority is now preparing to shift money back to suburban districts.
Administration officials agree that something must be done to revise the Quality Education Act, acknowledging that a drop in tax revenues and the strict guidelines of the current aid formula could hurt suburban districts.
At the same time they are concerned that the courts might not agree with changes that would slow down a long-term court-ordered plan: to bring school spending in poorer districts closer to that of wealthier districts.


As Army Gears Up, Floridians Rely on Private Relief
United States Army units began fanning out across the devastated southern suburbs of Miami today, but the bulk of stepped-up efforts to help the victims of Hurricane Andrew continued to be shouldered by local governments and increasingly efficient private relief agencies.
At mid-morning, 24 hours after the first military transport plane landed at Homestead Air Force Base, military spokesmen said only 700 soldiers were at work, mostly in field kitchens.
Seven hours later, they were joined by 500 more soldiers.
President Bush today raised to nearly 20,000 the number of Federal troops and military workers who will be involved in the relief effort.


Gorecki: A Trendy Symphony and Beyond
It's easy to be cynical about the recent flurry of mainstream enthusiasm for the music of the Polish composer Henryk Gorecki.
The interest centers on a few pieces -- the Symphony No. 3, in particular -- that are consonant and songful, far from any hint of off-putting modernist abrasiveness.
It is fueled by trendy artists like the Kronos Quartet and a trendy record company, Elektra Nonesuch.
Mr.
Gorecki's music is being promoted to the same young audience that laps up Arvo Part, Sofia Gubaidulina and, horror of horrors, the American Minimalists.
But cynicism slights the quality of Mr.
Gorecki's achievement.
Born in 1933, he studied in Paris with Olivier Messiaen and briefly became the darling of the Polish avant-garde around 1960, with huge, clashing exercises in orchestral sonority like "Scontri" ("Collisions").


Coping With The Divorce 'Logjam'
Another alternative to divorce litigation, as mentioned in "Divorce Logjam Leads to Alternatives" on July 26, is mediation.
It is important to note that couples who mediate their marital agreements together rarely find themselves in court for postjudgment litigation.
This is especially true concerning child-support obligations.
It seems that once the couple have worked together to create their agreement, they find they've created the fairest agreement possible reflecting their common interests, not their individual positions.


Voices of Hunts Point Talk of Drugs and Decay, but Rebirth Too
On the streets of Hunts Point, young men and women, aimless and bored, hang out in front of storefronts covered with graffiti, abandoned buildings and vacant lots.
Dealers brazenly sell drugs, paying children 5 cents to collect used crack vials.
A guard at the McDonald's on Garrison Avenue tries to keep prostitutes from using the bathrooms as shooting galleries.
On other streets, children play stickball late into the evening as their parents linger on the sidewalks and stoops to escape hot, humid apartments.
A woman on Bryant Avenue grows tomatoes and peppers in her front yard.
Government officials from France tour the neat rows of new town houses bearing plaques trumpeting the day they opened.


Mount Desert
To the Editor: In response to Wayne Curtis's "What's Doing on Mount Desert" (June 14) two very important names were left out of the Acadia National Park story: Charles W. Eliot and George Dorr.
In 1901 Mr.
Eliot approached Mr.
Dorr to "hold reservations at points of interest on this island, for the perpetual use of the public." In truest public spirit Eliot and Dorr saw the natural beauty as a communal treasure.
Yes, as stated in your article "the land was acquired for public enjoyment by society notables" but Eliot, and to a greater degree, George Dorr, devoted their lives to the piecemeal accumulation of land that was to be protected for public use.
Some wealthy citizens saw Dorr as a poor businessman wasting time and money on the creation of Acadia National Park.
Dorr died a penniless bachelor.


POSTINGS: Ferry Terminal Design; 6 Chosen for Competition
Six firms have been chosen to compete for the commission of designing the Whitehall Ferry Terminal -- better known as the Staten Island ferry terminal -- in lower Manhattan.
The existing terminal was badly damaged by fire last year; its replacement will cost $112 million
The competitors, selected by city officials from a field of 54, are Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer Associates; James Stewart Polshek &amp; Partners; Aldo Rossi Studio di Architettura; Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill; Rafael Vinoly Architects and a joint venture of Venturi, Scott Brown &amp; Associates and Anderson/Schwartz Architects.
All of the teams are based in New York or have New York offices.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Calls for an Inquiry Into Delays in Storm Relief
Gov.
Bill Clinton said today that an effort should be made to "look into" why problems have plagued the hurricane disaster-relief effort in Florida and Louisiana.
But he pulled up short of blaming President Bush for any of the troubles, saying he did not want to politicize the issue in an election and that any investigation should be carried out in "as nonpolitical a way as possible."


Nancy Saravay and James Shifren
Nancy Saravay, a daughter of Dr.
Stephen M. Saravay of Roslyn Heights, L.I., and the late Elizabeth Saravay, is engaged to James Shifren, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Shifren, also of Roslyn Heights.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Saravay, 25 years old, and her fiance, 26, are third-year law students at the University of Pennsylvania.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University.
Her father is an associate professor of clinical psychiatry at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
Her mother, a speech pathologist, taught hearing-impaired students in East Meadow, L.I.


It's Ever Too Late, but Mets Win Their 6th in a Row
Where was this in early August?
Or July?
Or June?
Or even April and May, for that matter?
It's not like the Mets have suddenly been blessed with a period of relative calm and good health -- the clubhouse is in a bit of an upheaval over the David Cone trade, the disabled list is still miles long.
Still, the Mets have managed to win six games straight.


Alison H. Scher, Andrew C. Halper
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley J. Scher of Great Neck, L.I., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Alison Hope Scher, to Andrew Charles Halper, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Halper of Clark, N.J.
Ms.
Scher, 28 years old, is a freelance public relations writer in Iselin, N.J.
She graduated from American University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Garbarini &amp; Scher.
Her mother, Susan G. Scher, retired as an elementary school teacher in the New York public school system.


Joan A. Eaton, Paul H. Jensen
Joan Alison Eaton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Eaton of Pocasset, Mass., was married yesterday to Paul Holbrook Jensen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred O. Jensen of Allendale, N.J.
The Rev.
David N. Williams performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church in Barnstable, Mass.
Mrs.
Jensen, 30 years old, is a speech pathologist for the Visiting Nurses Association in Brockton, Mass.
She graduated from Lesley College and received a master's degree in speech pathology from Boston University.
Her father is the president of Thompson, Eaton &amp; Boyden, an insurance agency in Brockton.


Manager Is Also a Mother Figure
Eight months after they fought to an unsettling draw in Atlantic City, James Toney and Mike McCallum met again tonight for the same International Boxing Federation middleweight title they couldn't decide the first time.
In a bout that lacked the electricity of last December's, Toney, the champion, retained his title with a majority decision.
Toney, now 32-0-2, was ahead on two of the judges' cards, 118-110 and 117-110.
One judge, Phil Newman of New Jersey, scored it a draw, 114-114.


Lauren P. Comly And Todd Cowen
Lauren Paige Comly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert R. Comly of Texarkana, Tex., was married yesterday to Edwin Alfred Cowen 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cowen Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Jo-An R. Glasse performed the Unitarian ceremony at the Santee Chapel of Lancaster (Pa.) Theological Seminary.
Ms.
Comly, 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a development associate at Stanford University.
She graduated magna cum laude from Dickinson College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Wilderness Walks in Adirondack Park
ADIRONDACK PARK is near enough to Westchester that local hikers can include it among their options for a September get-away weekend.
The 100-year-old park, which encompasses a daunting six million acres, is a mixture of state-owned and private land that spreads across 12 counties in northern New York.
But in four hours, a Westchester resident can be hiking to Swede Pond and Swede Mountain near Hague, in the park's eastern region, or camping at Fourth Lake near Lake Luzerne in its southern reaches.


There's Only Vroom For One of Them
AYRTON SENNA, the defending Formula One driver's champion, has been less than pleased with the performance of his McLaren Honda racer this season, so he was thinking about signing with Williams-Renault.
He'll have to think again.


As Vincent Dispute Heats Up, Disagreement Is Everywhere
One of the most belligerent periods in baseball history will reach a crossroads this week when the major league club owners gather in a Chicago suburb to confront each other over the future of Fay Vincent as commissioner.
The outcome of the meeting Thursday is utterly unpredictable, but a strong chance exists that the commissioner, who will not attend the meeting, and his relentless opponents will wind up in court fighting over his job.


Latest Thing In Designing: Try, Try Again
Stephen Sprouse is making a comeback -- again.
The designer is trying for the third time to start a successful fashion business, and Bergdorf Goodman has agreed to sell his new collection.


Nancy N. Tostanoski, Brian Russell Hogan Jr.
Nancy Noel Tostanoski, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Tostanoski of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Brian Russell Hogan Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hogan of Dover, Mass.
Msgr.
Timothy S. Collins officiated at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Church.
Mrs.
Tostanoski-Hogan, 28 years old, is an associate in Valhalla, N.Y., with the benefits consulting firm of Towers Perrin.
She graduated from Georgetown University, as did her husband, and received an M.B.A. degree from Northeastern University.
Mr.
Hogan, also 28, is a candidate for an M.B.A. at Columnia University.


Roni Anne Stromer, Jack David Ryger
Roni Anne Stromer, the daughter of Lenore Stromer of Fort Lee, N.J., was married yesterday evening in Woodbury, L.I., to Jack David Ryger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Simon Ryger of Belle Harbor, Queens.
Rabbi Robert Summers officiated at the Woodbury Jewish Center.


Arab Countries On Jewish Tour
The American Jewish Congress is offering a 21-day tour called a Jewish Heritage Expedition that will take travelers to places prominent in the life of Maimonides, the Hebrew scholar who was born in Cordoba, Spain, in 1135, and spent most of his life in Morocco, Israel and Egypt.
The trip, starting Dec. 17, visits all four countries.
It's the first time in many years, said an A.J.C. official, that one of the organization's tours has included two Arab countries, although Egypt has figured in its itineraries for several years.


Lisa Pollack, Sean R. Wallace
Lisa Pollack, the daughter of Diana L. Plunkett and Edward A. Pollack, both of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Sean Robert Wallace, a son of Kathleen Wallace of Convent Station, N.J., and the late Michael T. Wallace.
Msgr.
William J. Loughlin performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Wallace, 27 years old, is a marketing assistant at the Estee Lauder Companies in New York.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father owns and heads the Pollack Realty Group, a investment company in New York.
Her mother owns Diana, a jewelry shop in Rye.
The bride is a stepdaughter of John H. Plunkett and of Ginny B. Pollack.


AUGUST 23-29: Tables Are Turned; Evidence Links Sen. Hatch To B.C.C.I. Case
Last August Sen.
Orrin G. Hatch, a conservative Republican from Utah, jumped at the chance to attack his Democratic colleagues for getting cozy with Centrust Savings Bank, a symbol of the excesses of the savings and loan industry.
The tables have now turned.


For Haitians, Justice Denied
When lawyers for Haitian refugees filed their latest lawsuit to block the Government's program of interdiction on the high seas, the Justice Department didn't merely move to dismiss the suit.
With an arrogance that overwhelmed judgment, it sought civil penalties for frivolous litigation.
It also sought a $10 million bond from the public-interest lawyers and student assistants who represented the terrified refugees.
The U.S.
Court of Appeals in New York did not find the lawsuit frivolous.
It held that Congress meant just what it said in a 1980 immigration law: namely, that the Government may not return an alien to a place like Haiti if the alien is a genuine political refugee.
A political refugee is defined as someone whose whose life or freedom is endangered for racial or political reasons.


If You Can't Go to Havana . . .
PLACE: Mr. Fuji's Tropicana, 61 Fifth Avenue (at East 13th Street).
IDENTITY: Kitschy Cuban dance club and 24-hour restaurant inspired by Havana's famous Tropicana nightspot.


The Feminist Paradox
Perhaps it was inevitable.
From the moment Geraldine A. Ferraro and Elizabeth Holtzman declared their competition for the Democratic Senate nomination from New York, many women girded for an agonizing choice between two disparate but authentic heroines of the women's movement.
Yet few seemed quite prepared for the painful twist the race took last week, when Ms.
Holtzman, trailing badly in the polls, unleashed a harsh television commercial suggesting that Ms.
Ferraro had unsavory links to organized crime, and Ms.
Ferraro and her supporters responded that Ms.
Holtzman was not only nasty and unfair but had betrayed feminist goals of principled sisterhood.


Listening for the Scratch of a Pen
SO many literary women lived in New England in the 19th century that some inspirational ore might have leached into the wells and flavored their tea.
In attics, parlors, bedrooms, kitchens, they wrote through the endless, snowy winters, often in moments snatched from household chores.
But the dailiness of their lives informed their writing the way stone informs the sculptor; out of baked bread, mended stockings, polished silver grew poems, stories and novels.
This frankly astonishing process is why one visits a writer's home, for clues, for secrets, for the chance, amid creaking floorboards and family heirlooms, to hear a pen scratch.
The cradle of America's literary homes must be Concord, Mass., New England's white-steepled Bloomsbury near Walden Pond.
Huddled around Concord's town green, the clapboard houses haven't changed much since the redcoats marched past them in 1776, or since Louisa May Alcott lived half a mile away, next door to Nathaniel Hawthorne, Henry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson.
In fact, Orchard House, the Alcott home, looks virtually the same as it did in 1858 when, with a loan from Emerson, Bronson Alcott joined two old houses together to create the airy, barnlike Colonial home on Lexington Road.
He also raised the ceilings so his tall, artistic daughters wouldn't bump their heads.


Leave Religion Out of the B.C.C.I. Debate . . . It Was the Profit Motive at Work
To the Editor:
Ms.
Ehrenfeld proposes that the aim of B.C.C.I. was "to put forward a radical-Islamic political agenda and to support third world causes." She is only partially correct.
The founders of B.C.C.I., like bankers anywere in the world, were not driven by religious zeal, but rather by profit motives.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE DREAM AT THE END OF THE WORLD: Paul Bowles and the Literary Renegades in Tangier, by Michelle Green. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Tangier was the Haight-Ashbury of the 1940's.
It was this Moroccan port, with its exotic atmosphere of drugged decadence and erotic excess, that drew literary rebels like Paul and Jane Bowles, Jack Kerouac, Allen Ginsberg and Tennessee Williams.
Michelle Green's book is an "exuberant, captivating, gossipy account of this bargain-basement Eden," John Lahr said here last year.
FIFTY STORIES, by Kay Boyle. (New Directions, $15.95.) This collection embraces 40 years of writing and travel (1927-66), as Kay Boyle moved from the Midwest to Europe and, after World War II, back to the United States.
The stories document both historic events and the evolution of the author's style, which became essentially surrealistic, observed our reviewer, Vance Bourjaily.
"Surrealism is an authentic, unromanticized part of her vision of the world -- a world of abrupt transformations from charm to anguish, anxiety to knowledge, delight to fear," he said in 1980, praising this "long, rich progression of work."


Escaping Worries With a Fresh Air Family
MONROE, CONN. --
For Rubena Malik, an elfin 9-year-old from East Harlem, visiting the Loehr family here in this rural corner of Fairfield County means sniffing air sweet with the aroma of baking cupcakes, playing with dolls who live in a luxurious doll house, and waiting for word that a neighbor's cow has finally given birth.
The rest of the year, Rubena said, she worries about danger and noise in the neighborhood around East 115th Street where her family, who emigrated from Pakistan several years ago, has their apartment.
"Somebody got shot in front of our door," she said, her brown eyes pools of adult solemnity, "and the person died." Her school is not much better, she said.
"It's dangerous, because there are a lot of kids fighting."


Taking the Bite Out of a Music Hall's Sound
WHEN Mark Holden claps his hands in a theater, it is rarely during a performance.
"I'm listening to how the room reacts, echoes and resonates," said the 37-year-old Bethel resident, who is an acoustician with Jaffe Holden Scarbrough Acoustics Inc. in South Norwalk.


Shining Path Rebels Infiltrate Peru's Schools
When soldiers recently occupied Raucana, a desert shantytown on Lima's eastern edge, they were surprised to learn that some children believed the President of Peru was Comrade Gonzalo.
Gonzalo is the war name of Abimael Guzman, a former college philosophy professor who leads the Shining Path guerrilla rebellion in Peru.


Sports of The Times; The Yanks Must Sign David Cone
THIS could be as big as Catfish.
This could be as big as Reggie.
This could be as big as Eddie Whitson.
Oops, sorry.
They don't all work, do they?
The Boss, when he is allowed out of his make-believe solitary confinement, could strut down Fifth Avenue, the way he did with his other big-game trophies, showing off the sights of the big town.


Sultry Song Makes Sweet Music in Whitney as Strike the Gold's Late Run Fizzles
Sultry Song, a 4-year-old colt who had won only one race in nearly a year, won a big one today when he outran Out of Place by a nose in the second-fastest running of the Whitney Handicap in the 65-year history of the race.
The people's choice, the 8-5 favorite Strike the Gold, who was being groomed for a late campaign for Horse-of-the-Year honors, made his customary dramatic dash in the homestretch.


A Business School That Offers Real Life 101
Corporations throughout the nation have revamped their operations to address, among other things, increasing competition and a changing labor force.
Little surprise, then, that some graduate business schools have revised their curriculums for some of the same reasons.
But Babson College in Wellesley, Mass., seems to be taking such changes to another level.


Would You Cut It Out
The idea of cutting out the shoulders has long been a dressmaker's trick for evening.
But it is taking on a new form for daytime street wear -- and it is a form that could have been appreciated during last week's hot, muggy days.
And why
not
cut out the shoulders of a jacket or shirt or blouse, when teen-agers make a fad of cutting out the knees of their jeans?
These women dressed to give the sweltering weather the cold shoulder, wearing a black jacket with leggings (right and above right) or with a dressy white long-sleeve shirt with French cuffs and a choir-boy collar and bow (above center).
For a nonchalant, dressed-down look, there were broken-in jeans for an afternoon of shopping on Fifth Avenue.


It's Bicker, Bicker In New Odd Couple
NEIL SIMON'S 1965 comedy, "The Odd Couple," has become a classic American work of comic art.
The story, based on the personalities of Mr.
Simon and his brother, follows the problems faced by two unhappy roommates who discover that their conflicting personal habits interfere with everything from poker to sleep.
One of them likes everything and everyone around him neat, clean and on time, while the other has not emptied an ashtray in months and has not even noticed the mess.


Mutual Funds; Back to School for Some Basics
Among the attractions of buying mutual funds is the fact that they relieve individuals of having to master the intricacies of financial markets and allow them to rely on professional money managers instead.
But there are still basic concepts that a mutual fund holder needs to understand.
This quiz illustrates some fundamentals.
Question: What is the approximate compound annual rate of return for a fund that gains 20 percent in the first year, rises 25 percent the next year, drops 30 percent in year three and rises 18 percent in year four? (a) 5.5 percent (b) 7.6 percent (c) 8.3 percent (d) 10.3 percent


Margaret Sanger's Message
To the Editor:
It would have been nice if Don Sloan had at least glanced at my book, "Woman of Valor: Margaret Sanger and the Birth Control Movement in America," before distorting what Sanger actually said and condemning her as a eugenicist (Letters, Aug. 9).
Sanger, along with a great many Americans in the 1920's -- from ordinary workers and farmers to university professors and Supreme Court justices -- argued that sensible programs of social reform ought to address the manner in which heredity and other biological factors, as well as environmental and cultural ones, affect human health, intelligence and opportunity.
She hoped to locate birth control in a larger program of preventive social medicine.


Kelly McArthur, Leonard Chappel
Kelly Hartridge McArthur, the daughter of Kevyn Gardella of East Norwalk, Conn., and Roy A. McArthur of Brewster, Mass., was married yesterday in Middletown, R.I., to Leonard Loring Chappel, the son of Linda S. Margold of Darien, Conn., and Barry H. Chappel of East Norwalk.
The Rev.
Alan Neale performed the ceremony at St.
George's School Episcopal Chapel.
Mrs.
Chappel, 26 years old, is a merchandise manager for A/X Armani Exchange, a division of Giorgio Armani, in New York.
She received an associate's degree from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father is a professional pianist in Boston.
Her mother, now retired, was a concert pianist.
The bride's stepfather, John J. Gardella of East Norwalk, is president of L. J. Gardella Transportation in Norwalk, Conn.
Her stepmother, Bobye McArthur, is an interior designer in Brewster.


The Voices of Hunts Point
From Natasha DeLeon's window, Hunts Point in the South Bronx is a bleak, frightening, strangely fractured panorama.
The crackle of gunfire is common, but so is the sound of laughter.
Drug dealers and prostitutes share the streets with children at play and people who care about their neighborhood.
Violence walks one block, and on another a baby is born and a woman grows peppers in a tiny plot.
In an area where 12 people were shot last week in a fusillade that appeared to be another turf war by rival drug gangs, interviews with dozens of residents offered a portrait of this complex, troubled, but by no means hopeless neighborhood.


Up a Tree


Better Sound, Easier Prices
With the economic clouds showing few signs of lifting, the audio trade is adjusting to the current climate.
Designers have been upgrading their wares, especially in the lower price brackets, in hopes of enticing otherwise reluctant buyers with better sound for fewer dollars.
Small companies are often more nimble in such maneuvers than industrial giants.
So it is not surprising that some of the less familiar brands are leading the race toward greater cost-effectiveness.


Suspicious Word Choice?
To the Editor:
David Richards has given us a percipient review of the Guthrie's mounting of three classic Greek works  [ "A Trilogy for Clytemnestra, the Feminist," Aug. 9 ] .
Why, oh why, then spoil the review in the final sentence?
What need for "suspiciously," with its implications of furtiveness and skulking?


Tech Notes; Taking TV to the Highways
Television fanatics who favor the back seats of automobiles over living room sofas are the target audience for a new generation of hand-held color televisions that are larger than previous models and specifically marketed for use in cars.
The Sharp Electronics Corporation, for instance, will begin importing a television from Japan next month that has a four-inch active-matrix color liquid crystal display screen.
The set is priced at about $600.
An accessory for mounting it in a car should be available in October, at an undetermined price.


Voices of Hunts Point Talk of Drugs and Decay, but Rebirth Too
On the streets of Hunts Point, young men and women, aimless and bored, hang out in front of storefronts covered with graffiti, abandoned buildings and vacant lots.
Dealers brazenly sell drugs, paying children 5 cents to collect used crack vials.
A guard at the McDonald's on Garrison Avenue tries to keep prostitutes from using the bathrooms as shooting galleries.
On other streets, children play stickball late into the evening as their parents linger on the sidewalks and stoops to escape hot, humid apartments.
A woman on Bryant Avenue grows tomatoes and peppers in her front yard.
Government officials from France tour the neat rows of new town houses bearing plaques trumpeting the day they opened.


Cara Williams, Pierre Deveque
Cara Bronwyn Williams, the daughter of Catherine B. Alsop of New York and the late Bernard R. Williams, was married yesterday in Paris to Pierre Roger Deveque, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andre Deveque of Poissy, France.
The Rev.
Henry Childs performed the Episcopal ceremony at the American Cathedral.
Ms.
Williams-Deveque, 23 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She was until recently a sales representative for Sideral Productions, a film-production company in Paris.
Her father was a photography teacher at the Corcoran School of Art in Washington.
Her mother is a marketing representative for World Invest Ltd., a London-based international investment management company, in New York.


Hello, Cruel World
THE MALE CROSS-DRESSER SUPPORT GROUP
By Tama Janowitz. 314 pp. New York: Crown Publishers. $20.


Corrections
The Wall Street column last Sunday misstated trading volume for the Japan Equity Fund.
Volume was 241,300 shares on Aug. 14 and fell to 13,000 shares on Aug. 19.


Ailing Louisiana Now Has to Recover From Storm
Driven from their ruined homes -- three dark, damp cabins with freshly punctured roofs -- Leroy Hose, his family and his neighbors sat outside, surveying another calamity in the fields all around them.
Wilting under the heavy heat that follows a hurricane, a sugar cane crop lay all twisted, flailed and muddy.


An Uplifting 'Fanciulla'
A new recording of Puccini's "Fanciulla del West" is automatically an event.
Amazingly, Sony's live recording from La Scala, conducted by Lorin Maazel (S2K 47189; two CD's or cassettes), is only the opera's fifth. (This Jonathan Miller production has also been released in video form: Home Vision GIR 040; VHS.)
"Fanciulla," after all, is not only a product of Puccini's full maturity, but in a number of ways his most venturesome and personal full-length opera.
These qualities either don't interest the opera-consuming establishment or, worse, are misunderstood.
The opera's exuberance, in combination with the seeming incongruities of its Italian-opera-style California gold rush, is condescended to as kitsch.


New Attacks by Right-Wingers in Germany


Los Angeles Riot Anger Spills Into Competition for Jobs
Hammers fell silent last week on the wooden frame of a new shopping center in riot-torn South-Central Los Angeles as workers paused to hear the angry shouts of a small group of intruders.
"You white guys won't give us black people a chance," Jake Bellamy, a member of the Black Carpenters Association, shouted at one of the foremen.
"You aren't fair. You don't know nothing about fair. Black men can do this work, too. They need to do this work to give their children a better future. Is your child better than mine?"


Elizabeth Daniels, Thomas O'Reilly
Elizabeth Lynn Daniels, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Daniels of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to Thomas Andrew O'Reilly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin R. O'Reilly of Eden, N.Y.
The Rev.
James Adelmann performed the Congregational ceremony at the Community Church.


Steel Wall Framing Is for Houses, Too
STEEL wall framing is common in commercial buildings, including apartments, but not in houses.
As a result, many amateur carpenters barely know of its existence.
But building with steel framing is easier in many ways than building with conventional wood framing, and steel framing has advantages over wood that make it worth considering for many remodeling projects, not to mention new-house construction.


Curtain Calls
It seems only fair that decorative rebellion is about to get its due.
For decades, artists have used unexpected materials to create interiors.
But today, roused by a recycling, recession-driven, please-downscale-it's-the-90's attitude, interior designers have found materials like paper, plastic and aluminum foil more acceptable.
John Drews, interior designer and vice president of the New York decorating group McMillen Inc., and Mary Bright, an artist who is also a curtain designer, designed the window treatments made of paper and plastic that appear on these pages.
"As long as the material covers the windows, it does the job," says Bright, who has also designed drapes in leather, burlap and twine.
Drews has more of an establishment perspective.
McMillen is 68 years old and counts the likes of the socialite Anne Cox Chambers among its swagged and valenced clients.
The switch from thread and silk to a staple gun and paper "opened up a new bag of tricks" for Drews.


Politics and Artists, Then and Now
THE perspective provided by a show at the Katonah Museum of Art should prove valuable to voters "coming down" from the conventions.
Titled "In Good Conscience: The Radical Tradition in 20th-Century American Illustration," the exhibition proposes in the clearest possible terms that while times change the issues remain the same.
It was organized for the museum by Bernard Reilly Jr., head curator of prints and photographs at the Library of Congress.


Data Update
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
July 92
June 92
July 91
Nation
$ 102,600
$ 105,100
$ 103,400
Northeast
140,800
144,900
143,500
Midwest
81,500
82,300
79,200
South
91,500
92,400
93,000
West
142,600
145,600
150,100
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.03
8.15
9.39
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.40
5.45
7.10
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.90
8.04
9.24
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.18
5.25
6.96
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.95
8.05
9.30
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.14
5.19
6.94
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.03
8.19
9.50
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.92
6.13
7.59
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.40
3.43
5.62
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.04
8.04
9.12
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Finders Only Partly Keepers
More than 135 years ago, the steamship Central America, loaded with three million pounds of gold, sank in a hurricane off the coast of Charleston, S.C.
"It's one of the wrecks schoolboys dream about," said Dr.
George F. Bass, a marine archeologist at Texas A&amp;M University.
But after treasure hunters from Columbus, Ohio, found the wreck in 1987 and began to recover the gold, using a remote-controlled robot, the grown-up executives who now run the insurance companies that covered the ship in 1857 began to dream, too.


What the Poster Says
To the Editor:
Houstonians interviewed for your Aug. 13 article on the city as it awaited the Republican National Convention wondered if the official convention poster, showing a star-spangled cowboy riding a huge bucking bull, conveyed the proper image for an economically struggling city.


HARD AS NAILS
My father was a German immigrant and came to America with the trade and skills of a cabinetmaker.
He also taught me a variety of lessons while I learned to straighten nails.
Straightening nails had nothing to do with cheapness.
It had, according to my father, to do with the first lessons learned in apprenticeship.
Straightening nails gave the apprentice the feel of the hammer, so that when he began working with wood he wouldn't damage it with a heavy hand or hammer.


AFTER THE STORM: New Orleans Journal; Unscathed by Hurricane This Time, but Just Wait, Just Wait
"Sfiga -- no luck," Daniella Veroneze, a tourist from Milan, said glumly on Tuesday morning as her husband videotaped workers boarding up Brennan's and Hurricane Andrew barreled toward this vulnerable soup bowl near the mouth of the Mississippi.
But as things turned out, of course, luck was with New Orleans after all as the storm moved to its west.
Just hours after the remnants of the storm headed off toward Mississippi Wednesday night, the moist gulf air in the French Quarter was a cacophony of moaning guitars and booming trombones, the "Hurricane Andrew Survivor" T-shirts were for sale for $5.99, and the only hurricanes to be seen were being slurped from plastic cups.


Back Against the Stove
To the Editor:
The Republicans are giving Marilyn Quayle star billing for sacrificing her career in favor of supporting her husband and children, representing the woman's role in the United States in the 1950's.
I do not understand what is admirable about discarding one's education and professional career to be home at 7 P.M. to serve dinner.
With her husband's salary, Marilyn Quayle can afford to be a "self-sacrificing 90's supermom" (news article, Aug. 18).
Most working American women do not have that luxury.


Monkey See, Monkey Do
To the Editor:
In "Forgiving the Sin, Loving the Sinner"  [ Aug. 9 ] , Joel Engel says what needs to be said.
The audiences cheering characters who get away with murder are our children and young adults, who are having their values shaped by what they see on the screen.


Children's Books: Environment
THE question is not why Johnny can't read, but why on earth he'd
want
to read some of the most dutiful children's books about saving the planet.
However sincerely the authors of these books about rain forests and polluted rivers and endangered species mean to pass on valuable information, many of them seem to have lost sight of their primary mission.
Children won't pay attention if they aren't somehow entertained as well as instructed.
You
can
be too little for a lecture.
Even if today's standards of political propriety take the fun out of stories about gingerbread houses (too much refined sugar!), young readers still deserve some middle ground.
But too often, in their eagerness to educate, these books forget to be fun.
This seems even sadder when a gaily illustrated volume for readers of an age to love fairy tales winds up reading like a screed.


California Senate Reluctantly Passes Grim Budget
The two-month-long budget crisis in California took a large step toward conclusion early this morning when the State Senate reluctantly passed an austere recession-era budget that cuts deeply into health and welfare services and state support for cities and counties.
The bill, which closely resembles the no-new-taxes plan proposed by the Republican Governor, Pete Wilson, now goes to the fractious State Assembly, where its fate is uncertain.
But with the Democratic-controlled Senate having passed it by a solid 33-to-5 vote, the Assembly has been put in the difficult position of either yielding to the Governor or plunging the state still deeper into crisis.


Marianne Carey, Dennis J. Hayes
Former Gov.
Hugh L. Carey of New York has announced the engagement of his daughter Marianne Christine Carey to Dennis John Hayes, a son of Martin F. Hayes 3d of Orlando, Fla., and Ann T. Hayes of Rockville Centre, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Carey, 36 years old, is a coordinator of fund-raisers for Event Associates in New York.
She graduated from Boston College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father, who has homes in Shelter Island, N.Y., and Gulfstream, Fla., is the executive vice president of W. R. Grace &amp; Company in Boca Raton, Fla.
Ms.
Carey is also the daughter of the late Helen Owen Carey.


Storm Cycles and Coastal Growth Could Make Disaster a Way of Life
Like two hurricanes instead of one, Hurricane Andrew blasted first through Florida and then through Louisiana last week, leaving behind hundreds of thousands of shattered lives and damage estimated at $30 billion, so high that it seems certain to be the costliest natural disaster in American history.
But the hurricane's meaning goes even beyond the human misery left in its wake.
For a quarter century, the United States, and particularly the most vulnerable coastal areas of Florida, have experienced major hurricanes far less frequently than meteorologists have expected.
During that time there has been an unprecedented movement of population toward the storm-prone coasts.
To many experts, Andrew is a frightening indicator of how much more staggering the bill could be if, as most meteorologists expect, major hurricane activity increases.


In Israel, for the First Time . . .
The difference in mood since Yitzhak Rabin replaced Yitzhak Shamir as Israel's Prime Minister is almost scriptural -- the difference between the harsh thundering of Jeremiah and the more generous vision of Isaiah.
Granted, the Middle East peace talks that resumed last week in Washington have barely touched hard substance.
But for the first time, plowshares and pruning hooks can be mentioned without seeming fatuous.
Indeed, "for the first time" echoes through the news.
Israeli negotiators now hold briefing sessions in Arabic for Arab journalists covering the talks -- for the first time.
Israel says -- for the first time -- that it considers the Golan Heights to be covered by a U.N. resolution calling for return of captured territory in exchange for peace.


Take a Little Deadly Nightshade and You'll Feel Better
My friend the Medical Sociologist was the one who shocked me.
I had not been that surprised when some anthroposophical friends and others with interests in so-called alternative medicines had touted the virtues of homeopathy.
But when my friend, Joan L., who works in the health-care industry -- the high-tech, mainstream, regular-medicine health-care industry -- told me that not only had she used homeopathic remedies for her allergies and colds, but also had given her daughter homeopathic medicine for a sore throat (It worked! Overnight!), I was shaken.
This was a woman with whom I had shared long hypochondriacal conversations about heart disease, brain tumors and food poisoning, all based on the best available scientific evidence.
Yet here she was advocating a system of medicine -- based on treatment with very dilute doses of natural materials, which in larger quantities would cause the same symptoms that ail you -- that is inexplicable by modern science.
"But it works," she said, and cited a paper in The British Journal of Medicine (we often trade citations in conversation).


Janis L. Oolie, Gregory Feldman
Mr. and Mrs.
Sam Oolie of North Caldwell, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Janis Lisbeth Oolie to Gregory Lewis Feldman, a son of Mr. and Mrs Robert S. Feldman of North Plainfield, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Oolie, 27 years old, is the assistant director of marketing and special events at William Barthman Jewelers in New York.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her father is the chairman of Oolie Enterprises, a venture capital company in Fairfield, N.J.


SURFACING
FASHION --
Wool jeans:
cut like your favorite pair of dungarees. MARKETING --
Major-league peanuts:
licensed by the Mets, the Yankees and other teams for consumption at home. FITNESS --
Rotator cuff injury:
a side-effect of lifting weights -- the tennis elbow of the 90's. JEWELRY --
I.D. bracelets for women:
With these chunky silver links, bigger is better. WORDS --
Presettlement landscaping:
gardening with plants native to your area before it was developed.


Suzanne Sullivan, Michael Nowacki
Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Sullivan Jr. of Saddle River, N.J., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Suzanne Sullivan and Michael Joseph Nowacki, a son of Joyce A. Nowacki of La Habra, Calif., and the late Walter Nowacki.
Miss Sullivan, 25 years old, is an assistant media buyer at the BBDO New York advertising agency.
She graduated from Holy Cross College.
Her father retired as the chairman of Smit International Americas Inc. in New York, a marine services company.


Northwestern Mutual: Frugal, Stodgy and Admired
For Donald J. Schuenke, the 63-year-old chief executive of the Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company, life insurance is more than a necessary evil or a wise investment or even an outstanding product.
"It's a miracle!" he said recently over dinner.
"There is absolutely no substitute for life insurance."
A nervous pall passed over the faces of the company's president and public relations man as they sat with their boss.
Like teen-agers embarrassed by their uncool dad, the two men explained that Mr.
Schuenke did not mean to sound quite so earnest.
A miracle, perhaps, but not in a spiritual sense.


Settlement in Lawsuit on H.I.V.-Tainted Blood
Gregory Scarpa, the reputed capo in the Columbo crime family, has reached a settlement in his civil suit against a Brooklyn hospital and doctor whom he charged allowed him to be infected with the AIDS virus.
The settlement came after three weeks of testimony in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, in which Mr.
Scarpa said that Dr.
Angelito Sebollena, a surgeon at Victory Memorial Hospital, had given him a transfusion with H.I.V.-tainted blood.
The transfusion occurred during emergency ulcer surgery in 1986.


No Headline
We're a small piece of this puzzle.
I have had 10 doctors come up to me and ask where we can use them.
But the Army is here in support of this operation.
We did not come here to take control. -- LIEUT.
COL.
STEVE RITTER, an Army spokesman at Homestead, Fla.  [ 22:1. ]


Over the Rail With Flaubert
I BUMPED into Gustave Flaubert recently in my travels.
As always, it was a pleasure.
While I didn't actually talk to M. Flaubert, the meeting, through his writings, was as intimate as if he were standing beside me.
Flaubert was surely one of the most delightful travelers who ever lived, and wrote some of the most delightful descriptions about his travels.
Whereas in "Madame Bovary" he is wondrously controlled, in his letters and journals written abroad and in his short travel pieces, he is free, sly, bawdy, vivid and friendly.
It's clear he likes to travel, and he is never dull.
The last time I came upon the great man was in rather unfortunate circumstances.
It was at sea, and we were both hanging over the rails.
Not a pretty sight -- unless, of course, Flaubert writes about it.
Yes, he can give even seasickness a kind of beauty.
I was glad to run into him, because I didn't think it was possible to write about being seasick and get anywhere near to capturing how you really feel.


Cynthia G. Albert, Lawrence J. Link
Cynthia Greenwald Albert, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Willard F. Greenwald Jr. of North Haven, Conn., was married yesterday in New Haven to Lawrence James Link, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roderick W. Link of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
The Rev.
Andrew E. Fiddler performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church on the Green.
Ms.
Albert Link and her husband are associate directors of the Yale University development office in New Haven.
She graduated from Princeton University and received a master's degree in management from Yale; she was a widow.
Her father, an assistant clinical professor of orthopedic surgery at Yale, also has a private practice in New Haven.


A Lower Gear for Japan's Auto Makers
The Nissan Motor Company has gone to great lengths to give customers what they want.
Japanese buyers of the Nissan Sunny, known as the Stanza in the United States, can choose from nearly 200 variations with different engines, bodies, tires and transmissions.
The company has sold fewer than a dozen units of some combinations.
But those days are over.
Nissan, which said Friday it will lose money this year for the first time in about four decades, is trying to save money by cutting back on the number of variations it is offering, even it if means sacrificing market share.
It is also leaving some models on the market longer than the customary four years.
And it is trying to use the same parts in more models.
Right now, for instance, there are about 70 kinds of steering wheels used in its automobiles, when far fewer would do.


Anne B. Kroll, William Stassen
Anne Baldwin Kroll, the daughter of Janet B. Kroll of Norwalk, Conn., and the late William E. Kroll Jr., was married yesterday to William Harold Stassen, a son of Prof. and Mrs.
Glen H. Stassen of Louisville, Ky.
The Rev.
H.
Stephen Shoemaker officiated at Crescent Hill Baptist Church in Louisville.
Mrs.
Stassen, 27 years old, is the acting director of admissions at Bellarmine College in Louisville.
She graduated from Earlham College, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in education administration, planning and social policy from Harvard University.
Her father was a sales executive in New York for Scholastic Inc. and Harper &amp; Row.
Her mother is the publications editor for Norwalk (Conn.) Hospital.


Wasting Away
From the bright sunlight and mesquite of the high plains in southern New Mexico, it's a five-minute elevator ride down to the spectral darkness of the world's first deep geologic repository for nuclear wastes.
Nearly 2,200 feet underground, the air is warm and tastes of salt dust stirred up by the fleet of forklifts, carts and debris haulers that turn the wide passages mined from rock salt into thoroughfares as busy as a small-town main street.
In one corridor, light floods from the mouth of a storage room filled with stainless-steel pumps and red digital gauges.
Overhead, steel beams, rock bolts and wire mesh support the roof.
Down another corridor, the sound of metal pounding on the rock salt walls resonates with the same painful clarity of a jackhammer breaking up concrete.
Burly miners run the big machines, their headlamps like bouncing scratches of light against the midnight black.


Souvenirs
To the Editor: The reason Enid Nemy and others cited in her essay "The Mementos That Got Away" (Aug. 2) didn't buy a pricey souvenir at a distant vacation spot is because so many "objets d'art" are schlocky and/or rip-offs.
Common sense prevails.
Would I buy this in Bloomingdale's?
So many souvenirs that can't be recycled as gifts as the author suggests end up in garage sales or in the mother of all garage sales, Goodwill thrift shops.
JOAN MARY MACEY Binghamton, N.Y.


Aleta Margolis and Michael Brodsky
Judge and Mrs.
Lawrence S. Margolis of Silver Spring, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Aleta Margolis, to Michael Brodsky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Brodsky of Highland Park, Ill.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Margolis, who is 25 years old and is known as Aleta, teaches sixth grade at the McCracken Middle School in Skokie, Ill.
She graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in education from Northwestern University.
Her father is a judge of the United States Court of Claims in Washington.
Her mother, Doris Margolis, is the president of Editorial Associates, a Washington research service.


More Deaths Raise Issue Of Signaling Rail Crossings
NO city or town in Connecticut has more railroad crossings than Wallingford.
In all, the city of 40,000 has 18 crossings.
Each day, 16 Amtrak passenger trains rumble through the city center before and after stopping at the Wallingford station.
Numerous freight trains also traverse the nine crossings that run through the heart of the city and, to a far lesser extent, another nine crossings in the city's East Side.
For years, most of the Amtrak crossings had no safety gates, which is still the case on the Conrail freight line.
But a series of grade-crossing accidents in the 1980's, which resulted in five deaths in a three-year span, prompted the installation of gates at all but one of the crossings over which passenger and freight trains run.
That one crossing, known locally as the Doolittle Crossing, is at a private dead-end road leading to St.
Casimir's Cemetery on the southern end of Wallingford, which is about 15 miles north of New Haven.


POSTINGS: Staten Island Mall; Growing and Improving
The Staten Island Mall, the borough's only major shopping center, has begun an expansion and renovation that will add a new anchor store and about 50 specialty shops.
The $50-million project, which started last month, will have two phases: renovating the existing 19-year-old, 899,728-square-foot shopping center, and adding a 180,000-square-foot J.C.
Penney department store and 130,000 square feet of space on two levels.
There will be no interruption of shopping.


Leslie Anderson, Michael Petrick
Leslie Eileen Anderson, a daughter of Lydia T. Anderson of Old Greenwich, Conn., and the late James Anderson 3d, was married in Old Greenwich yesterday to Michael John Petrick, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Petrick of Plainfield, Ill.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas L. Stiers performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church of Greenwich.
Mrs.
Petrick is an owner of Anderson, Papachristidis Interiors, a New York interior-design firm.
She graduated from Rollins College.
Her father owned Anderson Hosiery Company, a textile distributor in New York.
Her mother is a freelance writer and an author of children's books.


HARD AS NAILS
Those Depression-era years that John Jerome recalls did indeed leave an indelible impression.


Alexandra Mullan And Dinesh Jain
Alexandra DeVries Mullan, the daughter of Nancy D. Mullan and W. Richard Mullan, both of New York, was married in New York yesterday to Dinesh Chandra Jain, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sagar Jain of Chapel Hill, N.C.
The Rev.
John G. Hartnett performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Jain, 26 years old, received a law degree from Fordham University in May and is to join the New York office of Graham &amp; James, a San Francisco law firm, in October.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is a senior vice president of the New York advertising agency Ally &amp; Gargano.
Her mother owns NDM Kitchens, a New York design and renovation concern.


Nicole S. Tempest, Robert A. Keller
Nicole Suzanne Tempest, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harrison F. Tempest of Lake Forest, Ill., was married yesterday to Robert Andrew Keller, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald H. Keller of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Warren Heard performed the ceremony at the Village Presbyterian Church in Northbrook, Ill.
Ms.
Tempest, who is 25 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Stanford University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is to begin as an associate at McKinsey &amp; Company, management consultants in New York, next month.
Her father is chief executive of ABN-AMRO North America, a Dutch banking concern, in Chicago.


Amtrak Offers Special Fares
Amtrak has introduced special off-season fares, available through Sept. 30, that allow three stopovers on a round trip, between tomorrow and Dec. 17.
With the ability to make three stopovers, the passenger could make a journey in four segments.
The Special All Aboard America fares may be used in one of the following regions, two adjacent regions or all three: eastern region, meaning the Atlantic coast to Chicago and New Orleans; western, Pacific coast to Wolf Point, Mont., Denver, Albuquerque and El Paso, and central, which is everything in between.
The costs are $138 for one region, $188 for two adjacent and $228 for all three.


Maintaining Parks Tests City Officials


Stacey Grossman, Brian A. Haskel
Stacey Neile Grossman, the daughter of Michael and Enid Grossman of Kings Point, L.I., was married last evening in North Woodmere, L.I., to Brian Andrew Haskel, the son of Harold and Sylvia Haskel of Valley Stream, L.I.
Rabbi Harold Saperstein officiated at Temple Hillel.
Mrs.
Haskel, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
She and her husband received law degrees from Fordham University.
She is the senior licensing coordinator for Gitano Licensing Ltd., a subsidiary of the Gitano Group, a sportswear manufacturer, in New York.


Despite Upbeat Summer, Worry Lingers on Sound
AT Al's Tackle Shop in Pelham, the talk these days is about the 10-pound flukes that fisherman have been catching in the Long Island Sound this summer.
"It's unbelievable," said John Corky, the store's owner.
"It's been a while since we've seen anything like this."
Not just in Pelham, but all along the coastline that embraces the Sound, the reports are that the water is clear, the fish are running and that maybe the problems that have plagued the 1,300-square-mile estuary have been resolved.


Travel Talk
To the Editor: Paul Hofmann's article about conversation between travelers ("Have You Heard the One About . . .?" July 5) reminded me of the garrulous lady who threatened to mar the four-hour flight on which I had hoped to recoup some of the energy I had expended on a hectic two-week business trip.
No sooner had I sat down for my nap than she proceeded with a harangue about her widowhood, problems with her grown children, cruelties of her life, etc.


Adding a Dash of Inspiration to Zucchini
IF zucchini were available early in the summer, perhaps it would generate more enthusiasm.
As it is, the peak of the zucchini harvest presents a challenge for many cooks.
After the first couple of weeks, one has lost the audience unless you can come up with interesting new ways of cooking this vegetable.
The places to look for inspiration are Italy and France.
While the English were happily winning gardeners' prizes with zucchinis grown to the size of a man's boot, in Italy, people were eating their flowers, which are a great delicacy.
The flowers are bright yellow and have a delicate but pronounced flavor.
They are extremely perishable, lasting only a day or so after they have been picked.
They can be stuffed with mozzarella (with diced prosciutto or anchovies sometimes added) and then fried.
Another very simple way to serve baby zucchini is to slice it thin with a cheese parer and saute it in oil with red peppers and garlic.
This makes a pleasant change from the more usual method of sauteeing zucchini cut in chunks or in half.


Gambling on the Gulf Coast
When he starts his job Tuesday as the new chief of the Mississippi Gaming Commission, Lorenzo D. Creighton says, his first assignment will be to listen.
By hearing what his staff and state gambling officials have to say, "I will have a much better feel for what is needed in order to make the administration run smoothly," Mr.
Creighton said.
"I want people to feel comfortable. I want to hear their feedback."


Prison Plan for Ft. Dix
The Army and the United States Bureau of Prisons are nearing agreement on a plan to convert Fort Dix, the sprawling Army base in central New Jersey, into a low-security Federal prison for 3,200 convicted drug offenders and white-collar criminals.
Article, page 33.


Failed Dictator of a Small Island
CASTRO'S FINAL HOUR
The Secret Story Behind the Coming Downfall of Communist Cuba.
By Andres Oppenheimer.
Illustrated. 461 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Frustrating Spate of New Rules for Clinics
A pediatrician outside of Syracuse recently removed the fish tank his patients loved to make room for a washer and dryer.
A dentist on Staten Island spent a weekend clearing space in his basement for the backdated files he now must keep.
An internist in Brooklyn decided to retire early after having yet another insurance-claim form rejected because it was improperly filled out.
The anxiety level of these otherwise calm professionals is so high that none would allow their name to be used in a newspaper for fear it would trigger a surprise inspection by one agency or another.
In the New York area and for that matter, across the country, four major sets of new Federal regulations have made this a particularly complicated year to be a doctor.
Since January, the Government has issued rules governing everything from what doctors wear, to how they wash their lab coats, to where they dump their garbage to what claim form they use if they want to be paid.


Miss Humphreys, Craig G. Coleman
Kristin Barton Humphreys, a daughter of Dr.
Jillian J. Thompson of Durham, N.C., and J. Stephen Humphreys of Freeport, Me., was married yesterday in Shelburne Falls, Mass., to Craig Gowen Coleman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis I. G. Coleman of Washington.
The Rev.
David Neil, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Coleman, 26 years old, graduated from Brown University and completed the premedical program at Columbia University.
Her father is general manager of the Deerfoot Samples shipyard in Booth Bay Harbor, Me.
Her mother is a veterinarian in Kitty Hawk, N.C.
The bride's stepfather, Dr.
W.
Craig Cullen, is a business consultant in Durham.
Her stepmother, Dana T. Thompson, is an administrative assistant at Chem Risk, an environmental-risk assessment company in Portland, Me.


Foreign Affairs; The Clinton Cabinet?
Next to electing Bill Clinton, no issue grips the Democratic power elite more than whom he will name to fill top national security posts.
The Arkansas Governor will come to this task, if elected, with one plus and some problems.
The plus is he can lean on Al Gore, who has considerable experience and standing in this field, and his key aide, Leon Fuerth.


Impossible Dream?
To the Editor:
I have no special insight into Jackson Pollock's work, but I have seen enough Pollocks here and about to tell Norman Wasserman that his "possible Pollock" is as impossible as can be  [ "Who Painted This Picture?," Aug. 9 ] .
Even given the monotone newsprint of The Times, one sees the object pictured behind Mr.
Wasserman as having none of the freshness or spontaneity of a Pollock; it is as rigid as a machine-designed wall covering.
The paint is also so "centered" (Clement Greenberg's word) that it suggests the artist was fearful of nearing the canvas's edge lest he and his energy fall off; Pollock was in control, never afraid.


Grand Show By Dream Team
To the Sports Editor:
The Dream Team went to Barcelona, put on a grand show, won the gold medal and everyone's happy.
Except American journalists.


Frequent Guest
To the Editor: Although her article gave a good overview of the many hotel frequent guest programs ("Hotels Reward Frequent Guests," July 19), Betsy Wade left out the often exasperating, frustrating, incredibly onerous process that gives the so-called "guest" nothing but delays that are usually interminable.
Without exception over the past few years, every time I try to use my frequent award points for personal use, I have to allow several hours, go through several different numbers on a phone computer system, then talk to several people in different parts of the company -- all before I can get any reservations.
And that's not what I usually get.
Instead, I get dates blacked out or no more rooms, no more cars or no more seats for that date.
And if you come back with one or two backup dates, those too, seem to be gone.


Contempt for the Voter
To the Editor:
I am all too often amazed at the contempt in which American politicians appear to hold the electorate.
The latest instance is the showcasing of Marilyn Quayle at the Republican convention (news article, Aug. 18).
As a career-sacrificing homemaker, she is supposed to act as a foil to the successful lawyer Hillary Clinton and lure us voters into the Republican fold, attracted by her superior dedication to "family values."


A Festival With Some Strings Attached
When 17 puppet companies take over the Joseph Papp Public Theater starting Sept. 7, it could mark a giant step toward increasing American awareness of puppetry as adult theater.
Despite its long tradition and popularity in much of the rest of the world, this ancient art form has never been taken quite seriously enough in the United States.
Both Jim Henson and Joseph Papp had dreamed together of providing a showcase for sophisticated puppetry.
And though Mr.
Papp died last year, and Mr.
Henson the year before, the idea survives in the International Festival of Puppet Theater that will feature eight foreign and nine American companies.
This dizzyingly comprehensive two-week gathering, through Sept. 20, is the first public festival of adult puppet theater ever produced in New York.


Who Won Cold War?
To the Editor:
The American electorate is being led to believe that the cold war was won in the four years between Ronald Reagan's ascension to power in 1981 and Mikhail S. Gorbachev's emergence as leader of the Soviet Union in 1985.
Completely forgotten are four decades during which the containment policy, forged in the late 1940's by the Truman Administration, and continued by successive administrations, provided the rationale for the Western alliance to counter the threat of Soviet expansionism.


On Sunday; Gun Juggernaut Vs. Gentleman Named Kean
In 1990, Thomas H. Kean finished his second term as Governor of New Jersey and came here to be president of Drew University.
And yet he is still held in such high esteem by fellow Republicans that all he had to do recently was utter a few words to reporters about a Republican-led effort to legalize assault weapons ("It's dead wrong") and the political tide shifted.
Amazingly, Mr.
Kean's words ("I don't know what the lawful purpose could be in owning an assault weapon") seemed to have more firepower than the National Rifle Association lobbyists and the hundreds of thousands of dollars they donated to New Jersey's Republican legislators.


Topics of The Times; Easier Registration
Last year, the New York State Legislature extended the time to register for a primary election.
The new cutoff came and went on Aug. 21 -- 25 days before the Sept. 15 primary.
That's in line with most states.
It's also big progress: under old rules, registration closed 60 days before a primary.
Still, as the Rev.
Jesse Jackson complains, even the new deadline is too early to encourage significantly greater voter participation.


Love for Sale
CITY OF EROS
New York City, Prostitution, and the Commercialization of Sex, 1790-1920.
By Timothy J. Gilfoyle.
Illustrated. 462 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $24.95.


Fall Boat Shows Seek to Turn Browsers Into Buyers
The annual round of fall boat shows, which begin in earnest next month, has called upon marketers to put their best foot forward in hopes of making buyers out of boating's reluctant window shoppers.
The Newport International Boat Show, scheduled for Sept. 10-13 in Newport, R.I., plans to consolidate its annual sailboat and powerboat shows in an effort to fill up what might otherwise have been a sparse showcase of boats.


Ms. von Mueffling, Mr. Esposito
Diana Claire von Mueffling, the daughter of Mrs.
George Crawford of New York and the late William von Mueffling, was married yesterday in Southampton, L.I., to Richard Joseph Esposito, a son of Richard T. Esposito of New York and Marie Esposito of Yonkers.
Judge Leslie C. Snyder of New York City Criminal Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony at the summer home of the bride's mother.
Ms. von Mueffling, who is 26 years old and is known as Dini, is keeping her name.
She is a freelance reporter for Reuters in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father was an investment banker in New York.
Her stepfather is a vice president of Jeffries Avlon, a real estate investment company in New York.


The Thursday Night Phenomenon: 'They Just Show Up'
WITH stars twinkling and stomachs growling, it seemed a perfect night to dine out for Joyce and Edward Murray of East Northport.
Married 23 years, the Murrays have spent much of that time sampling Long Island's finer restaurants.
But on this night all was to change.
The Murrays had entered the dining Twilight Zone.


'Girls Lean Back Everywhere'
To the Editor:
There is a profound and enduring conflict, as Richard Pildes states in his review of Edward de Grazia's "Girls Lean Back Everywhere: The Law of Obscenity and the Assault on Genius" (July 26), between those who insist on a strict construction of the First Amendment and those who are willing "to consider significant distinctions among types of speech" that are granted constitutional protection.
But to characterize this conflict as "generational turmoil" or a "generational divide" is absurd.


Goodbye, Howard. Hello, Jerry.
Several former staff members of Howard Stern's recently canceled television show have landed in a much more compassionate environment.
They are producing the Muscular Dystrophy Association's annual Labor Day telethon.
"It's ironic, yeah," said Kevin McMahon, who was Mr.
Stern's coordinating producer and is one of the people putting together the telethon, which WWOR will broadcast in New York on Sept. 6 and 7.
"I suppose it is a kind of penance."


Mutual Funds; What's Up in the Junk Funds?
Since they bottomed out in 1990, junk bond funds have performed strongly.
Their average return last year was 36.7 percent, more than double the return of high-quality corporate bond funds as a group, and through July this year the junk bonds returned 13.4 percent, compared with 5.1 percent for corporate bond funds.
But the strong 1992 numbers mask a downward trend.
Junk funds returned less than corporate bond funds in May, June and July.


Jeanine Pollitt, John McGuinness
Jeanine Mary Pollitt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Royal W. Pollitt Jr. of Stony Point, N.Y., was married there yesterday to John Joseph McGuinness , a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. McGuinness of Nanuet, N.Y.
The Rev.
Patrick Quigley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Immaculate Conception Church.
Mrs.
McGuinness, 25 years old, graduated from Fairfield University and received a law degree from Harvard University.
She expects to join the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell as an associate next month.
Her father is a vice president at the Bank of New York in White Plains.
Her mother, Jean Pollitt, is a third-grade teacher at St.
Peter's School in Haverstraw, N.Y.


In Health Care, Think of the Patient
To the Editor:
In "When Doctors Says Yes and Insurers No" (Aug. 16) each group is considering the benefits to itself and not to the patient.
In the 1970's, the cost of cancer care to insurers was about $30 billion a year; today it is $110 billion.


Entrepreneurs in China Attain the Age of Greed
James Shen is a tall, well-dressed 29-year-old who for the last five years has lived the Chinese dream: He has worked abroad for a Western company, earning a Western salary.
So when Mr.
Shen, who sells flame-retardant chemicals for a British company, returned to his native Shanghai this month to visit friends, he had a rude surprise.


Adding a Dash of Inspiration to Zucchini
IF zucchini were available early in the summer, perhaps it would generate more enthusiasm.
As it is, the peak of the zucchini harvest presents a challenge for many cooks.
After the first couple of weeks, one has lost the audience unless you can come up with interesting new ways of cooking this vegetable.
The places to look for inspiration are Italy and France.
While the English were happily winning gardeners' prizes with zucchinis grown to the size of a man's boot, in Italy, people were eating their flowers, which are a great delicacy.
The flowers are bright yellow and have a delicate but pronounced flavor.
They are extremely perishable, lasting only a day or so after they have been picked.
They can be stuffed with mozzarella (with diced prosciutto or anchovies sometimes added) and then fried.
Another very simple way to serve baby zucchini is to slice it thin with a cheese parer and saute it in oil with red peppers and garlic.
This makes a pleasant change from the more usual method of sauteeing zucchini cut in chunks or in half.


Voices of Hunts Point Talk of Drugs and Decay, but Rebirth Too
On the streets of Hunts Point, young men and women, aimless and bored, hang out in front of storefronts covered with graffiti, abandoned buildings and vacant lots.
Dealers brazenly sell drugs, paying children 5 cents to collect used crack vials.
A guard at the McDonald's on Garrison Avenue tries to keep prostitutes from using the bathrooms as shooting galleries.
On other streets, children play stickball late into the evening as their parents linger on the sidewalks and stoops to escape hot, humid apartments.
A woman on Bryant Avenue grows tomatoes and peppers in her front yard.
Government officials from France tour the neat rows of new town houses bearing plaques trumpeting the day they opened.


The Inside Story on the Trusty Geranium
In spite of the rainy season, geraniums seem to be holding their own.
The plants have put on a good show, whether set in window boxes or patio tubs or planted as borders, or along walls and walks.
No matter where they are grown, the jolly flowers of the geraniums, in shades of bright red, pink or white, have brightened the garden.
Even though most gardeners feel they should have a refund on their summer, it is time to think about taking some of these favorite plants indoors for the winter months.
The good old reliable geraniums, which have put on a consistent show in spite of the lousy growing weather, are excellent choices to keep indoors as decorative house plants.
Most garden books and professionals recommend a series of elaborate instructions to save them.
They describe how to cut the geraniums back, pot them, and take them indoors after the plants have settled.
Others say that geranium cuttings must be taken now to be rooted and potted if the plants are to carry over the winter months.


Allison Twaddell, Jack Mathews
Allison Powell Twaddell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Twaddell of Providence, R.I., was married yesterday to John Gabriel Mathews, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John G. Mathews of Sarasota, Fla.
The Rev.
David Toolan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Channing Memorial Church in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Mathews, 28 years old, graduated from Tulane University.
She is a freelance design consultant who works at Item Inc., a Providence product-development company.
The bridegroom is a founder and design manager of Item.
The bride's father is the chairman of Barclay Investments, an investment banking company in Providence.


Voices of Hunts Point Talk of Drugs and Decay, but Rebirth Too
On the streets of Hunts Point, young men and women, aimless and bored, hang out in front of storefronts covered with graffiti, abandoned buildings and vacant lots.
Dealers brazenly sell drugs, paying children 5 cents to collect used crack vials.
A guard at the McDonald's on Garrison Avenue tries to keep prostitutes from using the bathrooms as shooting galleries.
On other streets, children play stickball late into the evening as their parents linger on the sidewalks and stoops to escape hot, humid apartments.
A woman on Bryant Avenue grows tomatoes and peppers in her front yard.
Government officials from France tour the neat rows of new town houses bearing plaques trumpeting the day they opened.


Pernfors Placed on the Survivors List After Qualifying Round
For Mikael Pernfors, having to face the indignities of qualifying for the United States Open was an alien experience.
For Nicole Arendt, on the other hand, qualifying has become a way of life, a sort of comfort zone on a professional tour that has proven far more grueling than the 23-year-old ever believed it could be.
Regardless, both Pernfors and Arendt survived their third and final tests yesterday and earned spots in the main draw of the Open, which begins tomorrow.


Nature's Own Napalm
PEPPERS
A Story of Hot Pursuits.
By Amal Naj.
Illustrated by the author. 245 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Nina Szarkowski, Adrian Jones
Nina Anson Szarkowski, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Szarkowski of New York, was married yesterday to Adrian Holdship Jones, a son of Dana Burden and Peter Jones, both of New York.
The Rev.
Herbert G. Draesel Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church on the Hill in Lenox, Mass.
Mrs.
Jones and her husband graduated from Yale University.
She is to begin studying for an M.B.A. at Columbia University next month.
Her father is the director emeritus of the photography department at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
Her mother, Jill Anson Szarkowski, is an architect in New York.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
123.03
125.98
136.83
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4095
1.4295
1.7470
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1968
1.1928
1.1416
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9830
1.9550
1.6809
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$339.75
$337.50
$348.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


The Democrats as the Devil's Disciples
During the celebrated trials in Salem, Mass., children fell into writhing fits at the sight of an accused witch.
That was, of course, 300 years ago, when the fear of witchcraft was common.
It couldn't happen again.
Or could it?


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Greenwich,Conn. 4,539,350
13 Dewart Road  10-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 72-year-old Tudor; vaulted ceilings, stained glass, pool, tennis court, 9.3 acres; taxes $22,365.
Trumbull, Conn. 172,500
67 Moose Hill Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; foreclosed property, needs work, family room, 1 acre; taxes $3,433.
Wilton, Conn. 385,000
17 Dirkson Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; master bedroom suite, circular drive, fieldstone terrace, 1 acre; taxes $3,874.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 210,000
76 Castle Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 77-year-old colonial; entry hall, dining room, den; taxes $3,674.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 205,000
324 Millwood Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 55-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, den, full basement; taxes $3,915.
Pleasantville, N.Y. 470,000
23 Heritage Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old colonial; deck, family room, fireplace, powder room; taxes $10,430.
OTHER AREAS Freehold, N.J. 170,500
356 Elton Adelphia Road  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 22-year-old ranch; 2-car garage, c/a, inground pool; taxes $3,844.
Middlesex, N.J. 171,900
202 Ashland Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; corner lot, eat-in-kitchen, washer/dryer; taxes $3,421.
Massapequa, L.I. 165,000,
3 Fairfield Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, dining area, 1-car attached garage; 60- by 100-foot lot; taxes $3,000.


Pro Choices
These women invent, select, sell, write about, photograph and exude style.
They are the pros -- those whose jobs deal with delineating fashion every day.
They spell out the new direction for everyone else, but in the end, what have they chosen for themselves this fall?
Several are gung-ho for longer skirts, while others would rather stay with hemlines above the knee.
Some, though planning to wear an occasional below-the-knee length, are opting for more pants.
In short, the fashion professionals are like women everywhere -- against dictates and for freedom of choice.


RISING COMPLAINTS OF PRICE GOUGING
With supplies of ice, basic foods and building materials scarce and many restaurants and gas stations still closed in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew, state officials said today that complaints of price gouging were pouring in.
"There are people charging $5 for a bag of ice that normally costs $1," said Robert A. Butterworth, Florida's Attorney General.
"They are charging $125 for a motel room that was $35 before the storm."


Hopes Become Plans for Palestinian Self-Rule
For years Sari Nusseibeh, a Palestinian political strategist, has theorized about Palestinian government.
Now he is working on the real thing.
Behind an unmarked door in a drab office building, he directs teams of experts who are drawing up blueprints for self-rule in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Nonprofits Did Many of the Rehabilitations
MANY of the rehabilitated housing units completed within the last few years in New York City were the result of efforts by nonprofit community development groups like the Mid-Bronx Desperados and organizations like the New York Equity Fund, the Local Iniataives Support Corporation and the Enterprise Foundation.
Five years ago, the Crotona Park East section of the South Bronx was perhaps best known for its blocks and blocks of bombed-out buildings.
Since then, however, virtually all of the abandoned buildings in the area have been renovated into affordable apartments for the working poor and the homeless -- largely because of the efforts of the Desperados and the Equity Fund, the largest private provider of financing for low-income housing in the city.


Sara R. Adler Victor Bassin
Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Adler of Forest Hills, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sara Rebecca Adler, to Victor Bassin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Saul Bassin of Douglaston, Queens.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Adler, 26 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a J.D. from Harvard.
Her father, who is retired, was the assistant director of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation in New York.
Her mother, Lunita Adler, is a foreign-language interpreter in New York.


Recent Sales
Aquebogue, 435,000
Peconic Bay Boulevard
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 8-year-old waterfront contemporary, den, deck, 1.1 acres; taxes $8,000.
Bayville 339,500
9 Oak Point Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $7,200.
Glen Cove 195,000
23 Buckeye Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,700.
Massapequa 165,000,
3 Fairfield Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, dining area, 1-car attached garage; 60- by 100-foot lot; taxes $3,000.
Miller Place 172,500
7 Tree Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 22-year-old ranch; den, fireplace, patio, 2-car garage; taxes $4,500.
Seaford 182,000
3922 Beechwood Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $4,000.
OTHER AREAS Trumbull, Conn. 172,500
67 Moose Hill Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; foreclosed property, needs work, family room, 1 acre; taxes $3,433.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 205,000
324 Millwood Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 55-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, den, full basement; taxes $3,915.
Freehold, N.J. 170,500
356 Elton Adelphia Road  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 22-year-old ranch; 2-car garage, c/a, inground pool; taxes $3,844.


Perspectives: Seymour B. Durst; The Champion of Midtown Laissez-Faire
BY the age of 78, most men know their own minds.
Seymour B. Durst surely does, and he speaks it unhesitatingly.
Semiretired now from his family-owned real-estate investment company, the Durst Organization, this senior figure among New York City land assemblers and developers is free to devote much of his attention to his widely admired collection of New York memorabilia.
His 10,000 volumes on city history, plus maps, prints, postcards, signs and more, fill a town house on East 61st Street.


Maytag Just Wants To Explain
Ask Leonard A. Hadley, president and chief executive of the Maytag Corporation, what he would like to do to his critics, and he answers: take them out.
To dinner, that is.


French Wedding
To the Editor: You did a very good job in answering the question from the couple wishing to get married in France (Q&amp;A, July 12).
But there are a couple of additional pitfalls to be avoided.
When you finally arrive in front of the mayor for the ceremony, unless both parties demonstrate fluency in French, you need to have a translator.
As in the United States, you also need to bring along witnesses.


The Vacant Post: Ending a Tradition
THE Westchester Board of Legislators is about to take a step long urged by its Democratic minority and recommended by a Charter Revision Commission: filling vacancies that occur on the Board and in the post of County Executive through special elections, rather than through appointments.
Since the Board supplanted the County Board of Supervisors in 1970, it has been controlled by Republicans.
Whenever a vacancy has occurred, a Republican has been named to fill it.
County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke was originally appointed to the office in 1983.


International Gumshoe
"It will probably be the most interesting thing we have ever done," says Jules Kroll.
The world's most famous gumshoe is matter-of-fact about his company's latest major international assignment: the Republic of Russia has hired it to locate the money -- an estimated $6 billion to $8 billion in 1991 alone -- believed to have been spirited out of the country by the directors of state enterprises when they realized that privatization was inevitable.
The Russian Government wants Kroll to get the money back.


Art and the Cover-Girl Myth
The most provocative art show in SoHo this summer wasn't in a gallery.
For the last five months, Pam Butler has been plastering downtown lampposts, walls and mailboxes with drawings from her "Cover Girl" series of simple, sentimentalized images of women that are coupled with one or two descriptive words that call to mind stereotypes of women.


Stumping With the Movies' Favorite Son
At breakfast in a Santa Monica diner, Tim Robbins puts down his fork, looks across the table and, with demonic swiftness, contorts his face into a mask.
Mr.
Robbins, the 33-year-old actor who is known for a small number but wide range of characters -- from the flashback-troubled Vietnam veteran in "Jacob's Ladder" to the morally vexed Hun in the slapstick comedy "Erik the Viking" -- is ordinarily a bit of a manchild in appearance.
Thin-shouldered and 6 feet 4 inches, he has the gangly, startled look of a teen-ager unsure of what to do with his arms and legs, and in spite of the gray at his temples, his face is downy -- it's doubtful he could raise a convincing mustache -- and he has an actively elastic mouth that seems to register a perpetual adolescent perplexity.
But in the moment that he abandons his avocado omelet for an acting demonstration, a kind of steel emerges, and in an instant he's assumed the oxymoronic quality -- "a puckish, commanding presence" -- that the critic Pauline Kael found unique in him.
His eyes perk up and glisten, his dimples become pronounced and the skin around his mouth tautens as his smile becomes an earnest, humorless, invincible grin.
Utter charm with a tinge of malevolence -- it's the face of Bob Roberts, the ruthless senatorial candidate and title character of the satirical film, opening in New York on Friday, that Mr.
Robbins wrote, directed and stars in.


New Museum Offers More Than Indian Art
"We are not just about sweetness and feathers," Gustavo Silva of Bay Shore said.
Mr.
Silva, an artist and an advocate of Indian rights, is determined to maintain his Quechua-Mapuche traditions from Ecuador.


Dinkins Accused of Playing Politics on AIDS Oath Issue
Several Board of Education members yesterday accused Mayor David N. Dinkins of orchestrating the revolt against their requirement that AIDS educators sign a pledge to emphasize abstinence over safe sex in classroom presentations.
"City Hall is using this issue as a way to characterize us as a non-functioning board, as a way to expand the board so he can control it," said Ninfa Segarra, one of those who joined the 4-to-3 majority recently voting in favor of the pledge.
"That really seems to be the agenda here."


Regina Souther, Michael T. Stiuso
Eugene P. Souther of Muttontown, L.I., has announced October wedding plans for his daughter Regina Reilly Souther and Michael Terence Stiuso, a son of Angela Stiuso of Albertson, L.I., and the late Alfred Stiuso.
Miss Souther, 26 years old, is a saleswoman at Peter DeNatale Jewelers in New York.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father is the senior partner in the New York law firm of Seward &amp; Kissel.
She is also a daughter of the late Jane A. Souther.


Gurus of 'Choice' Say Schools Coast With C's
When they pitch their favorite topic, Seymour Fliegel and Colman Genn can't help falling into a shtick, Mr.
Genn playing the earnest Carl Reiner to Mr.
Fliegel's manic, wisecracking Mel Brooks.
Mr.
Genn, in funereal tones, will state that many liberals who defend neighborhood schools do so because they want to keep the jobs and contractual benefits the school districts produce.
Then Mr.
Fliegel will bore in what he considers the absurdity of restricting children to the nearest school.


Saudis in Supporting Role to Allied Flights Over Iraq
Saudi aircraft are refueling allied fighter jets and flying defensive screens behind American surveillance planes in the military operation to ban Iraqi flights over southern Iraq, United States military officers said today.
The Saudis have not only provided the main base for flights by the United States Air Force but have also provided wide logistical assistance on the ground since the air operation began on Thursday, said Lieut.
Col.
Dennis Krembel of the Air Force, the commander of a squadron of F-15's flying from a base in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THEY ALL LAUGHED . . .
From Light Bulbs to Lasers: The Fascinating Stories Behind the Great Inventions That Have Changed Our Lives.
By Ira Flatow.
HarperCollins, $20.


BUSH TO INCREASE HELP FOR FLORIDA
President Bush promised today to dispatch 5,000 more troops and a hefty increase in Federal aid to South Florida, ordering a "block by block," blank-check Federal effort to aid storm victims and rebuild devastated suburbs.
After flying to the White House from Camp David, Md., to meet with aides who had flown up from Florida to review the situation with him, Mr.
Bush ordered the additional Army and Marine troops and medical units to Florida to run mobile kitchens, erect tents and meet other basic needs.


THE GERBIL MYSTIQUE
Must even the prospective mating of gerbils be turned into an opportunity for feminist pontificating?
And by the way, if the gerbils in question are like the ones I had, Tamar Lewin is in for a surprise if they ever do mate.
My gerbils
ate
all their babies. FELICIA ACKERMAN
Providence, R.I.


The Executive Life; Taking Midlife Crises On Two Wheels
A vigilant reader of the New York City Opera's Stagebill will find listed in the small type under "Donors of Auction Goods and Services Valued in Excess of $1,000" a number of corporate benefactors who cater to the needs of the pampered classes: Bill Blass Ltd., Cal-A-Vie Spa, Cartier Inc., Christie's, Calvin Klein Ltd., MGM Grand Air, Glorious Foods -- and Harley-Davidson of New York.
Verdi and hogs?
Harley-Davidson, it seems, is mixing with an elite crowd these days.
For while Bruce Springsteen may have forsaken his odes to "suicide machines," a core of upscale baby boomers are cruising wide open spaces to the deafening roar of gunning engines -- or at the very least getting choice parking spaces in front of chic West Broadway restaurants.


Payments to the Retired Loom Ever Larger
To the elderly they represent a sacred trust, their rightful due.
To critics, "welfare for the well-off." To bureaucrats, they are "non-means-tested entitlements." And to politicians they are instruments of political suicide.
But for anyone who imagines curing the budget deficit, the huge, mostly tax-free benefits that flow to the elderly, mainly via Social Security and Medicare, present unavoidable targets -- money monsters that must be tamed.


For Red Cross, the Chance To Help and Raise Money
Overwhelmed by the scope of Hurricane Andrew's destruction in South Florida and Louisiana, the American Red Cross has begun a national appeal for money to support its relief effort.
Some of the appeal's immediate success -- million-dollar gifts from corporations and foundations -- reflect the dual role of disasters in the Red Cross's existence in highlighting the group's mission and providing a backdrop for fund-raising efforts.
This week, for instance, Elizabeth Dole, the president of the American Red Cross, was soliciting money for both the immediate needs of South Florida and the longer-term needs of the Red Cross's disaster relief program.


At Work; This Woman's Place Is a Picket Line
Nicky Marone had stopped her car at a traffic light one day this spring when the idea hit her.
A consultant, lecturer and writer, Ms.
Marone had been mulling over the difficulties facing women in the workplace -- equal pay, child care and promotion.
She was wondering, on this particular day, how to draw attention to such issues.


Soviet Emigre A 3-Time Winner
GREGORY KAIDANOV is on a roll.
After winning the Chicago Open May 25 and the World Open in Philadelphia on July 5, he has now won the United States Open Championship in Dearborn, Mich.
In the tournament, held Aug. 2-14 at the Hyatt Regency Hotel, the grandmaster, a Soviet emigre who now lives in Lexington, Ky., scored 10-2 to win the $5,000 first prize.
Second place was shared by the grandmasters John Fedorowicz of Manhattan and Anatoly Lein of Jersey City, the international masters David Strauss of California and Ben Finegold of Michigan, and the national masters Ray Stone of Ontario and Ronald Burnett of Tennessee.
Each tallied 9 1/2-2 1/2.


The Mall That Ate Minnesota
Victor Gruen has been all but lost to history, his name ridiculed when it is remembered.
As the designer of Southdale, the world's first fully enclosed shopping mall, Mr.
Gruen languishes in the rogues' gallery reserved for those pioneers of plastic consumerism who gave America everything from aerosol cheese to Astroturf.
Yet, Mr.
Gruen was thinking more of civics than shopping when he opened Southdale in the Minneapolis suburb of Edina in 1956.
To Mr.
Gruen, the mall was to have been America's new Main Street, a town common to bring together citizens increasingly displaced from each other by the burgeoning postwar sprawl of freeways and suburbs.


Revival at Goodspeed Of 'Paint Your Wagon'
"PAINT YOUR WAGON," the musical Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe wrote between "Brigadoon" and "My Fair Lady," remains untouched by legend, or, for that matter, popularity.
In the harvest of their collaborations, which culminated with "Camelot," the 1951 show about the Gold Rush in California is but a granule, but it still nourishes.
And to a veteran musical theater enthusiast, the very mention of "Paint Your Wagon" conjures memories of a bountiful score, opulent production numbers (with Agnes DeMille choreography and Oliver Smith scenery) and an ambitious, original book -- a rarity then as now -- that doesn't flinch from the dark side of fortune hunting, beginning, in fact, with a burial scene and a "you-ology."


Karin Koplimae, Urmas J. Wompa
Karin Triin Koplimae, a daughter of Elmar and Sylvi Koplimae of Orangeburg, N.Y., was married yesterday to Urmas Jaan Wompa, the son of Heljo Wompa of Toronto and the late Theodor Wompa.
The Rev.
Toomas Vaaga performed the Lutheran ceremony in New York Harbor aboard the Diplomat, a motor yacht.
Mrs.
Wompa, 33 years old, is a project analyst in the clinical information center of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from the City University of New York.
Her father, who is retired, founded and headed the Rolex Tool and Die Corporation in Guttenberg, N.J.


Janet McGlynn, Christopher Myer
Janet McGlynn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger H. McGlynn of Mendham, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher E. Myer, a son of Frances T. Myer of East Hampton, L.I., and Robert B. Myer of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Msgr.
Harrold A. Murray conducted the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Rose of Lima Church in Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Myer, 26 years old, is an associate at the executive search firm of Teeman, Allison, Perley in New York.
She graduated from Mount St.
Mary's College in Emmitsburg, Md.
Her father is a lawyer in Mendham.


Foes in Afghanistan Announce a Cease-Fire


Despite the Odds, Dreamers Still Dream
College football players cannot help dreaming about playing in the National Football League for all that money and all that fame.
But a more realistic attitude towards professional football is emerging, according to several players for Iowa and North Carolina State who performed in the Kickoff Classic here tonight.
The scene was Giants Stadium, one of the N.F.L's most notable sites.
Would any of tonight's 150 athletes play here again?
Maybe one or two, according to N.F.L. job statistics.


Topics of The Times; Unfair Standard
In the race for the Democratic Senate nomination, Elizabeth Holtzman, the New York City Comptroller, is waging an often-nasty campaign against Geraldine Ferraro, a former member of Congress and Vice Presidential candidate.
Nasty campaigns are unfortunate.
So is Ms.
Ferraro's most recent response.
To counter a television commercial in which Ms.
Holtzman accuses her of taking rent from a pornographer who had space in a building owned by her husband, Ms.
Ferraro has wrapped herself in the mantle of Anita Hill.


AUGUST 23-29: C.I.A. Defector; Freed by Sweden, a Spy Seeks Safety in Moscow
Upsetting American efforts to return him to stand trial, Edward Lee Howard, the only Central Intelligence Agency officer to ever defect to the Soviet Union, abruptly fled back to Russia last week, hours after his release from detention in Sweden.
Mr.
Howard moved to Stockholm from Moscow last year, operating as a business consultant.
Pressured by American officials to expel him, the Swedish security police arrested him and conducted a brief inquiry.
But in the end, the Swedish Government let him go.
One reason: The treaty between the United States and Sweden does not recognize espionage as an extraditable offense.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Wilmington, Del.;
A 27-YEAR-OLD office tower that was less than a third occupied a year ago is making a comeback in one of the city's worst leasing environments, thanks to a $5 million rehabilitation.
The finishing touches were put on the tower, called the Mellon Bank Center for a longtime tenant, in July after two years of exterior and interior renovations.


Coslet Calls the Shots. Case Closed.
There is an edginess to Bruce Coslet these days.
It's not because he is preparing to open his third season as coach of the New York Jets with a young quarterback who is pumped up by extensive play in five preseason games but has no National Football League experience.
The source of Coslet's agitation a week before the season starts is a badly sprained ankle, and the real problem is not the injury but the fact that it has kept him on the sideline for the daily no-blood, no-foul basketball games that he and his coaching staff play.


Before First Frost
Divide and replant irises, if they are crowded.
Do the same for peonies, day lilies and ornamental grasses.
Check potted house plants that have been outside all summer, for insects or disease.
Spray with plain water just to clean the leaves.


Risk Reports
To the Editor:
I think there could be a tremendous market for a risk-report service in Westchester, almost as much as in the city ("For the Buyer, a Customized Risk Report," July 19).


Jennifer Leigh Holmes, William Johnson Hayes 3d
Jennifer Leigh Holmes, the daughter of Wilbur G. Holmes of Aiken, S.C., and the late Norma R. Holmes, was married yesterday in Cambridge, Mass., to William Johnson Hayes 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hayes of Sherborn, Mass.
The Rev.
George Brown performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Harvard Memorial Church.


Wanted: Lively Chum With Racquet
Unless Jimmy Connors restages his Lazarus shtick at this year's United States Open tennis championships starting tomorrow, the burden may fall on the long-maned Andre Agassi to fill the void for colorful televised entertainment.
Connors's storied run in victories against Patrick McEnroe, Aaron Krickstein and Paul Haarhuis, with its denouement in a loss to Jim Courier, brought huge audiences to CBS and the USA Network and showcased a 39-year-old guy speaking to the camera in midmatch like Garry Shandling on Deco-Turf.


Croatian Aid Staggered By Steady Refugee Pace
After a lifetime of backbreaking field work under the hot Balkan sun, Milka Rupanovic is now living free of charge at the luxurious Split Hotel, in a suite of rooms overlooking the pristine Adriatic.
But Mrs.
Rupanovic, with her two sons and their wives and seven grandchildren, is an unwilling guest.
She is a war refugee who fled the destruction of her village nearly a year ago, and her greatest hope is to be able to return home and resume the hard life she lived for 60 years.


Ms. Onyemelukwe, Mr. Garner
Elizabeth Ijeoma Onyemelukwe, the daughter of Clement and Catherine Onyemelukwe of Hamden, Conn., and Lagos, Nigeria, was married yesterday to Kelvin Raynard Garner, the son of Elouise Chambers and Earl Garner, both of Nashville.
The Rev.
Jonathan Onyemelukwe, the Anglican Bishop of the Niger Diocese in Nigeria and an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Harvard Memorial Church in Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Cedric Kirkland-Harris, a Baptist minister, took part in the service.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; A Contest of 2 Generations, Molded by 2 Different Wars
With both nominating conventions completed and the fall race begun, the 1992 election has emerged as a generational contest of unusual intensity and scope, a choice between two men of two very different epochs, shaped by two very different wars.
The 68-year-old George Bush may be the last President of the age of World War II, the war in which every President since Harry S. Truman has served, excepting Jimmy Carter, who was a midshipman at the United States Naval Academy during the war.
The 46-year-old Bill Clinton, born a year after that war ended, is the first Presidential nominee of the age of the Vietnam war.
Peril for Both Candidates
Over this week and last, the old, unresolved differences between the time of America's good war and that of its failed war have begun to occupy a place at the center of the 1992 race, informing debates on matters ranging from party ideology to personal morals.


Washington's Spin on Keiretsu
To the Editor:
Yoshi Tsurumi in "Don't Beat the Keiretsu. Join Them" (Forum, Aug. 2) describes Japanese keiretsu as benign groupings of companies helping each other in adversity and pooling resources to develop new businesses.
Because some foreign companies sell to, or have joint ventures with, keiretsu members, he concludes that Americans should join keiretsu rather try to break them up.


About That Jobs Plan
To the Editor:
As a member of the House Ways and Means Committee, which writes tax legislation, I was dismayed by untruths told by President Bush in his nomination acceptance speech in Houston (front page, Aug. 21).


Revived Vikings Embarrass Redskins
The Minnesota Vikings completed their preseason dedicated to change and the creation of a winning attitude by throttling the Washington Redskins, 30-0, tonight in Robert F. Kennedy Stadium.
New Vikings Coach Dennis Green -- he has been called "the new sheriff in town" in Minneapolis -- brought the Vikings here and dominated the Redskins in a most unusual way, even considering the matchup was only a preseason affair.


Western Hanover Takes Cane
Unlike his previous big races that were marked by some misfortune this season, Western Hanover had an easy trip tonight in the Cane Pace, the first leg of the triple crown for 3-year-old pacers.
Driven by William Fahy, Western Hanover justified his reputation as the top pacer this season by capturing the Cane Pace at Yonkers Raceway by three lengths over Nuclear High, who is co-owned by George Steinbrenner, the owner of the Yankees.


Steelers Run Over Giants In a Rout
For years, the Giants have lived by their defense.
Tonight, in their last preseason game, their defense was awful in the first half, the offense killed one drive after another with mistakes and the Pittsburgh Steelers rolled to a 24-3 victory.
Coach Ray Handley said he was disappointed in all aspects of the Giants' performance, especially with the way the Pittsburgh running game ripped up the Giants' defense.
Phil Simms, the Giants' quarterback until the last four minutes, said the only consistent thing about the offense was its inconsistency.


Dina S. Goldstein, Elliott M. Kugel
Dina Susan Goldstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin P. Goldstein of Upper Saddle River, N.J., was married yesterday evening to Elliott Matthew Kugel, the son of Lee Kugel of Pompano Beach, Fla., and the late Philip Kugel.
Rabbi Paul Schuchalter officiated at the Stanhope Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Kugel, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Arizona and received a law degree from Syracuse University.
She is a lawyer with the law firm of Lindabury, McCormick &amp; Estabrook in Westfield, N.J.


Low Clearance


Ms. Riether, Mr. Coupounas
Kimberly Anne Riether, a daughter of Leo Riether of Stratford, N.J., and the late Mary Riether, was married yesterday to Demetrios George Coombs Coupounas, the son of George and Dr.
Angelyn Konugres Coupounas of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
The Rev.
Frank Strasburger performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Coupounas, 25 years old, was until recently an analyst at Goldman, Sachs in New York.
She and her husband, 26, graduated from Princeton.
Next month she is to join Mr.
Coupounas in a dual-degree program at Harvard University, where he has been studying for an M.B.A. and a master's degree in public policy.
Her father is a retired sales manager for White Horse Winnebago in Somerdale, N.J.
Her mother was the executive secretary at Christy Enterprises, a printing company, in Voorhees, N.J.


Talbot A. Welles, Thomas J. Mason
Talbot Allegra Welles, the daughter of Charles E. Welles of New Haven and Elizabeth B. Welles of Washington, was married yesterday in Walpole, Me., to Thomas Jordan Mason, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Mason of Hancock, N.H.
The Rev.
John Ineson performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Old Walpole Meeting House.
Ms.
Welles, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Barnard College.
She is a grant writer at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art in Los Angeles.
Her father teaches English at the Hopkins School, a private secondary school in New Haven.
Her mother is the coordinator of foreign-language projects at the education division of the National Endowment for the Humanities Division in Washington.


Foreign Policy Follies
To the Editor:
President Bush seeks our support in his bid for re-election based principally on his foreign-policy leadership (news article, Aug. 21).
This record bears closer scrutiny.


Two-Way Street
As an 18-year-old, I was disappointed by the tremendously narrow view of artistic freedom provided by Joel Engel.
Noting the current tendency to stomp on the Hays Code, under which no evil deed ever went unpunished in a motion picture, Mr.
Engel seems to have missed the point of modern films that try to inspire, enlighten, enrage or stimulate, without always tying their morals up in a neat package for delivery into viewers' minds.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Aug. 15 MANHATTAN  Chelsea 145,000
250 West 24th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining foyer, sunken-living room, 2 exposures; maintenance $610, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Coleman/Neary Real Estate)  Greenwich Village 585,000
113 Bedford Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, 4-story, brick Greek Revival house; dining room, 4 fireplaces, greenhouse, 17- by 44-ft. lot; taxes $6.304 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  TriBeCa 330,000
335 Greenwich Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, dining area, renovated kitchen, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $767, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Tabak Real Estate) Upper East Side 1.4 million
830 Park Avenue (75th St.)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 3,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, library, 3 fireplaces, remodeled kitchen; maintenance $2,900, 37% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 187,500
300 Riverside Drive (102d St.)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, renovated kitchen and bath; maintenance $583, 41% tax-deductible (Broker: A.J. Clarke Real Estate)  BRONX Riverdale 77,500
3333 Henry Hudson Parkway  (Whitehall)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, terrace, c/a; maintenance $715, 67% tax-deductible (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  Williamsbridge 140,000
845 East 215th Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Canarsie 219,000
1157 East 103d Street  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dinnette in other; full basement, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,650 (Broker: Helmar Brokerage Ltd.)  Marine Park 211,000
2718 Quentin Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Maryl Real Estate)  Sheepshead Bay 222,000
2019 East 23d Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 17- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,166 (Broker: Jacob Gold Real Estate)  QUEENS  Jackson Heights 335,000
35-39 88th Street  4-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, dining room, den in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in top floor simplex; 1 bedroom in two first-floor units; 1 bath in each; , 35- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $3,750 (Broker: Century 21/TriBoro Terrace Realty)  Jamaica 62,000
147-11 111th Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 bath, single-family, detached Colonial; dining room, private driveway, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $620 (Broker: Kremer Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  New Springville 153,000
17 Plymouth Road  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached frame house; dining room, rear deck, finished basement, 25- by 107-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)  Princess Bay 211,500
7 Haynes Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, Colonial; dining room, sitting room, remodeled kitchen, fireplace, full basement, 43- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: RE-MAX/Preferred)


Lifting the Lid on Excitement
WHEN you complain to the manufacturers, as I sometimes do, that they ought to be making more cars that people want -- and specifically more hardtop coupes and convertibles -- you get some interesting answers.
They'll say, yes, yes, we're working on it.
Or they'll shrug off the idea and tell you that people don't drive around with their windows down as they did in the 1950's.
With dollar signs in their eyes, they'll say that air-conditioning is a big seller and that consumers really don't want a breath of fresh air.


Phillies Foil Glavine In Bid for 20th Victory
Atlanta's Tom Glavine, trying to grow accustomed to winning 20 games a season, hoped to reach that plateau today by going against a team he was more than accustomed to beating.
The Philadelphia Phillies had other ideas.
They were not cowed by Glavine's 19-4 record against the league, nor by Glavine's 10-1 career record against their franchise and 5-0 career record in their ball park.
Instead, the Phillies drove the majors' winningest pitcher to his earliest exit of the season in what wound up a 10-2 romp.


Karen Dacher, Steven D. Roth
Karen Rachelle Dacher, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Dacher of Great Neck, L.I., was married there yesterday to Steven David Roth, the son of Rabbi Dr. and Mrs.
Sol Roth of New York.
The bridegroom's father performed the ceremony at the Great Neck Synagogue.
Mrs.
Roth, 26 years old, is a lawyer at the Federal Reserve Bank in Manhattan.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received a law degree from Cornell University.
Her father is a dentist in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Joyce Dacher, teaches fifth grade at Public School 152 in Brooklyn.


A Farm Village in Serbia Distills War Into Hatred
There are no smashed buildings in this farming village, and tractors, not tanks, ply the surrounding fields of corn and sunflowers.
But violence is taking hold even here in Serbia's northern breadbasket, far from the front lines of the ethnic war in republics that have broken away from Yugoslavia.
Where the conflict began in Hrtkovci is a matter of dispute.
Some argue that it has its roots in brutality by the Croatian Army, which forced Serbs living in Croatia to flee back to Serbian villages like this one.
Others say it arises from the determination of Serbian nationalists to pursue a policy of "ethnic cleansing" wherever they can.


U.N. Reports an Attempt to Bomb Guards' Car in Iraq
Officials with the United Nations said today that three of the organization's guards in northern Iraq had discovered a bomb attached to the bottom of their car, but were able to defuse it before it could explode.
The officials said that the incident took place on Thursday and that a strong protest had been lodged with Baghdad.
The Iraqi Government has denied any involvement with attacks on international forces operating in northern Iraq.


SANCTIONS DRIVING YUGOSLAV ECONOMY INTO DEEP DECLINE
Three months after the United Nations imposed sanctions on Yugoslavia, the country's economy has begun to collapse in a way that many believe can lead to political confrontation before the end of the year.
Most large factories are closed, hundreds of thousands of workers are receiving reduced wages or none at all, inflation is surging, and shortages are spreading.
"It's working about as well as any embargo can be expected to work," said a diplomat who closely watches the Yugoslav economy.


Army Has Trouble Building Beachhead in Disaster Zone
As the Bush Administration fought off accusations that its response to Hurricane Andrew was slow and confused, the Pentagon sent thousands more troops into South Florida today and said more than 20,000 might be in place by Tuesday.
But the first wave of soldiers has run into problems setting up mobile kitchens and tent cities, mainly because of difficulty finding sites that are not only close to large numbers of people but also accessible for big equipment.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Clinton: Focusing on the Economy
TELEVISION SCRIPT -- Announcer: "Something's happening. People are ready. Because they've had enough -- enough of seeing their incomes fall behind and their jobs on the line. Enough of a Government that just doesn't work. They're ready for change. And changing people's lives, that's the work of his life. Twelve years battling the odds in one of our nation's poorest states. Arkansas now leads the nation in job growth. Incomes are rising at twice the national rate.
"Seventeen thousand people moved from welfare to work. That's progress, and that's what we need now. Change. Real solutions. Bill Clinton has an economic plan to rebuild America that invests in our own people. Education. Training. Eight million jobs in the next four years.
"A new direction. Those making over 200,000 a year have to pay more. The rest of us get a break. But don't take their word. Read it yourself. It's a plan to put people first again. And six Nobel Prize economists say it'll work. For people. For a change. Bill Clinton for President."
ON THE SCREEN -- Colorful images from the campaign's bus tours, many in slow motion.
The images are patriotic: small children, people along roadsides with American flags, Mr.
Clinton reaching into crowds to shake hands.
Mr.
Clinton is also seen working at his Governor's desk and delivering his speech at the Democratic National Convention. (Sixty seconds).
ACCURACY -- The Clinton campaign issued a flurry of documentation for the claims in this ad, including statistics from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Department of Commerce and the Arkansas Department of Human Services to support figures on job and income growth and the contention that eight million jobs will be created in four years.
The claim that Mr.
Clinton's tax increases will affect only those earning $200,000 or more is undercut by the campaign's own previous assertions that some people making more than $150,000 will see their taxes rise.
Officials of the Bush campaign said the ad emphasizes only the good news about Arkansas's record and Mr.
Clinton's economic plan.
Other rankings have shown that Arkansas comes in near the bottom in income per person and in environmental protection.
In addition, Bush officials argue that Mr.
Clinton's economic plan would cause job loss through military cuts.
SCORECARD -- The commercial will run in several states this week, but the Clinton organization will not say which ones.
Like the 15-second commercials that were broadcast during the Republican convention, this ad seems intended to challenge the Republicans to respond.
By continuing to focus on the economy, the Democrats are sticking to their determination to focus the debate on what they believe is the President's weak spot.


Weak Foreign Demand Depresses Tool Orders
Orders for American-made machine tools fell 2.8 percent in July, reflecting the weakness among foreign customers that plagues several sectors of the United States economy, according to a report to be released today by an industry trade group.
The trade group, the Association of Manufacturing Technology, tallied last month's orders at $205.6 million, down from the $211.5 million of orders in June.
But compared with orders a year earlier, the July figure was up 6.4 percent.


Half Right on Health; Blend the Bush and Clinton Plans
When it comes to health care reform, President Bush and Bill Clinton are not only at war with each other but also -- however decorously -- with their own advisers.
Who's right?
Both sides, although that's hard for either to concede in the heat of the Presidential campaign.
Mr.
Bush has proposed an elaborate plan that would rely on competition between prepaid providers, like health maintenance organizations, to control costs.
The plan would provide poor families with tax credits to buy basic medical insurance.
And it would encourage small employers to buy insurance through large purchasing cooperatives.
That would stop the perverse practice by which such companies negotiate low premiums by hiring only healthy workers.


Coe Makes Switch To Political Track
SEBASTIAN COE, the only member of the British Parliament who holds two world records in track and field, is still moving at a good pace.
He is back in England after a tour of the Colonies that brought him to New York the other day.
"I'm the president of the United Kingdom division of Diadora," he said.
"We're sponsoring JIMMY CONNORS and JENNIFER CAPRIATI, and now we're launching a new running shoe."


Army Has Trouble Building Beachhead in Disaster Zone
As the Bush Administration fought off accusations that its response to Hurricane Andrew was slow and confused, the Pentagon sent thousands more troops into South Florida today and said more than 20,000 might be in place by Tuesday.
But the first wave of soldiers has run into problems setting up mobile kitchens and tent cities, mainly because of difficulty finding sites that are not only close to large numbers of people but also accessible for big equipment.


Miami Linebacker Fulfills a Family Tie
Michael Barrow, a quick, relentless 230-pound middle linebacker with all-America credentials, is a prime symbol of the University of Miami's standing as a football power.
But this week, as he tirelessly helped to patch up the lives of his family and neighbors in the horrible aftermath of Hurricane Andrew, he became something larger.


Abrams Runs in a Favorite Role: Underdog
This United States Senate campaign is not following Robert Abrams's original script.
When he announced 19 months ago that he would run for Senator, Mr.
Abrams, the State Attorney General, cast himself as the presumptive favorite and the man his party should quickly rally around as the best candidate to take on the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato.
The first major figure to enter the race, he released a slew of early endorsements and scheduled dozens of fund-raisers, all in an obvious bid to scare off potential Democratic opponents.


'Stone Wrote Anti-American Propaganda'; Recruited Twice
To the Editor:
"Strange New Pals in the K.G.B." (editorial, Aug. 13) charges that Herbert Romerstein and I became dupes of Moscow apparatchiks in reporting what a high-ranking former K.G.B. officer told us separately concerning I. F. Stone.
You charge that we are victims of disinformation that is "not just repugnant but grotesque" because we "thirst to believe" what we were told: that Stone was a paid agent of the K.G.B. for many years.


One Mistake Dooms Rookie's No-Hit Bid
Cubs 3, Giants 1
CHICAGO, Aug. 30 (AP) -- Jim Bullinger, a rookie, pitched a one-hitter, allowing only Kirt Manwaring's leadoff home run in the eighth inning, and the Chicago Cubs beat San Francisco, 3-1, today for the Giants' sixth straight loss.
Bullinger (2-3) made his third major league start and finished for the first time.
He has pitched 30 times in relief, earning seven saves.


Tracking the Back-to-School Bounce
Peppering their cautious assessments with a variety of caveats, the nation's retailers report that sales of notepads, sneakers, lunch pails and pens have recovered a bit of their old buoyancy this month as students prepare to head back to school.
But while they appreciate any sign that sales are regaining at least a small semblance of normalcy, many retailers no longer worry if they fail to get a significant bounce from the back-to-school season.
Normalcy, they say, has undergone an evolution.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Financings by the Treasury this week are confined to the regular Monday auction of new three- and six-month bills.
By late on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.15 percent, and the six-month bill was 3.24 percent.


A Chronology of a Film's Making And a Relationship's Unmaking
Woody Allen has often said that his work is his life.
"Husbands and Wives," his new film, gives new meaning to the sentiment.
The film deals with problems of fidelity, the psychological pressures of aging and the eternal war between the heart and the intellect.
The film can be read as a script for Mr.
Allen's own life, with parallels that range from intriguing to uncanny.
Of particular interest is the shooting schedule for the film, on file at the New York City Mayor's Office for Film, Theater and Broadcasting, which includes a scene-by-scene breakdown of "Husbands and Wives," scheduled to be released in mid-September.
Sept. 4, 1991.
Mr.
Allen ends his long relationship with Orion Pictures, which is in severe financial difficulties, and signs with Tri-Star Pictures for his next film, initially referred to by the working title of "Woody Allen Fall Project '91."


Riverside South: Still Questions
Will the abandoned Penn Yards -- 74.6 prime acres on Manhattan's Hudson River waterfront -- ever be put to good use?
The last 30 years are littered with false starts.
Now, a coalition of civic groups has persuaded Donald Trump to scale back his first proposal, a dense design that included the tallest building in the world.
Exit Television City.
Enter Riverside South.
Mr.
Trump's newest version, with 16 apartment buildings, a huge film studio and a riverfront park, is an improvement on its outsize predecessor.
Even so, the City Planning Commission is obliged to ask Mr.
Trump a lot of tough questions before approving Riverside South.
Manhattan Borough President Ruth Messinger has already won some intelligent concessions; more may be required.


TROOPS BEGIN WORK IN STORM-HIT AREA, BUT MISERY MOUNTS
Nearly a week after one of the most powerful hurricanes in history ripped through southern Florida, and three days after a vast Federal relief effort was announced, 275,000 people still have no electricity, at least 150,000 are either homeless or living in ruins, and tens of thousands must forage each day for food and ice.
Here in the most severely battered zone, a plain of flat farmland spread with the splintered wreckage of house trailers and simple bungalows, many people have been unable to bathe since the storm last Monday.
Few toilets are functioning, and heaps of noxious garbage are piling up.
Health officials are beginning to worry about outbreaks of dysentery and cholera. 'Things Are Getting Better'


Currency Vote Is a Test Of Confidence in Europe
Nothing is going right for the European bond markets this year.
And what is going wrong will become worse if the French decide to just say no to a single currency by the end of the century.
An anticipated decline in interest rates, which was expected to ignite a rally, has not occurred.
In fact, with the stingy hand of the Bundesbank on the monetary rudder in Germany, interest rates have gone up throughout Europe.
The dollar's decline, which has temporarily stalled the American bond rally, is also wreaking havoc in Britain and on the Continent.


Stadler Wins World Series
Craig Stadler alternated between hitting near-perfect shots and having to scramble like a youngster to hold off Corey Pavin, Fred Couples and darkness today for victory at the NEC World Series of Golf.
With no daylight left for a sudden-death playoff because of a 2-hour-15-minute rain delay during the afternoon, the 39-year-old Stadler holed a 10-foot par putt on the 72d hole to defeat Pavin by one shot and Couples by two.


Toney Retains Title, Then the Action Starts
Promoter Bob Arum didn't draw much of a crowd and didn't have much of a fight, but by the end of Saturday night he did have this: a little hype for another potential championship bout.
Arum, of course, loved every moment of it.


INSIDE
Emmy for 'Murphy Brown'
The show, criticized by Vice President Dan Quayle, was named best comedy series.
"Northern Exposure" was named best drama.
Page C13.


London Journal; U.S. Tourist Dollar Paying a Value-Deleted Tax
Robert Hite of Denver sat on a bench outside the Tower of London (admission price: $13), munching on his cheapest meal in days, a quarter-pounder from McDonald's ($3.25), and running over the expenses he has incurred during his family's vacation in England.
"The one that really sticks in my mind was the ice cream," he said, sitting alongside his wife, Joanne, and his son, Cass.
"We went into a place in Salisbury and had an ice cream, and it was $6 a bowl. That really got to me."


Billie Tekel, Barry Elias
Billie Tekel, a costume jewelry wholesaler in New York, and Barry Elias, a sales executive at Maylis Textiles in New York, were married yesterday in Huntingdon Valley, Pa.
Rabbi Simeon J. Maslin officiated at the Philmont Country Club.
Mrs.
Elias, 37 years old, graduated from Columbia University and received a master's degree in operations research from Stanford University.
She is the daughter of Dr.
Ralph Tekel of Elkins Park, Pa., and Pearl Miller of Philadelphia.
Her father, who is retired, was a professor of organic chemistry at La Salle College in Philadelphia.
Her mother, also retired, owned Critics' Choice, a restaurant in Wyncote, Pa.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Lillian T. Tekel.


Sports of The Times; When $17.5 Million Is Seen as an Insult
LISTEN to the sports talk shows, among other so-called conversations, and the refrain is often about the big salaries paid in baseball.
"When is this nuttiness going to end?" ask Vinnie from Queens and Solly from Yonkers, who hold tightly to dreams of baseball as a game.
Yet when the Mets the other day said, "Enough -- for now," Hurricane Cone broke loose around here: "How can the Mets not pay him what he wants!?"


Hurricane Likely to Reshape The TV Market in Miami
Routine television audience measurement was disrupted last week by the absence of the nation's 16th-largest television market from the national Nielsen ratings.
The devastation in Miami caused by Hurricane Andrew created havoc for the city's television stations, two of which are owned by networks.
Worst hit was WCIX, the station owned by CBS.
The station's broadcast tower was blown over by the hurricane winds, knocking the station off the air for 12 hours.
The station managed to resume its signal by relying on a low-power station that CBS owns north of the city, but still managed to reach only about 40 percent of the normal Miami viewing area.


N.C. State Uses a Late Kick to Send Iowa Into Spin
When Steve Vedetich's field-goal attempt was good at six minutes after midnight today, the first upset of the 1992 college football season had taken form.
The 46-yard kick by Vedetich, the sophomore's first in a college game, broke a 14-14 tie in the seventh minute of the fourth quarter as his team, North Carolina State, went on to defeat favored Iowa, 24-14.
The event was the 10th annual Kickoff Classic at Giants Stadium.
The crowd of 46,251 was the smallest ever at the event.
But the fans saw an even game, one remarkable in that both teams were so adept so early in the season.
The North Carolina State player who did the most to frustrate Iowa was quarterback Terry Jordan.
He found openings when he kept the ball on the option play and he ran for 92 yards on those plays.
Signs of Trouble
On one play, Jordan pitched the ball out to tailback Anthony Barbour, who sped 49 yards for a touchdown in the second period that gave North Carolina State a 14-7 lead.
By then, Iowa knew it was in for a fight.
Coach Dick Sheridan of North Carolina State, who has gained considerable respect for his program after six seasons at Raleigh, took a risk against the Iowa offense and its veteran 280-pound line.
To get at the nimble Hawkeye quarterback, Jim Hartlieb, Sheridan reasoned that North Carolina State would have to attack rather than just defend with its three-man defensive front.
So the Wolfpack judiciously blitzed linebackers and brought up defensive backs.
"We had to bring pressure to balance it out," Sheridan said.
The risk was in leaving gaps for Hartlieb to exploit, and the tactic worked.
"That was a new defensive scheme for them," said Coach Hayden Fry of Iowa.
"There was too much pressure on Hartlieb. He was harassed quite a bit of the evening."
Hartlieb, nevertheless, managed two first-half touchdown passes to Danan Hughes, an outstanding senior wide receiver and kick returner from Bayonne, N.J.
Sheridan, delighted that a new offensive line "did a superb job," cited another New Jersey native: George Hegamin, the Wolfpack's 337-pound freshman right tackle from Camden, who was starting in his first college game.
Hegamin and the other North Carolina State linemen, said Sheridan, "had to control the ball in the fourth quarter and that was the key to the game."
By the time Vedetich kicked the tie-breaking field goal and sophomore receiver Eddie Goines caught a 5-yard touchdown pass from Jordan with two minutes left, more than half the crowd had melted away.
But this was no real wonder: The game's kickoff didn't take place until 9:17 P.M.
Where do the teams go from here?
Iowa, regarded as Michigan's foremost challenger in the Big Ten, will take on Miami on Saturday night at Iowa City, and had valid concerns.
"They ripped us," he said of the Wolfpack.
"Miami obviously has better personnel than North Carolina State."


California Legislature Passes Budget With Big Cuts
The two-month-long fiscal crisis in California has moved closer to conclusion with the passage of an austere recession-era budget package that cuts deeply into health and welfare services and state support for colleges, cities and counties.
The State Assembly passed the main $57 billion budget bill on Saturday evening after an impassioned speech by Speaker Willie L. Brown Jr. urging colleagues to pass the bill even though it closely resembled the no-new-taxes budget favored by his main political rival, Gov.
Pete Wilson.


Assets of Auto Dealer in Fraud Case to Be Sold
The extensive business assets of John McNamara, the Long Island auto dealer accused of defrauding General Motors of more than $400 million, are now for sale, and his 6,000 creditors, including the tax collector, are standing in line.
Once known as a philanthropist and major contributor to the Republican Party, Mr.
McNamara remains free on $300 million bail.
But the 52-year-old businessman has become even more reclusive than usual, seldom seen by friends and former business associates in this quaint waterfront village of 7,500 residents.
He has been advised by his lawyer to avoid making any public comments.


Singapore Inquiry Into the Press Entangles Merrill Lynch
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company has become entangled in a Singapore Government investigation of leaks to the nation's leading financial newspaper, an inquiry that is testing the limits of press freedom in this prosperous, tightly ruled city-state.
Investigators, operating under Singapore's broadly worded Official Secrets Act, are trying to determine how The Business Times obtained information for a June 29 article on Singapore's economic performance in the first half of the year.


Truce Brings Afghans Into Kabul Bazaars
One day after a cease-fire began, the bazaars in Kabul were filled with residents today who shouted their anger at the fighting expressed fears that the lull would be brief.
"They are just having the cease-fire to rearm themselves," said Fared Mohammad as he pulled a handcart loaded with blankets and pots and pans.
"We have had these kinds of agreements 20 times before."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Farm Prices . . .
Aug.
New-Home Sales . . .
July  Tuesday  Leading Indicators . . .
July Construction Spending . . .
July Purchasing Managers' Report . . .
Aug.
Wednesday  Factory Orders . . .
July  Thursday  Productivity Revision . . . 2d Qtr.
Auto Sales . . .
Aug.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  Unemployment . . .
Aug.


Rejuvenated With a Heart of Gold
In case nobody's noticed, Jennifer Capriati has shed 30 pounds since that traumatizing evening in Rome, when a nosy reporter asked her whether she traced that day's Italian Open loss to being overweight.
If she had to be stuck on a desert island with just one recipe for sustenance, "lo-cal cheesecake" would be her slimming selection.
"Moderation," said Capriati, is her middle name these days.


Hurricane Ruins Much of Lime Crop
Count the nation's lime crop as another casualty of Hurricane Andrew.
An estimated 95 percent of America's limes come from the hard-hit area of Florida's southern Dade County, near the town of Homestead.
State officials and citrus growers who have toured the area say the lime crop is destroyed.
Most of the trees were stripped of fruit and leaves, they say, and others were toppled.


Books of The Times; Stalking a Japanese Money Mafia
Silent Thunder  By Peter Tasker  287 pages. Kodansha International. $20.
Here's a fairly new category: the international financial thriller from Japan.
The theme has been brushed against before, most recently in Michael Crichton's "Rising Sun," but that was told from an American viewpoint and wasn't a traditional suspense novel.
Of course, any number of nonfiction books have described the powerful role of the Japanese economy in world commerce.
What makes Peter Tasker's "Silent Thunder" welcome as pure entertainment is that it pulls out all the fictional stops yet does so convincingly.


A Shift in Japan's Economic Tack; Rescue Plan Supports Land Prices at Home Buyers' Expense
Analysts have generally praised the Government's huge economic rescue package, announced on Friday, as a good start in restoring badly shaken public confidence.
But they also say it represents the abandonment of a pledge that was important to the average Japanese and foreign companies trying to set up in Japan -- to bring the country's astronomical land prices down to reasonable levels.
The $86 billion plan consists of a range of spending programs, tax breaks and cut-rate loans to bolster the anemic economy while shoring up the banking system and financial markets.
The thread running through nearly all these programs, however, is an effort to support land prices with Government money.


2 New York Teams Hold Open House
The Knicks and the Rangers, who still have a few thousand good seats left, are trying to lure season-ticket holders with an inside look.
Anyone who buys season tickets, and pays with an American Express card, will be entitled to see their team in one private practice.
Actually, with the Knicks it will be more of a "shoot-around" on game day.
But fans will be able to see Coach PAT RILEY talking to the players.


Ex-Ranger Heads For Lightning
With his flowing hair, clever moves and good looks, RON DUGUAY was a Ranger hero of another era.
But now, at age 35, and 10 years removed from his 40-goal season with the New Yorkers, Duguay is attempting a comeback.
He starts skating on Sept. 11., the oldest player trying out for the expansion Tampa Bay Lightning.


Bystanders Increasingly In Crossfire
As detectives hunt for the gunmen behind last week's ferocious firefight outside a Bronx grocery, law-enforcement specialists say it represents crime's latest calling card on the streets of New York City: spray-shooting that indiscriminately targets bystanders as well as intended victims.
In many ways, they say, it is more alarming than other surges of criminal violence, a volatile mix of heavy armament, drug rivalries, abject poverty and shadowy ethnic gangs that one criminologist says summons up the specter of overseas war zones.


Philadelphia City Workers Vote to Authorize a Strike


World Economies


Companies Learn to Live With Dollar's Volatility
As the dollar plunged to record lows last week, most corporate foreign exchange managers stayed up half the night, watching the dull glow of numbers across their computer screens.
But not David Fiedler, the director of foreign exchange planning at the Eastman Kodak Company.
He calmly let his 8-year-old son use his monitor at home to check the latest baseball scores, then he got a full night's sleep.
Blase?
No, it's just that Mr.
Fiedler has Kodak's risks from the dollar's jumps and jiggles under enviable control.


Essay; Justice Corrupts Justice
U.S.
Attorney General William Barr, in rejecting the House Judiciary Committee's call for a prosecutor not beholden to the Bush Administration to investigate the crimes of Iraqgate, has taken personal charge of the cover-up.
The document that will be Exhibit A in a future prosecution of obstruction of justice is an unsigned 97-page apologia that accompanied Mr.
Barr's unprecedented refusal to recognize a "political conflict of interest," as called for in the law.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Race; Where Anita Hill Is the Silent Third Candidate
Against the low drone of an air-conditioner at a roadside inn near Scranton, a dozen campaign workers sat briefing Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, on how a certain woman was threatening his bid for re-election.
One by one, they gave their reports, about how Republican women still empathized with her, about how everyone would have to work hard to convince people, given the situation, that Mr.
Specter supported women's issues and how, in fact, some people were beginning to come around.


15 Killed by Artillery Shell In a Busy Sarajevo Market
An artillery shell crashed and exploded in a crowded marketplace on the western edge of Sarajevo today, killing 15 people and dimming hopes that had risen with reports that Serbs were ending a siege of another Bosnian town.
About 100 people were reported wounded in the blast, and the television here showed civilians lifting the dead and wounded onto trucks.
Radio reports from the Bosnian capital quoted doctors as saying that many of the wounded were not expected to survive.


Eve Robinson, Joshua Wiener
Eve Kimberly Robinson, a daughter of Irwin and Janet Robinson of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to Joshua Hiram Wiener, the son of Hattie Wiener and Jack Wiener, both of New York.
Rabbi Edward Feld performed the ceremony at Sunningdale Country Club in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Ms.
Robinson, 28 years old, is keeping her name, She owns Eve Robinson Associates, an interior-design concern in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Phillips, Niser, Benjamin, Krim &amp; Ballon.


Peter Deriabin, 71, A Moscow Defector Who Joined C.I.A.
Peter S. Deriabin, described by the Central Intelligence Agency as the highest ranking Soviet intelligence officer to have defected to the West up until 1954, died on Aug. 20 in northern Virginia, the C.I.A. reported Saturday.
He was 71 years old.
The C.I.A. said that Mr.
Deriabin died after suffering a stroke, and that it waited to make the announcement at the request of his family.


Cathleen Donnelly And G. P. Cantor
Cathleen Elizabeth Donnelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Donnelly of Manchester, N.H., was married in Ridgewood, N.J., yesterday to Geoffrey Paul Cantor, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
William L. Cantor of Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
Rabbi Kathy Felix performed the ceremony at the Women's Club of Ridgewood.
Mrs.
Cantor, 31 years old, teaches ballet at Ballet Academy East in New York.
She graduated from the Juilliard School and received a master's degree in advanced education from Columbia University.
Her father is the property administrator at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Mass.
Her mother, Elizabeth Donnelly, a registered nurse, is an administrator at the Hitchcock Clinic in Bedford, N.H.


That Face, Those Fees, for Many Ads
More and more, advertisers are using a select group of high-profile models to promote their products.
Whereas in the past, many of these so-called super models seemed to be the exclusive property of top fashion houses, today they can be seen hawking everything from one-of-a-kind outfits to Gap jeans and diet soda.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Orion Capital Corp., New York, is offering $110 million of 9 1/8 percent senior notes due in 2002 at 99.873 to yield 9.144 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated Ba-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BBB- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., Bentonville, Ark., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $2 billion of debt securities through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  INSPECTIONS POSSIBLE AFTER SUBWAY FIRE


Poland and Strikers Facing Showdown
Poland's new Government has embarked on a bold and potentially risky effort to break strikes in the nation's industrial heartland.
For the first time since the fall of Communism in 1989, striking workers have received dismissal notices.
The showdown, at a coal mine and a car parts factory, could herald either a new era in Poland or the political demise of Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka.


Transportation Secretary Andrew Card: Unlikely Relief Leader
On the face of it, Andrew H. Card Jr. seems like an improbable choice as President Bush's personal emissary for disaster relief.
As a Transportation Secretary, with only six months on the job, Mr.
Card brings to his task a resume studded with Republican political credentials but devoid of direct experience managing operations like the vast recovery effort under way in South Florida.
Nevertheless, it was to Mr.
Card, his close political friend, that Mr.
Bush turned in what has emerged as a perilous moment for the President.
Since his appointment on Wednesday, Mr.
Card has faced a vast and unwieldy Federal relief effort and has tried to counter the criticism that the Administration's early response was ineffectual with a demonstration that Mr.
Bush does indeed care about people.


Billie Tekel, Barry Elias
Billie Tekel, a costume jewelry wholesaler in New York, and Barry Elias, a sales executive at Maylis Textiles in New York, were married yesterday in Huntingdon Valley, Pa.
Rabbi Simeon J. Maslin officiated at the Philmont Country Club.
Mrs.
Elias, 37 years old, graduated from Columbia University and received a master's degree in operations research from Stanford University.
She is the daughter of Dr.
Ralph Tekel of Elkins Park, Pa., and Pearl Miller of Philadelphia.
Her father, who is retired, was a professor of organic chemistry at La Salle College in Philadelphia.
Her mother, also retired, owned Critics' Choice, a restaurant in Wyncote, Pa.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Lillian T. Tekel.


Not in the Odds, but Surely in the Stars: Great Navigator Wins Hopeful
Is this the horse of the future?
You win the Hopeful Stakes, you're marked for great things.
Man o' War won it in 1919, Whirlaway in 1940, Secretariat in 1972, Affirmed in 1977.
That's why they call it the Hopeful.
The official history of the race says: "It is the first time 2-year-olds are asked to go over six furlongs in stakes and it means their owners are hopeful they have colts of classic possibilities."


American Express' Second Phase of Ads
American Express will soon introduce the second phase in its much-debated campaign by Chiat/Day/ Mojo Inc. in New York for its flagship green charge card, adding warmer, emotional elements to the cooler, rational tone of the advertising that has irked many critics.
"The campaign is doing what we asked it to do," Aldo Papone, a senior adviser to the American Express Company, said of broadcast and print ads that present oversized green cards as consumer icons.
"Frankly, though, it has not had the emotional content so important to our brand."


Review/City Opera; A 'Barbiere' Worthy of Trust With Both Head and Heart
If the New York City Opera continues to revise and rethink its coverage of the standard repertory, it could do worse than to use its current production of "Il Barbiere di Siviglia" as a model.
Rossini's opera returned to the New York State Theater on Friday evening.
Desmond Heeley's set is unusually well suited to the proportions of the company's stage.
Its rotating components, turning exteriors to interiors and back, have an elegant simplicity.
They are clever but not fussily so.
Mr.
Heeley's costumes, especially for Rosina, offer what seems to be a calculated tastelessness, one that lends an interpretive weight all its own to Rossini's characters.


Question Box
Expos and Blue Jays
Q.
Are there any players who have played for both Canadian teams in the major leagues, the Toronto Blue Jays and the Montreal Expos?
A.
Since the Blue Jays joined the American League in 1977, eight years after the Expos joined the National League, there have been 20 such players, enough to field a team and almost fill out a roster.
The left-handed starting pitcher for such a squad would be Mickey Mahler, the right-hander would be Balor Moore, and the relief pitchers, both right-handed, would be Dale Murray and Dyar Miller.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Friday about the New York City schools' requirement that AIDS educators emphasize abstinence over safe sex rendered the name of the director of the AIDS and Adolescent Network of New York incorrectly.
She is Teri Lewis.


Punjab Violence Eases as Police Claim Successes
Heavily armed policemen stormed a comfortable villa in this crowded city in early August and captured India's most wanted Sikh militant.
A few hours later, the police announced that the arrested man, Sukhdev Singh Babbar, who had posed successfully as an affluent builder here for four years, was dead.


The Video Dial Tone, Strangled
Pick up your phone, call the neighborhood video store and ask that "Casablanca" be transmitted to your TV set.
Dial a department store and, also on your TV set, call up its display of new fall sweaters and place your order.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  COLLAPSING YUGOSLAV ECONOMY
Three months after the U.N. imposed sanctions on Yugoslavia, the country's economy has begun to collapse in a way that many believe can lead to political confrontation before the end of the year.
A1  CHESS MATCH NEAR A WAR
Bobby Fischer, the American chess genius, and his old rival Boris Spassky appear ready to play.
The site of their rematch, to begin on Wednesday, is just 70 miles from the carnage of the Balkan war.
A1  In quiet Yugoslav village, the hate of war has emerged.
A6  An artillery shell killed 15 and wounded 100 in Sarajevo.
A6  BRAZILIAN DENIES CHARGES
Speaking in a national broadcast, the President of Brazil denied allegations that he had profited from a corruption scheme and predicted that he would defeat efforts to remove him from office.
A2  U.N.
AIDES FIND BOMB UNDER CAR
Officials with the United Nations said three of its guards in northern Iraq had discovered a bomb attached to the bottom of their car, but were able to defuse it.
A3  AFGHANS RELUCTANT TO LEAVE IRAN
Many of the millions of Afghan refugees in Iran, whom Teheran wants to ship home, are reluctant to return in the face of grave uncertainties in Afghanistan, where a dissident guerrilla faction has clashed violently with the Government.
A3  POLAND MOVES TO BREAK STRIKES
Poland's Government has embarked on a bold and potentially risky effort to break strikes in the nation's industrial heartland.
For the first time since the fall of Communism in 1989, striking workers have received dismissal notices.
A7  London Journal: Even souvenirs take more of the tourist dollars.
A4  Violence in Punjab ebbs as the police contain militants.
A5  A truce allowed Afghans to return to the bazaars in Kabul.
A3  Lebanese Christians shunned the second 2d round of voting.
A7 National A8-12  FLORIDA CONTINUES TO SUFFER
Almost a week after Hurricane Andrew hit South Florida, 275,000 people have no electricity, 150,000 are either homeless or living in ruins and tens of thousands are foraging for food and ice.
A1  A DEVASTATED CITY'S TALE
Virtually destroyed by a hurricane last week, Homestead, Fla., bares little resemblance to its former self.
Residents are now left to piece together a future.
A1  DEFENSE OF RELIEF EFFORT
Transportation Secretary Andrew Card must try to counter the criticism of the Bush Administration's response to the damage in South Florida.
A10  The Pentagon sent thousands more troops into South Florida.
A10  3 ACTORS IN PENNSYLVANIA RACE
The race between Senator Arlen Specter and Lynn Yeakel in Pennsylvania is being dominated by the name of Anita Hill.
Her appearance before a Senate panel last fall galvanized women across the country and forced Senator Specter to defend his role in the hearings.
A1  LAWYERS IN THE CAMPAIGN
As family values become a less prominent campaign issue, a battle over legal values may take its place.
And in the debate on the legal profession, each campaign has accused the other of being a captive of special interest groups.
A1  STRENGTH IN MINORITY ALUMNI
Around the nation, from large public institutions to private universities, minority alumni groups are a growing phenomenon.
A8  PROGRESS ON CALIFORNIA BUDGET
The fiscal crisis in California moved closer to conclusion with the passage of an austere recession-era budget bill.
A8  SURRENDER AT IDAHO CABIN
A man holed up in a mountaintop cabin with a white supremacist fugitive surrendered to get medical attention for gunshot wounds.
A8  Barbara Bush's stepmother faces a $5 million lawsuit.
A12  Governor Clinton's lead shrinks in two voter surveys.
A12  Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-16  The Emmy Awards C13  Chronology of Woody Allen matter.
C13  Music: City Opera's "Barbiere." C13  Dance: Miki Liszt troupe.
C13  Word and Image: Louisiana politics on "P.O.V." C14  "Silent Thunder," fiscal thriller.
C16  Sports C1-11  Baseball: Bonilla's homer in ninth sinks Reds.
C1  Twins beat Yanks and Militello.
C2  On knuckleballs and knuckleballers.
C3  Blue Jays beat Brewers.
C5  Cubs rookie one-hits Giants.
C5  Phils foil Glavine's bid for 20th victory.
C5  Boxing: Barkley may be next for Toney.
C11  Berkow on the Cone trade.
C3  Features: Sidelines C2  Question Box C10  Football: Why are the Giants stuck?
C1  North Carolina State took risks in beating Iowa.
C8  Miami linebacker lends hurricane aid.
C8  Golf: Stadler wins World Series.
C10  Horse Racing: Longshot wins Hopeful at Saratoga.
C11  Paseana is upset in Pacific Classic.
C11  Tennis: Connors prepares for an encore.
C1  Korda dismantles Lendl to win Hamlet Cup.
C8  Capriati wins Mazda championship.
C6  Ashe stages exhibition in battle against AIDS.
C8  Capriati in control of her diet and her game.
C6  Obituaries A16  Theodore H. Spaet, prominent hematologist, educator and researcher.
Peter S. Deriabin, an early high ranking Soviet intelligence defector.
Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  Half right on health.
The video dial tone, strangled.
Riverside South: Still questions.
Letters  William Safire: Justice corrupts justice.
Kathryn Anastos: Washington could help us fight AIDS.
Barry Tarshis: Fonts of wisdom.
Ze'ev Chafets: Israel and Arafat.


Karena P. Somerville Executive, 46
Karena P. Somerville, the manager of Consolidated Edison's Customer Outreach program, died on Thursday.
She was 46 years old and lived in Rye, N.Y.
Mrs.
Somerville died in an automobile accident on the Hutchinson River Parkway near the Orchard Beach exit in the Bronx.
Her car struck a tree early Thursday morning in a construction area, the police said.


A Game Maas Will Try to Forget
As if his distressing season and uncertain future with the Yankees has not been enough for Kevin Maas to endure, he found himself presented with an additional factor this afternoon.
It is hard enough to play first base on an occasional basis while living with the inevitable comparisons with Don Mattingly.
The task becomes that much harder when those comparisons are taking place under the teflon-coated fiberglass of the Metrodome.


Bridge
One American team was a heavy favorite to advance at the World Team Championships here today, but another remained a long shot.
With six rounds of play remaining in the qualifying stage of the open series, the American open team led its group with 440 victory points.
Their nearest rivals were: 2.
Turkey 436; 3.
Netherlands 435; 4.
Sweden 416; 5.
France 410.
In the other qualifying group it is difficult to predict the eventual qualifiers, for the leading teams are bunched: 1.
Denmark 416; 2.
Israel 406; 3.
Poland 401; 4.
Hong Kong 398; 5.
Austria 396.


Review/Dance; Finding Deep Reality in Ordinary Movement
Miki Liszt took the audience on an intriguing voyage for about the first two-thirds of "Touch," presented by the Miki Liszt Dance Company on Friday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
It has been said that dance is derived from natural movement.
Ms.
Liszt, a modern-dance choreographer from Charlottesville, Va., takes walks, pauses, slow and gentle collisions and standing still and makes them suggest purpose and meditative thought.
No one touches anyone else for a long time in "Touch," except for small cuffs that spin the recipient into motion.
At first, the six men and women have as little to do with one another as the pedestrians moving behind the dancers, projected on the stretched white fabric surfaces of three freestanding sculptures.
A voice murmurs phrases built around the word "Touch," an unnecessary wrinkle that seems a bow to fashion.
But the choreography creates the effect of layered and refracted realities.
The performers are wanderers through life in dance that replicates the apparent aimlessness of everyday activity, in the process heightening and intensifying the unfocused behavior so that it becomes both a state of being in all ordinariness as well as a commentary, simultaneous and intense, on that state.
Life flows in a logical, well-ordered stream of consciousness.


Susan Lewtan, Glenn Langberg
Susan Deena Lewtan, a securities analyst at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in New York, and Glenn Ralph Langberg, a managing partner in Trelan Partners, a real-estate developer in New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi James Rosen officiated at the Beth El Temple in West Hartford, Conn.
Mrs.
Langberg, 32 years old, graduated from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in management from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She is the daughter of Marvin and Jane Lewtan of West Hartford.
Her father is the president of Lewtan Industries, a book publisher and maker of promotional gifts in Hartford.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Marketers Still Struggling To Appeal to 90's Consumers
ALMOST five years after the stock market crash that marked, to many, a symbolic end to the heady hedonism of the 1980's, marketers are still struggling to refine, and in some cases to define, their sales pitches for the more practical, more skeptical consumers of the 1990's.
"In the 80's, we saw a lot of Burberry raincoats that probably won't be sold again," said Nina T. Lyons, director of marketing communications at Waterford Crystal Inc., which is the Burberry of candy dishes.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Specter of the Storm
Damage from Hurricane Andrew to natural gas operations in the Gulf of Mexico will cut production for several weeks, until repairs are completed.
Prices for gas contracts rose sharply on Friday, and analysts predicted that customers in the Northeast and Midwest would see bigger heating bills this winter.
In addition, some analysts said Andrew's ravages may have ended a long depression in the natural gas market.  [ Page D1. ]
Top executives of large insurance companies toured Florida municipalities where almost all property had become a casualty of the hurricane.
Several said the damage was more intense than anything they had ever seen, and the faces of corporate leaders from Allstate, State Farm, Prudential, Aetna and other companies turned expressionless at the destruction.  [ D1. ]


Bonilla And Mets Dressed To Thrill
This is why the Mets signed Bobby Bonilla.
This is why he gets the big dollars.
Ninth inning, two outs, two runs down, two runners on base.
This is when, in a perfect world, Bobby Bonilla is supposed to come to the plate.
And hit a homer.
And win the game.
For the Bobby Bonillas of this world, that is what is expected.
That's the way life is.
Most of this year, though, that kind of thing didn't happen.
Most of this year, nothing has happened the way the Mets planned.
Yesterday, though, the magic came back.


Minority Alumni Find a New Voice
When Vincent Cohen graduated from Syracuse University in 1960, he didn't take away the fond memories that many of his white classmates did.
Mr.
Cohen, who is black, remembered racial slurs and discrimination.
Once he had earned his degrees, he didn't care if he ever saw the ivied brick halls of his alma mater again.
But next month, Mr.
Cohen and about 500 other black and Hispanic alumni will return to Syracuse for homecoming.
There will be the usual sports events to attend, reminiscences and catching up to be done.
But the prime lure at homecoming for the minority alumni will be the fourth edition of Coming Back Together, a three-day series of workshops, seminars and career counseling given by black and Hispanic alumni for current students.


In a Warm-Up for the Open, Korda Is Too Hot for Lendl
Those gaunt and gawky guys from Czechoslovakia, Ivan Lendl and his heir apparent from the homeland, Petr Korda, the 1992 French Open runner-up, unholstered their racquets and got down to the gritty business of trying to outgun each other for possession of the Waldbaum's Hamlet Cup title this afternoon.
It wasn't a fair fight, however, because only one of the finalists remembered to bring his ammunition.
Korda's 6-2, 6-2 demolition of his childhood hero left Lendl, a three-time United States Open champion and a brand-new American citizen with a 0-3 record in 1992 finals.


What, Be Careful?


Violence in Hunts Point, Again, Leaving Five Wounded
About seven blocks from where a dozen people were wounded in a fusillade of bullets in the Bronx last week, four people were wounded by shotgun blasts and a 15-year-old was stabbed early yesterday after a dispute at a party spilled onto the street, the police said.
The police said the two incidents in the Hunts Point section were not related.
In both cases, no one was killed.


On an Inspiring Day, Everyone Gets to Serve
This day, if not this particular event, was conceived roughly three and a half years ago, when Arthur Ashe began to deal with the knowledge that he was afflicted with AIDS.
What he was going to do to fight back, not just for himself, he didn't know; he only knew that he would do something.
It surprised him that the special-interest groups that make up the tennis world fell so quickly into place in support of his Arthur Ashe Tennis Challenge, which took place yesterday at the National Tennis Center, on the eve of the 1992 United States Open.


In Case of Emergency


Ignatius D. Volpe, 78, Electronics Consultant
Ignatius D. Volpe, a prominent electronics and engineering consultant, died on Friday at his home in Huntington, L.I.
He was 78 years old.
Mr. Volpe suffered a severe stroke in June, said a grandson, Daniel Rose.


Here Comes the Season. Where Are the Giants?
With their opening game of the season against the San Francisco 49ers just seven days away, the Giants have two major problems -- offense and defense.
The defense was embarrassingly porous in Saturday night's 24-3 loss to the Pittsburgh Steelers, but at least it should improve this week.
When the late-signing Erik Howard and Carl Banks are activated, Howard should clog the middle and Banks should be able to shed tight ends trying to set up sweeps, at least enough to make a difference.


Market Place; Challenges In Store For Ivax
STORY stocks selling on the promise of future glories can be a bit like a bargain package vacation: while promoters promise something as lovely as Paris in spring, things may turn out more like Nome in winter.
For the Ivax Corporation, the pharmaceutical concern that closed at $28 a share on the American Stock Exchange on Friday, some 127 times earnings, the last month has certainly seemed more like Paris.
Despite some criticism that it was promising too much about potential sales of drugs, the company seemed blessed by favorable events.


New Alliance Party Has Unsevered Ties to Anti-Semitism
To the Editor:
Lenora B. Fulani, the New Alliance Party Presidential candidate, writes (letter, Aug. 11): "As an independent black leader I have neither the need nor the inclination to exploit anti-Semitism in the black community. I deplore it." Perhaps she will explain:


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Bubka Is Flying High Again  Sergei Bubka, who missed all his attempts at the Olympics earlier this month, set his 31st world pole-vault record at the Industry Trophy meet in Padua, Italy, yesterday.
The Ukrainian's vault of 20 feet 1 inch improved by a half-inch his own outdoor world mark set in Dijon, France, on June 13.
Bubka, who also holds the world indoor record of 20-1 1/2, cleared 20-1 on his first attempt after missing once at 19-2 1/2 at the Arcella stadium.
In other events, Olympic gold medalist Mark McKoy of Canada dominated the 110-meter hurdles, beating Florian Schwarthoff of Germany in 13.44 seconds, and American sprinter Dennis Mitchell won the 100 meters in 10.43 seconds, edging Calvin Smith.
German Heike Drechsler, leaping more than 23 feet for the 20th time this year, won the women's long jump in 23-0 1/2. (AP) AUTO RACING  Michael Andretti Wins  Michael Andretti drove away from the field and into the thick of the Indy-car championship race with a dominating victory yesterday in the Vancouver Molson-Indy.
His fourth triumph of the season and 26th of his career moved Andretti, the defending series champion, within 12 points of Indy-car leader Bobby Rahal, who was eliminated early in the 100-lap race in a collision.
Andretti led all but three early laps on the way to a 54.56-second victory over runner-up Al Unser Jr. (AP) Schumacher Finds the Formula: Michael Schumacher of Germany won his first Formula One race, beating the already crowned champion Nigel Mansell in the Belgian Grand Prix in Spa-Francorchamps, Belgium.
Schumacher's victory came on the first anniversary of his debut in Formula One racing.
Schumacher, driving a Benetton-Ford, won the 44-lap race by 36.595 seconds over Mansell, who clinched the driving title for Williams-Renault two weeks ago by winning for the eighth time in the first 11 races.
Riccardo Patrese of Italy, also in a Williams-Renault, was third. (AP) DOG SHOWS  Terrier Wins Best of Show  A Norwich terrier, Ch.
Childey Willum the Conqueror, owned by Ruth Cooper and Patricia Lussier of Glen View, Ill., yesterday was named best of 1,748 dogs at the 31st all-breed show of the Sussex Hills Kennel Club in Florham Park, N.J.
It was the fifth top award for the little 3-year-old dog.


Braves Get Reardon For the Stretch Run
Jeff Reardon, the career saves leader, was traded by the Boston Red Sox to Atlanta yesterday as the Braves tried to bolster their bullpen for the stretch.
The Red Sox will receive two players to be named.
Alejandro Pena, who leads the Braves in saves with 15, went on the disabled list Aug. 21 with pain in his right elbow.


Subway-Car Inspections Are Considered After Fire
The New York City Transit Authority is considering conducting emergency inspections of more than 500 subway cars after a 20-pound control box fell off the undercarriage of a subway car on Saturday afternoon, igniting a fire that injured 13 people and caused hours of delays in Manhattan.
The control box, part of the subway car's braking system, hit the electrified third rail of the track as the uptown No. 5 express train pulled out of the Grand Central subway station at 4:48 P.M., said a spokesman for the Transit Authority, Termaine Garden.


Natural Gas Prices Heading Up
Damage from Hurricane Andrew to natural gas operations in the Gulf of Mexico will cut production for several weeks, until repairs are completed.
Prices for gas contracts rose sharply on Friday, and analysts predicted that customers in the Northeast and Midwest would see bigger heating bills this winter.
In addition, some analysts said today that Andrew's ravages may have ended a long depression in the natural gas market, in which prices have plunged an average of 7 percent a year for 10 years.
That slump, which began in 1982, benefited consumers but weakened or devastated hundreds of gas producers and pipeline companies.


Transactions
Auto Racing
GALLES-KRACO RACING -- Signed Adrian Fernandez, driver, to three one-year contracts.
Baseball  American League


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Only Cable Celebrates on Saturday Night
FOR years, Saturday night has been the loneliest night of the week for network television -- and it is likely to get only the lonelier this coming television season.
Several cable channels have adopted aggressive programming strategies aimed at taking even bigger bites out of the network audience on Saturday night.
They perceive the networks to be especially vulnerable there, thanks to a stretch of weak programs that have allowed the network viewing habit to be broken on that night.


Youth in Stolen Car Wounded by Police
In yet another violent encounter involving car theft, a Newark teen-ager was shot and wounded here early today as he tried to hit three police officers with a stolen car, the authorities said.
The youth, who was shot three times, is the fourth occupant of a stolen car to be killed or wounded by police gunfire in the last eight days in and around Newark, the police said.


'Stone Wrote Anti-American Propaganda'
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 13 editorial in defense of I. F. Stone was also an attack on me.
Perhaps your readers would like to know what I actually wrote in Human Events of June 6, 1992.


A Sweet Summer, but a Bitter Fall
This has been one sweet summer for the Jets: a 5-0 preseason record, their only unbeaten exhibition campaign since joining the National Football League.
Now, the real fun starts.
And just what does a great preseason mean?
Don't get nervous Jets fans, but if the last five years is any indication . . .


Ex-Gang Member Heads the Enemy
As a boy growing up on welfare in Boston's predominantly black Roxbury section, William Richard (Billy) Celester remembers what it was like to mistrust the police.
"I saw them as the enemy," said Mr.
Celester, who as director of Newark's 1,200-member police force is grappling with an epidemic of car thefts by the city's troubled youths.
"I probably had the same attitude as some of these kids."


Guzman Back to Mound, And Jays Back to Winning
Blue Jays 5, Brewers 3
TORONTO, Aug. 30 (AP) -- Juan Guzman pitched four innings in his first start since coming off the disabled list and Joe Carter hit a two-run homer as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Milwaukee Brewers, 5-3, today.
Toronto bounced back to beat the Brewers after a 22-2 loss Friday and a 7-2 defeat Saturday.
The Blue Jays finished with a split in the four-game series and stayed four and a half games ahead of third-place Milwaukee in the American League East.


'Stone Wrote Anti-American Propaganda'; Vile Rumors
To the Editor:
I heartily endorse "Strange New Pals in the K.G.B." (editorial, Aug. 13).
Few Americans noticed the shattering effect K.G.B. half-truths and outright concoctions had on the fledgling democratic movement in Eastern Europe.
Take, for example, Czechoslovakia's parliamentary crisis when doctored files of leading dissidents were released.
Many honorable men and women were "exposed" as informers.
Looks like the same wave of filth is beginning to wash American shores.


No Headline
"The hell with the Army. Let them go back to Iraq. Maybe we ought to get Hussein over here and maybe they'd get down here real quick." -- BILL HALE, supervising cleanup efforts in Florida City, Fla.  [ A1:6. ]


Alien Terrain Replaces What Was Once Home
It was the trees that so many people spoke of.
In the midst of the devastation, the privations and the pain, the people of Homestead last week sometimes stopped, mid-conversation, and remarked on a pine tree that had grown with them, an acacia that was a benchmark for their lives, a towering mangrove that was a testament to their own struggles, achievements and now loss.


Deborah J. Sager, Norman Birnbach
Deborah Joy Sager, a daughter of Jerome I. Sager of New York and the late Marilyn Sager, was married yesterday to Norman Daniel Birnbach, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maks L. Birnbach of New York.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein performed the ceremony at the weekend home of the bride's parents in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Birnbach, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Next month, she is to become an associate at the New York law firm of Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan.
Her father is the executive director and general counsel of the Empire State Pharmaceutical Society, a trade association in New York.
Her mother taught the second grade at Public School 220 in Forest Hills, Queens.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Wendy Sager.


Randye Retkin, Douglas Feinstein
Randye S. Retkin, the director of legal services for the Gay Men's Health Crisis in New York, was married yesterday to Douglas A. Feinstein, a senior copywriter at Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss, an advertising agency in New York.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony at the Tappan Hill estate in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Ms.
Retkin, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Jeanne Sobel of Lake Worth, Fla., and the late Sidney Retkin.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Buffalo and received a law degree from Howard University.
Her father was the president of Sidney Retkin Inc., a distributor of industrial sewing machines in New York.
Her mother is an artist in Lake Worth.
Her stepfather, Jules Sobel of Lake Worth, now retired, was the vice chairman of Frankel Enterprises, a home-furnishings chain in Port Washington, L.I.


Theodore Spaet, 72, Hematologist And a Professor of Medicine, Dies
Dr.
Theodore H. Spaet, a prominent hematologist, educator and research scientist, died on Saturday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 72 years old.
He died of intestinal bleeding, his wife, Mona, said.


Why Do We Both Save and Kill Wolves?
To the Editor:
Having been a wildlife conservationist for some 20 years, I was very happy to see your Aug. 10 front-page report on returning the Rocky Mountain gray wolf to Montana.
It is wonderful to see this beautiful, useful animal restored to its rightful place.


A Tennis Tourney Along the Adriatic
The Croatia Open tennis tournament? Yes, indeed, and playing to a full house, too.
In a quiet corner of Croatia, the one-time Yugoslavia Open tournament ended yesterday.


How to Help the Storm Victims
Following is a list of organizations seeking donations for the hurricane relief effort:
The American Red Cross Checks may be sent to American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 9140, Church Street Station, New York, N.Y. 10256.
Credit-card donations may be made by calling (800) 842-2200, or, for Spanish speakers, (800) 257-7575.


Tokyo-Style Plan Too Costly for U.S.
The Japanese Government's huge new economic rescue package, aimed at catapulting Japan out of its worrisome slump, is the type of powerful stimulus package that Washington policy makers wish they could adopt.
But pressured by the $350 billion Federal budget deficit, Bush Administration officials feel too hemmed in to embrace a huge pump-priming program that could increase the deficit by $50 billion or more.


Hostetler Will Miss Practice
Giants Coach Ray Handley said today that Jeff Hostetler, nominally the starting quarterback, had made considerable progress the last three days from a week-old back injury.
Handley said, however, that Hostetler could not practice on Monday.
The players have Tuesday off, and Handley did not know if Hostetler would be ready Wednesday.
If not, Phil Simms will probably start Sunday against the San Francisco 49ers in the season opener.


Suing Mrs. Bush's Mother
When President Bush railed against "crazy lawsuits," at the Republic National Convention in Houston, he named "doctors" and "moms and pops" as victims.
He did not mention his own step-mother-in-law.
It turns out that Barbara Bush's 81-year-old stepmother, Willa Martin Pierce, is being sued for $5 million in a personal-injury case in Westchester County.


At 40, Connors Won't Grow Up or Give Up
Last year, just after turning 39, that awkward age when most tennis superstars have long since been shunted off to the country club to give lessons to suburbia's weekend warriors, Jimmy Connors went on a warpath of his own beneath the singular spotlight of the United States Open.
He didn't simply compete at the U.S.T.A.
National Tennis Center in Queens; he commandeered the joint.


Pitch Floats Like a Butterfly, Stings Like a Bee
It floats and flutters.
It dips and darts.
It makes catchers cringe, it makes hitters grumble and it makes even confident managers pace the dugout.
What is it?
A balloon dropping off the upper deck in the bottom of the ninth inning?
An annoying team mascot interrupting play while Jose Canseco is batting with the bases loaded?


2d Round of Voting Shunned By Most Lebanese Christians
Deepening a split along religious lines, an overwhelming majority of Christians boycotted the second round of parliamentary elections today in the capital and mountainous heartland while Muslims voted briskly.


Billie Tekel, Barry Elias
Billie Tekel, a costume jewelry wholesaler in New York, and Barry Elias, a sales executive at Maylis Textiles in New York, were married yesterday in Huntingdon Valley, Pa.
Rabbi Simeon J. Maslin officiated at the Philmont Country Club.
Mrs.
Elias, 37 years old, graduated from Columbia University and received a master's degree in operations research from Stanford University.
She is the daughter of Dr.
Ralph Tekel of Elkins Park, Pa., and Pearl Miller of Philadelphia.
Her father, who is retired, was a professor of organic chemistry at La Salle College in Philadelphia.
Her mother, also retired, owned Critics' Choice, a restaurant in Wyncote, Pa.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Lillian T. Tekel.


Storm's Destruction Shocks Insurers
Top executives of the nation's largest insurance companies toured municipalities today where almost all property had become a casualty of Hurricane Andrew, and several said the damage was more intense than anything they had ever seen.
"At points, it looks like a nuclear detonation, where the buildings just exploded," said Joe House, a regional vice president of the USAA Property and Casualty Group, a company that insures homes and autos.


Brazil's Leader Admits 'Mistakes' But Predicts He Won't Be Ousted
Conceding that he had made "mistakes" but refusing to resign, President Fernando Collor de Mello rebutted corruption charges against him today in a nationally televised speech and predicted that he would survive a congressional vote on impeachment.
"We will win the vote," Mr.
Collor said, ending a weeklong silence since a congressional inquiry concluded that he had benefited from a multimillion-dollar influence-peddling ring.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
D &amp; K Wholesale Drug Inc., an initial public offering of 1.15 million common shares.
Pauli &amp; Co.
DRS Industries Inc., formerly Longwood Group Inc., New York, an initial public offering of two million units (each consisting of two common shares, one class C warrant, and one class D warrant).
Chatfield Dean.
Heart Labs of America Inc., an initial public offering of 500,000 units (each consisting of two common shares and one warrant).
Noble Investment Co.
Intelligent Surgical Lasers Inc., an initial public offering of 1.8 million common shares.
Paine Webber.
Medical Resources Inc., an initial public offering of 800,000 shares.
Raymond James &amp; Associates.
Noble Roman's Inc., 2.6 million common shares. Raffensperger, Hughes &amp; Co.
R2 Medical Systems, an initial public offering of 1.2 million common units, consisting of one share and one warrant.
Vantage Securities.
Seismed Instruments, 1.5 million common shares.
Vector Securities. (Source: MCM CorporateWatch.)


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Albertson's Inc Bre Pptys Inc TUESDAY  Arthur J Gallagher Co Mutual Omaha Int Shs Premier Indl Corp WEDNESDAY  Browning-Ferris Inds Global Yield Fd Inc Helmerich &amp; Payne Inc Kemper Corp L S Starrett Co THURSDAY  Chrysler Corp Engelhard Corp Getty Petr Corp Times Mirror Co TIS Mtg Invt Co Witco Corp FRIDAY  Berry Petr Co Stanhome Inc Sysco Corp


Pamela J. Gelson, Ronald R. Palmeri
Pamela Jean Gelson, a daughter of John and Joyce Gelson of Lancaster, Pa., was married yesterday to Ronald Robert Palmeri, a son of John and Evelyn Palmeri of Flagler Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Fredrick Baldwin performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Stronghold Mansion at the Gill St.
Bernard's School in Bernardsville, N.J.
Mrs.
Palmeri, 33 years old, is the director of marketing at the H. Cotler Company, which makes men's and boys' clothing in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father, an independent marketing consultant in Lancaster, was the president and chief executive of the Hamilton Watch and Clock Company there.


Adena N. Lebeau, Jeffrey S. Kress
Adena Nehama Lebeau, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
William Lebeau of New York, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Stuart Kress, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sidney Kress of Manor Heights, S.I.
The bride's father performed the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Jeshurun in West Brighton, S.I.
Mrs.
Kress, 23 years old, is a paralegal at the New York law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a vice chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York.
Her mother, Beverly Lebeau, is an accountant with BDO Seidman, an accounting concern in New York.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues -- Tort Reform; Selling Voters on Bush, As Nemesis of Lawyers
The President's aides have found something they think is even scarier to voters than Willie Horton: lawyers.
George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle have begun painting Bill Clinton as a captive of a special interest group, "sharp lawyers" in "tasseled loafers" who, as Mr.
Bush put it in his speech to the Republican convention, are "running wild," terrorizing doctors and even Little League coaches with personal-injury suits, malpractice suits and other kinds of liability cases.


Fischer and Spassky Ready to Play Chess Not Far From a War
Even by his own eccentric standards, the reclusive American chess genius Bobby Fischer has come up with something seriously weird in agreeing to make a comeback against his old rival Boris Spassky at this coastal resort just 70 miles from the carnage of the Balkan war.
Defying United States Government threats of stiff fines or even long imprisonment for breaking the current United Nations sanctions on Yugoslavia, Mr.
Fischer has holed up in a medieval fort-turned-hotel overlooking the clear waters of the Adriatic.
His heavily guarded suite, No. 118, is known as Villa Sophia because Sophia Loren once stayed here.


Sometimes Disabled Need Help, but Don't Ask; A Good Samaritan
To the Editor:
I admire Jay D. Leventhal's ability to navigate around New York City (Op-Ed, Aug. 12) and understand his anger at being manhandled by well-intentioned individuals, but not all visually impaired people may have the self-confidence to ask for help when they need it.
On more than one occasion, I've asked people walking with a white cane if I could be of assistance, and my offers have always been graciously accepted.


Assessing Damage: Costs Keep Growing
Top insurance executives flew over communities flattened by Hurricane Andrew, knocked on the doors of policyholders and said later that the damage was the most intense they had ever seen.
In the Gulf of Mexico, the storm damaged drilling platforms and rigs and disrupted supplies of natural gas; prices have already started to climb.


Ex-Ranger Heads For Lightning
With his flowing hair, clever moves and good looks, RON DUGUAY was a Ranger hero of another era.
But now, at age 35, and 10 years removed from his 40-goal season with the New Yorkers, Duguay is attempting a comeback.
He starts skating on Sept. 11, the oldest player trying out for the expansion Tampa Bay Lightning.


Fear Builds A Bridge Across Gulf of Cultures
Even on a baking hot day in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, Esther Klein ambled down the block in a long-sleeved dress and a kerchief concealing her hair in the modest Hasidic fashion.
Wheeling her baby's stroller, she stayed three or so paces behind her husband, a slender shy scholar in a glossy homburg.
Across the street, Tara Roman, air-conditioned in her shorts, sat on a shaded bench in an asphalt Housing Authority courtyard, watching her daughters, Tamara, 3 years old, and Tiffany, 5, caper around her.
A native New Yorker with roots in Puerto Rico, she was taking a break from college studies that will steer her toward the independence she craves.


Learning To Be Cool, Drug-Free
The call comes rolling through the rich summer air with a restless cadence: A-boom-chicka-boom, a-boom-chicka-boom.
The setting is part summer camp, part revival meeting.
The noisemakers, 250 strong, are students who have come to the Teen Institute of the Garden State to learn an alternative to a life style focused on drinking and drugs.


Sometimes Disabled Need Help, but Don't Ask
To the Editor:
As a small woman with multiple sclerosis in a wheelchair working in downtown Washington, I share the sense of vulnerability on the street in a big city that Jay D. Leventhal feels ("Blind, Not Incompetent," Op-Ed, Aug. 12), but not his opinions.


Walking on the Moon


Just Close Eyes And Enjoy Action
There's an old myth about "Monday Night Football" that holds that thousands of people watch the game on television but turn the sound off and listen to the radio.
But if watching proves boring at the United States Open, you can close your eyes and listen to CBS announcers make it exciting.


Opponents of Tax Endorse Candidates For the Legislature
In an effort to revive the anti-tax fervor that swept across Connecticut last year, about 350 members of the Connecticut Taxpayers Committee gathered today at Hamden High School to endorse candidates for the state Legislature who have vowed to repeal the state income tax.
The representatives of the committee held what they called a "convention," adopting a platform and giving speeches assailing Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., who last year led the fight to enact an income tax.


Review/Television; Where Politics Is Not Government
For as long as anyone can remember, politics in Louisiana has been an entertaining embarrassment interrupted by brief fits of reform.
Observers on "Louisiana Boys: Raised on Politics," tonight's sassy yet serious review of the revels, agree that election campaigns are spectator sports throughout the state, fueled by cash and enlivened by marching bands, barbecues and forests of placards.
Channel 13 programmers are not doing the "P.O.V." offering a big favor by preceding it with Ken Burns's accomplished 1985 work "Huey Long." Viewers may find two and a half hours among Louisiana pols a lot to take in one evening.
Still, the subject is as rich as a down-home gumbo, and for those who stay with it, "Louisiana Boys" carries the story up to the present.


Economists Put Forth Plans to Stimulate Growth
For two days, an all-star cast of economists gathered in the Rocky Mountains here to search for their Holy Grail: a formula to reverse the trend in which growth in the industrial world has slowed decade by decade since World War II.
If the often-bickering economists were able to forge a consensus on anything, it was that providing more education is a sure way for a nation to increase its output.


